I do not support amendment 25. I will try to deal with the points that have been raised by the various speakers. Everybody, including the Scottish Government, has recognised throughout that many churches and celebrants will have concerns about same-sex marriage. Our consultations on the bill and the planned amendments to the Equality Act 2010 reflect that. I do not consider that there is a need to borrow terminology from the 2010 United Kingdom act. I will give a brief synopsis of the protections for Scottish religious and belief bodies and celebrants as a result of the legislation that we introduced and the related amendments to the Equality Act 2010. The bill will establish an opt-in system for bodies that wish to take part. There is provision at section 10 that makes it clear that the bill does not impose a duty to opt in and does not impose a duty on a person to apply for temporary authorisation. We have also agreed amendments to the Equality Act 2010 with the UK Government to protect individual celebrants from actions of discrimination. I believe that the approach that we have taken was supported by the evidence given to the Equal Opportunities Committee. Amendment 25 could actually cause confusion. In particular, it is not clear what is meant in the amendment by “the enforcement of a contract or a statutory or other legal requirement”. Including those words in marriage legislation might suggest that there is a statutory role for religious and belief bodies in marriage ceremonies beyond their role under the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977. During the debate on an equivalent amendment at stage 2, John Mason mentioned a specific example, as he has done today, of a local authority that would not hire out premises to a church because that church did not toe the line on same-sex marriage. We covered that specific issue in the Government consultation on the draft bill before it was introduced to Parliament. Paragraphs 62 to 65 of annex A to the consultation noted that a local authority that refuses to let premises to a body on the basis of the body’s religious beliefs risks a successful claim for discrimination. I know that John Mason often raises concerns about the public sector equality duty. Our consultation on the bill went on to note that that duty does not mean that public bodies can discriminate when the Equality Act 2010 says that that is unlawful. In conclusion, I invite the Parliament to reject amendment 25 for three reasons. First, we specifically addressed in our consultation the point that John Mason raised at stage 2 on churches hiring premises. Secondly, to import terminology from UK legislation into the bill could cause utter confusion. Thirdly, there are robust protections for religious bodies and celebrants in the bill and in the planned amendments to the Equality Act 2010. I therefore consider that amendment 25 is unnecessary and that it should be rejected.

Like others, I am concerned about the potential impact of these amendments and I do not support them. A number of them would make specific reference in legislation to protecting views about marriage being between one man and one woman. As others have said, that raises questions about other views. I do not consider that amendment 26 is necessary. I agree that a belief that marriage should only ever be between one man and one woman is worthy of respect. However, it would be unnecessary and unhelpful to put a specific provision on that in the bill. Making specific reference in legislation to one issue would raise questions about other beliefs for which there is no specific legislative provision. In addition, the effect of providing in law that one particular view is “worthy of respect” is unclear. It could almost suggest that the view could not be criticised, which would undermine freedom of speech. On amendment 3, I agree that a person or body that believes that marriage may only be between one man and one woman should not, on the basis of that belief alone, suffer detriment when using a public authority’s service or facility. However, there is already provision in this area. At stage 2, Siobhan McMahon expressed concern about, for example, religious organisations that are opposed to same-sex marriage not being allowed to provide public contracts or not being allowed to hire public buildings. In response to the request that Jackie Baillie made during her speech, I can refer to the relevant amendments to the UK Equality Act 2010, which I have agreed with the UK Government. One of those amendments is to protect people from discrimination in relation to persons controlling the use of religious or belief premises who refuse to allow those premises to be used for same-sex marriage—in other words, people cannot be discriminated against because they refuse to allow those premises to be used, as outlined by Siobhan McMahon. A public body that refuses to let premises to a religious body just because of the religious body’s views on same-sex marriage risks a successful claim for discrimination, however. The key factor in relation to the award of contracts is the balancing of cost, quality and sustainability to provide the service to all who need it, rather than views on same-sex marriage. I do not consider that amendment 3 is necessary or helpful. As with other amendments in this group, the amendment is unhelpful in that it raises questions about the impact on other beliefs for which there is no specific legislative provision. On amendment 1, I appreciate Richard Lyle’s concerns, but the key and overriding principle in relation to adoption and fostering is the welfare of the child. It is already the case in law that views on same-sex marriage—or anything else for that matter—should not disqualify anyone from becoming a foster carer or adoptive parent. If the amendment was agreed to, we would be singling out views on marriage as being a specific issue that should not be considered by adoption agencies, the courts and local authorities. Again, it seems unnecessary and unhelpful to single out views on same-sex marriage in that way. The better approach is to assess prospective foster carers and adoptive parents in a comprehensive way on their ability to provide loving homes and to promote the welfare of children in their care. We should not concentrate on views on issues of the day, but instead should concentrate absolutely on what is best for the child. I have similar concerns about amendment 2. It is already the case that the simple expression of a view on same-sex marriage, which is to the furtherance of a body’s charitable purposes, is not expected to adversely affect the body’s charitable status. Under the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, a body seeking charitable status has to show the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator or the courts that its purposes are for public benefit. The act does not lay down what purposes are for the public benefit. Amendment 2 appears to seek to change that only in respect of same-sex marriage. That could raise general questions about how charitable status is decided. Singling out views on same-sex marriage could cast doubt on the expression by a charity of a view on other issues and lead to the need to amend the 2005 act repeatedly, to make provision on each issue. That concern is similar to the concern about many of the amendments in this group.

We are absolutely, totally sure that we are not wrong on this matter. If such a situation arose under unforeseen circumstances, we would take whatever measures were necessary to rectify it, because it would not be an acceptable position. I hope that that reassures the member that we are absolutely sure about what we are proposing. However, if we turn out to be wrong—which would be a highly unusual occurrence, in my estimation—we would take corrective action as appropriate at the time. I do not consider that amendment 30’s suggested changes to the Equality Act 2010 are desirable. The first suggested change is to the protected characteristic of religion or belief. If the protected characteristic of religion or belief should be amended to make a specific reference to the belief that marriage may only be between a man and a woman, doubts could be raised about whether other beliefs are covered by the protected characteristic. Similarly, I do not agree with the proposed amendment to section 149 of the 2010 act, on the public sector equality duty. The amendment would provide that complying with the equality duty requires a public authority to ensure that a belief that marriage may only be between a man and a woman is respected and that no person may suffer any detriment as a result of holding or expressing such a belief. Imposing an obligation on a public authority that they must ensure that a specific belief is respected would give them a duty that they could not deliver. Given that I do not consider that those changes should be made to the Equality Act, it follows that I do not consider that the commencement of the same-sex marriage provisions should depend on them. Indeed, as Jackie Baillie and others have stated, it is highly unlikely that the UK Government would make those changes to the Equality Act, so it appears that amendment 30 would stop the provisions on same-sex marriage in the bill from being commenced. That would, of course, have a huge impact on the bill and could delay same-sex marriages in Scotland for an indefinite period. We would have to discuss the proposed amendments to the Equality Act with the UK Government, which is opposed to them and opposed them when it considered its own legislation. The effect—although perhaps not the intention—of amendment 30 would be to wreck the bill entirely. I therefore invite the Parliament to reject all the amendments in the group.

Like other members, I do not support amendment 27. The points that Patrick Harvie made are valid. We are all agreed that every piece of legislation that is passed by Parliament should be subject—at the right time and at Parliament’s choosing—to post-legislative scrutiny. However, amendment 27 is not really about the typical, normal post-legislative scrutiny process. It refers only to the provisions of the bill relating to same-sex marriage. The bill goes much wider than same-sex marriage; it extends the notice period for marriages, it allows civil marriage ceremonies to take place anywhere that is agreed by the couple and the registrar, it puts belief bodies on the same footing as religious bodies in relation to the solemnisation of marriage, it introduces qualifying requirements for religious and belief bodies to meet before they can solemnise marriage, and it introduces religious and belief civil partnerships. It also makes very wide provisions for the transgender community. Amendment 27 does not, however, refer to any of those other provisions. To paint the proposed provisions as normal post-legislative scrutiny is not a proper or accurate reflection of the effect of the amendment. I appreciate John Mason’s claim that the amendment would not introduce a sunset clause, but the proposed new section would still be potentially very destabilising when it comes to the impact of the bill. It would be detrimental to the reputation of Parliament if we were to pass amendment 27 and we would be sending out a very wrong signal to the entirety of Scottish society. I hope that Parliament will reject the amendment decisively.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to Patrick Harvie’s amendments 28 and 29, on the review of civil partnerships. I guarantee that there will be no inertia from the Government on that or any related issue. As members will be aware, we have already published the remit for our review of civil partnerships, which is on the Government website. We have already had initial informal discussions with key stakeholders, which will be followed by a full public consultation that will outline the options and the consequences of each option and seek views. I am keen to talk to the other parties across the Parliament on the methodology and timing of the review, because such an exercise is better done together on a consensual basis, so that, whatever option the Parliament eventually agrees, at least we will have as much buy-in as we can from external stakeholders and parliamentary participants. On the timescale, I am determined that we get the job done as quickly as possible. We hope to establish a timetable and methodology as soon as possible after initial discussions with parliamentary colleagues in other parties, and to complete the review by the early part of 2015 at the very latest. A realistic timetable would probably mean any consequent legislation coming in the session that starts in 2016, but if we can all agree on what the legislation should be, there is no reason why the work on it could not start in 2015. That would be my intention after consultation with other parties. As the debate has highlighted, there are, broadly, two viable options that relate to the future of civil partnerships. The first would be to lay down that no more new civil partnerships could be entered into after a specified date, to reflect that, in future, both same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples will be able to get married. The other main option would be to establish opposite-sex civil partnerships in Scotland. At the moment, I will certainly not come down on one side of the argument or the other; rather, I want to see the evidence on and consequences of both. I will develop the extremely important point that Bruce Crawford made about people who have already entered into a civil partnership—and people who will have done so by the time that any legislation is introduced. Unlike the recommendations in the review down south, I would be quite reluctant to support any proposal that absolutely required those in existing civil partnerships to be forced to change their status as a result of any review, because it is clear that they entered into civil partnerships in good faith. They should have the option of changing their status, but I would need a lot of persuading before I would agree to forcing them to change their status by either dissolving their civil partnerships or transferring and converting them into marriage. All those issues are clearly for discussion. We need to look at the consequences. The pension consequences, for example, require detailed consideration, because pensions may be the most complicated issue of the lot to deal with when we come to legislating, no matter which option, or options, we eventually agree to pursue. I say to Patrick Harvie that I am absolutely committed to the review and to doing it and dealing with the methodology and the timetable on a consensual basis. I want the review to be done by early 2015 so that we can quickly start to work on any recommendations on legislation, with legislation possibly being passed in the session that starts in 2016. On that basis, I ask Mr Harvie not to press his amendments.

Most of the amendments in group 5 relate to a new procedure that was introduced at stage 2 on obtaining a full gender recognition certificate. Under the procedure, a sheriff may, in certain circumstances, grant a full GRC without the need for the spouse to consent to stay in the marriage. Amendments 4 and 5 relate to section 28A of the bill, which amends the Divorce (Scotland) Act 1976. Amendment 4 makes it clear that the amendments are to section 1 of the 1976 act. Amendment 5 adds a reference to the title of section 1 of the 1976 act. Amendment 6 is also on divorce. A ground for divorce is when one of the spouses has been issued with an interim GRC. The bill amends the Gender Recognition Act 2004 so that, once the gender recognition panel has issued a full GRC, it is no longer open to a spouse to seek divorce on the basis of the interim certificate. Amendment 6 creates an exception to that general rule so that, where a sheriff issues the full GRC under the new procedure, a spouse can still seek a divorce on the basis of the interim GRC. That is because a spouse might not have consented to staying in the marriage. As a result of amendment 6, amendment 11 deletes proposed new section 4E(4) of the 2004 act, which is now unnecessary. Amendment 7 updates the interpretation section of the 2004 act to reflect that, in future, a sheriff may issue a full GRC under the new procedure. Amendment 9 provides that a person may apply to the sheriff under the new procedure only if the applicant does not have a statutory declaration by the spouse consenting to stay in the marriage after the issue of the full GRC. Amendment 10 requires the sheriff, when granting a full GRC under the new procedure, to send a copy to the panel. Amendment 13 removes the obligation on the court to issue a full GRC following divorce when a sheriff has already issued a full certificate under the new procedure. Amendments 15 and 17, which relate to applications to the court where a GRC might have been obtained by fraud, ensure that such applications are possible where the sheriff grants a full GRC under the new procedure. Amendment 19 places a duty on the panel to send a copy of a full GRC to the registrar general for Scotland following the sheriff issuing it under the new procedure. Where the Court of Session quashes a sheriff’s decision to issue a full GRC under the new procedure, amendment 20 requires the court to inform the registrar general, who then has to cancel the relevant entry in the gender recognition register. Finally, proposed new paragraph 20A(1C) of schedule 3 to the 2004 act imposes a requirement that regulations on marriage registration must provide that, following the issue of a full GRC under the new procedure, spouses could register their marriage only if they both consented in writing to the registration. That proposed paragraph could cut across the drafting of regulations, so amendment 22 removes it. I move amendment 4.

I will forgo any opportunity to do so, Presiding Officer.

Amendment 31 introduces a new section 4F to the Gender Recognition Act 2004. Section 4F provides for applications to the gender recognition panel for a full gender recognition certificate—GRC—in certain cases where the civil partner or spouse of a transgender person dies. Amendment 8 makes a change to the interpretation section of the 2004 act to reflect that change. Amendment 14 extends the right of appeal to the Court of Session on a point of law against a decision by the panel to reject an application under section 4F. The 2004 act provides for referrals to the Court of Session where a GRC was secured fraudulently. Amendments 16 and 18 extend the right to make such referrals to cases under section 4F, and amendment 21 provides that, where the Court of Session quashes a decision that the panel made under section 4F, the court must inform the registrar general for Scotland so that he can remove any relevant entry in the gender recognition register. Section 7 of the 2004 act allows the secretary of state, following consultation with the Scottish ministers, to lay down the form and manner of applications to the panel. Amendment 23 extends that to applications under the new section 4F. The last amendment in the group relates to certain protected information about a transgender person who has applied for a GRC. Section 22(2)(a) of the 2004 act makes it an offence to disclose such information unlawfully. Amendment 24 applies that offence to applications under section 4F. I move amendment 8. Amendment 8 agreed to. Amendments 9 to 11, 31 and 13 to 24 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to.

I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. I thank the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee; its convener, Margaret McCulloch; and her predecessor, Mary Fee. Their careful and considered scrutiny of the bill is greatly appreciated. I pay tribute to and thank my team from the policy, legal and communications team, who have been helping with the bill within the Scottish Government. They have provided me with absolutely first-class support. The stage 1 debate in November did this Parliament proud. There were many eloquent and moving speeches, with respect shown on all sides. I am sure that, although different views are honestly and earnestly held across the chamber, we will, nevertheless, represent those views in a respectful manner. If we pass the bill, today will mark an historic day in the history of the Scottish Parliament. I believe that we have got the balance right in the bill. We are extending the rights and freedoms of people of the same sex who wish to be married and to have that marriage recognised by the state. At the same time, we are building in necessary safeguards for the rights of those who are opposed to same-sex marriage and who do not wish to perform same-sex marriage, particularly church organisations and celebrants. We are doing a remarkable thing today. We are saying to the world, loud and clear, on behalf of Scotland, that we believe in recognising love between same-sex couples in the same way that we do between opposite-sex couples. We have taken forward this process carefully, and I am confident that, following the two consultations, a robust committee process and today’s proceedings in the chamber, we have achieved an excellent package. Of course, the bill does not just introduce same-sex marriage; it also includes detailed provisions in other areas. I will give a brief overview of those provisions before moving to the provisions on same-sex marriage, because the other provisions are also important. In the case of couples who wish to have a civil marriage, the bill allows flexibility for ceremonies to be undertaken anywhere that is agreed by the registrar and the couple, provided that it is not in religious premises. The bill establishes belief ceremonies alongside religious and civil ceremonies, reflecting the growing number of marriage ceremonies that are being solemnised by humanists. The bill also authorises Church of Scotland deacons to solemnise opposite-sex marriage. Scotland has an excellent reputation for marriage ceremonies. Indeed, one of the strengths of the Scottish system is its diversity and variety. The bill seeks to protect that by introducing the possibility of qualifying requirements for religious and belief bodies to meet before their celebrants may be authorised to solemnise marriages or register civil partnerships. The bill extends the normal notice period for marriage and for civil partnership from 14 days to 28 days, which will work as a deterrent to sham marriages and reflects the reality of how long it takes to check that a person is eligible to marry in Scotland. As well as changes to marriage law, the bill makes some changes in relation to civil partnerships. Most notably, the bill introduces the religious or belief registration of civil partnership, where the religious or belief body is happy to take part. As debated earlier, the Government will consult publicly on the future of civil partnerships, taking account of the introduction of same-sex marriage. Clearly, the major innovation in the bill is the introduction of same-sex marriage. The bill proposes to allow same-sex couples to do what thousands of opposite-sex couples do every year—get married. Same-sex couples will be able to choose whether to have a religious, a belief or a civil marriage ceremony, recognised by the state. Although the bill will allow religious and belief bodies that wish to solemnise same-sex marriage the opportunity to do that, we respect the decision of those religious and belief bodies that do not wish to take part. Not only do we respect that decision, but we have put in place specific protections in the bill for such religious and belief bodies so that they cannot be forced to solemnise same-sex marriage. The bill establishes an opt-in system for religious and belief bodies in relation to same-sex marriage and civil partnerships. It also makes it clear that there is no obligation to opt in. We have agreed an amendment to the United Kingdom Equality Act 2010 to provide further protection for individual religious and belief celebrants. That amendment will protect individual celebrants who refuse to solemnise same-sex marriage and civil partnerships from court actions claiming discrimination. Of course, a number of religious and belief bodies wish to take part in same-sex marriages and will welcome the opportunity to do so. The bill does not include a specific opt-out for civil registrars. That is because a civil registrar is a public servant providing only a public function. The registration of civil partnerships by civil registrars in Scotland has worked well and there is no reason to expect that the solemnisation of same-sex marriage by civil registrars will not work just as well. Those who are opposed to same-sex marriage have made it clear that their concerns go beyond issues in relation to celebrants and registrars and relate to other issues in society. Most notably, we have heard concerns in relation to freedom of speech. There is nothing in the bill that impacts on freedom of speech. Indeed the wide-ranging debate on the bill, in which diverse views have been expressed, shows that freedom of speech is, as it should be, alive and well in Scotland. The bill includes provision at section 14 to make it clear that the introduction of same-sex marriage in Scotland will have no impact on existing rights to freedom of speech, thought, conscience and religion. We have listened to people’s concerns about potential prosecutions for speaking out against same-sex marriage. The Lord Advocate’s prosecution guidance puts beyond doubt that “criticism of same sex marriage or homosexuality is not in itself an offence”. In relation to guidance, the Government has sought views on updating education circular 2/2001 on the conduct of relationships, sexual health and parenthood education. We are considering the points that have been made and will issue updated guidance shortly. In all our work, whether guidance or legislation, we have aimed to listen, to be inclusive and to increase rights and provide protections. In relation to same-sex marriage specifically, I strongly believe that the bill achieves the right balance between treating all of our citizens equally and respecting and protecting the rights of conscience and religious objection. In addition to same-sex marriage, we make new provisions for the transgender community, which I hope will make life a lot easier for that community. Our society has changed, and changed for the better. Within my adult life, we have seen an end to the criminalisation of homosexual acts and the introduction of civil partnerships. Today is a momentous day for equality in our nation. No longer will persons of the same sex be barred from showing their commitment to each other through getting married. This legislation sends a powerful message to the world about the kind of society that we in Scotland are trying to create—a nation where the principles of fairness and equality are woven into the very fabric of our society; a nation that protects and promotes freedom of expression; a nation that cherishes love; and a minister who prepares a shorter speech to allow other members the opportunity to speak for longer in the debate. I commend the bill to the chamber and ask my fellow MSPs to support it and support it well. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. It is never a problem to do that. I begin with a plea to Jackson Carlaw, who said that he will not go to the party tonight. I think that he should go to the ball tonight. If he is worried about his age letting him down, I will give him a loan of my slippers so that he can get home safely and well. I pay tribute to the work of Nicola Sturgeon, who demonstrated the bravery and vision to initiate the bill in the first place. Without her contribution, we would not be here today agreeing to—I hope—the bill. [Applause.] I pay tribute to those on both sides of the argument, who have, with very few exceptions, conducted the argument both in and outwith Parliament with a great deal of dignity and respect for everyone’s points of view. That is how things should be. It is fair to say that the people who are worried about freedom of speech in Scotland should not be worried at all, having listened to this debate and to the entire debate over the past two and a half years, because freedom of speech is alive and well on all sides in Scotland, and that is also how things should be. I want to answer the precise and fair question that was asked by Margaret McCulloch in her role as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee and as an individual MSP. She asked specifically about overseas civil partnerships and converting them into marriage. Obviously, I appreciate the views that have been expressed on allowing people who are in civil partnerships that have been registered outwith Scotland to change their relationship to a marriage in Scotland, if they so wish. Assuming that the bill is passed, we will treat that as a priority and aim to lay an order as soon as possible. The powers in section 7A of the bill are wide enough to cover all relationships from around the world that are recognised as civil partnerships in Scotland. Therefore if, following consultation of stakeholders and other jurisdictions, the view is that all overseas civil partnerships should be covered, we will do that. We want to ensure that we are not doing couples a disservice by putting them in an uncertain position with regard to the legal status of their relationship, so we will work with the committee to ensure that there is an early resolution of that issue. More widely, I agree with Jackie Baillie and thank her for her very kind comments about me. Again, this has been an outstanding debate that has done Parliament very proud. I think that all the members who are opposed to the bill and were the authors and supporters of amendments that we discussed earlier said in their speeches that they are concerned that none of the amendments was passed. That is not because there was a lack of consideration of those amendments or a knee-jerk reaction. We considered each and every one of the amendments in great detail and decided not to accept them for the reasons that I outlined. However, in Parliament’s 15-year history, no piece of legislation—there is no exception—has had as much consultation as this bill. We have gone through various stages of consultation and have done much more consultation than our colleagues down south. That was the right thing to do. I agree with Patrick Harvie; as a result of the consultation, we have ended up with a better bill than would otherwise have been the case, and with a better bill than the legislation down south. From listening to people, I am aware that there is no precedent in any jurisdiction anywhere in the world that has passed such legislation, for the many protections that we have in the bill. There are five sets of protections for people who are opposed to same-sex marriage or who do not wish to perform same-sex marriages. First, the system is a voluntary, opt-in one. That is a protection. Secondly, the amendments to the Equality Act 2010 represent a series of protections—in particular, for celebrants and churches. Again, the protections are stronger than those in the UK legislation. Thirdly, there will be protections in the education guidance that my colleague Mike Russell will publish shortly. In addition, there are protections in the prosecution guidelines that the Lord Advocate has already published and—with regard to many of the issues—there is protection in the fact that, under the Scotland Act 1998, Parliament must embed the European convention on human rights in all its legislation. The provisions in many of the amendments that were debated today are covered more robustly in some of the legislation that I have mentioned. Indeed, the reason for not accepting a number of the amendments was that much of the existing legislation—in addition to the bill that is before us and the draft amendments to the UK Equality Act 2010—is stronger than the wording of some of those amendments. The legislation is not confusing, but is straightforward and clearly understandable, and will be absolutely adhered to in its implementation. One example, which was mentioned earlier, is Siobhan McMahon’s amendment concerning the hiring of property and facilities. A very specific element in the draft amendments to the Equality Act 2010 relates to people who are using premises on behalf of a religious organisation, and states that they cannot be discriminated against for refusing to allow those premises to be used for same-sex marriages. I believe that, as Jackie Baillie said, we have struck a good balance. We are extending the freedoms and rights of organisations such as the Unitarian Church and the Quakers that want to perform same-sex marriage, and the rights of people of the same sex to marry and have their marriage recognised in law. In so doing, we are also safeguarding the rights of churches and celebrants who do not want to perform same-sex marriages, and we are protecting the right of free speech so that people can continue to express their opinion for or against same-sex marriage in an open, free and democratic society. The balance of measures that we have introduced is very fair. It reflects the diversity of opinion in our society, and at the same time it can take us forward. The priority now is to get the secondary legislation in place and to get the amendments to the Equality Act 2010 agreed. I give that commitment to members—I cannot give a guarantee, because it depends on the amendments’ passage through Westminster, although I put on the record the excellent co-operation that we have had from Maria Miller and her officials in the UK Government. Following the passing of those amendments and the secondary legislation we will, ideally, see the first same-sex marriages in Scotland this year. [Applause.] That sends out a loud and clear message. I finish by saying this: I was brought up, as every member in the chamber probably knows, in a mining village in South Ayrshire— Members: Oh! It was south of the Ayrshire Mason-Dixon line. Dreghorn, where the Deputy First Minister comes from, was north of that line; I note for her sake that my village was called Patna. I was christened in the United Free Church and married 36 years ago in the same church. I always remember the philosophy in that mining village. Our motto, if we had one, was the same as I think it is in every mining village and in many other communities in Scotland: “Live and let live.” My belief is that couples of the same sex can fully realise their potential, fully live out their aspirations and fully live out and show their love only if those people are able to marry the person whom they love who is of the same sex. We should let live; let live those who want to get married to someone of the same sex and those who want to perform marriages of people of the same sex, and let live those who are not in favour of that because of religious belief, so that they are not forced to do something that they do not want to do. If ever there was a motto to sum up the Government’s and the Parliament’s approach to the bill, it is live and let live. I believe that, when the history of the Parliament is written, if we pass the bill, as I believe we will, today will be one of the great historic days of the Parliament, not just because of the provisions of the bill but because of the message that it sends out about the new Scotland that we are creating in the 21st century—a Scotland where we all believe in live and let live. [Applause.]

The Scottish Government has serious concerns about the impact on the health and wellbeing of those negatively affected by the UK Government’s welfare benefit reforms. In 2012, the Scottish public health network undertook a review of literature, which suggests that there are likely to be short and long-term negative health outcomes as a consequence of the reforms, although it is not possible at this stage to quantify them. In December 2013, the Scottish public health observatory published a report on a framework and baseline measures for the evaluation of the health and health inequalities impact of the current wave of welfare changes and the economic downturn. Although it is too soon to evaluate the impacts of either the economic recession or the welfare changes using routine health data, the report will be updated when more data are available.

I entirely agree. Of course, if the Tories win the next UK election and there is a no vote in Scotland, the situation will get much worse because we will have our share of £25 billion-worth of cuts, £12 billion of which will be in welfare—a size of cuts that has been endorsed by the Labour Party.

As the member knows, we have done absolutely everything in our power to help people who are the victims of the bedroom tax. I remind the member that a Labour Government introduced the bedroom tax in the private rented sector. Labour cannot therefore complain when the Tories copy it and extend the policy to another sector. Indeed, the last people who should complain are the ones who introduced the policy in the first place. We are the only party that has consistently opposed the bedroom tax and, unlike some Labour MPs, our people were present in Westminster to vote against it.

The regulation of medical doctors is reserved to the United Kingdom Government. However, healthcare professionals, subject to statutory regulation, are required to adhere to standards of ethical and professional conduct that are set by their regulatory bodies, whether they work in the national health service in Scotland or in the private sector. Registered doctors are required by the General Medical Council to work to the standards in “Good medical practice”. Since the introduction of the new general medical services contract in April 2004, general practices have been contractually obliged to keep a register of gifts that have an individual value of more than £100.

As I said, that is a reserved issue for the United Kingdom Government. Although I agree that doctors should register gifts and payments that they receive from drugs companies, that would require full and proper investigation. Anyone who has any suspicions, concerns or evidence that prescribing is being influenced by such gifts should report the matter to the right authorities.

Many of the outputs of clinical research are universal and therefore research from academic sources from both within and outwith Scotland is of value in formulating the Scottish Government’s health and wellbeing policy. The chief scientist office, through its two research funding committees, funds high-quality, peer-reviewed research of relevance to the health and wellbeing of the people of Scotland. Lay summaries of the outputs of that research are made available to Scottish Government health policy colleagues. More generally, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network develops evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the national health service in Scotland. SIGN guidelines are derived from a systematic review of all the scientific literature available.

We make extensive use of medical professionals in our health boards and they are heavily involved in all the scientific work that we do. I can give one example relating to the science of informatics, which has been important in informing our policy on diabetes. As a result of the involvement of the health boards and their medics in informatics in looking at how we can better treat diabetes, Scotland has seen in recent years a 40 per cent reduction in amputation resulting from diabetes, and a substantial reduction in blindness resulting from diabetes. That is a direct result of the application of the science of informatics throughout the health service in Scotland, in co-operation with the CSO.

An independent Scotland would have at its disposal the full range of policy levers to promote good health and increase life expectancy. As well as maintaining free healthcare delivery through our national health service, independence will allow us to take responsibility for our society’s wellbeing and welfare. An independent Scotland will have greater powers to regulate alcohol and tobacco through taxation, while control over tax policy and advertising regulation will help us achieve a coherent approach to the problems of obesity and poor diet. Most important, with independence Scotland can address poverty and socioeconomic inequalities, which are at the root of preventable ill health, which successive Westminster Governments have systematically failed to tackle.

International research led by Professor Harry Burns, the chief medical officer for Scotland, who is unfortunately about to move on to pastures new, provides overwhelming evidence that the major contributing factor to the disparity in life expectancy within Scotland, as well as between the likes of Glasgow and similar cities elsewhere, is almost entirely the levels of deep-seated poverty and unemployed in those cities. Like Harry Burns, I believe that we will only seriously reduce health inequalities when we are able to reduce social and economic inequalities in our society, and we can only achieve that when we are independent.

One of the big campaigns in which Neil Findlay is involved is the campaign to get rid of nuclear weapons from the Clyde—he has said that the resources could be freed up for investment in education, health and helping poorer people in our society. The reality is, of course, that Neil Findlay is going to vote no. That means that, despite his campaigning, he is going to vote to retain nuclear weapons on the Clyde, so the money—£100 billion—will be spent on nuclear weapons instead of on education, health and anti-poverty measures. Therefore, I do not think that Mr Findlay can claim to be either consistent or, indeed, a socialist.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of young transgender patients getting the necessary support that they require, and we expect all boards to ensure that the appropriate services are in place to help and support them.

A great deal of discussion has been undertaken—in particular in the Equal Opportunities Committee—in relation to that issue. It has been part of our discussions on the bill on same-sex marriage—the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill—which includes wide-ranging provision as regards transgender services and support. We have been consulting the transgender community at every stage and we will continue to have dialogue with the transgender community to identify ways in which we can continue to support and help people in that community, particularly those such as young people in their teens who are at the stage in life of seeking to manage the situation that they find themselves in.

We remain in dialogue with the European Commission and we are committed to introducing minimum unit pricing. Minimum unit pricing is just one of more than 40 measures in our framework for action document—measures that seek to reduce consumption, support families and communities, encourage more positive attitudes and positive choices, and improve treatment and support services. Considerable progress has been made on implementing key aspects of the alcohol framework, including: a record investment of more than £237 million in the past five years to tackle alcohol misuse; the delivery of more than 366,000 alcohol brief interventions by NHS Scotland; the establishment of 30 alcohol and drug partnerships; the development of an implementation plan to deliver the recommendations in the quality alcohol treatment and support report; the commencement of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010; the passing of the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Act 2012; and, most recently, the launch last week of a campaign to promote the availability of a smaller wine measure in the on-trade.

I share the member’s frustration at the time that it is taking for us to be able to implement our legislation. Two processes are currently under way. One is taking place in the domestic courts, in which there will be a further hearing in the next two weeks on the Scotch Whisky Association’s action in relation to the implementation of minimum unit pricing. I am sure that the member will understand if I do not go into the legal arguments as to why we have not responded positively to the SWA’s proposal. The other process concerns the European Commission. Three directorates-general are involved in considering the question: the internal market directorate-general is formally neutral on the issue; the health directorate-general is in favour of minimum unit pricing; and, if not hostile, the enterprise directorate-general is not exactly pro minimum unit pricing. We believe that the enterprise directorate-general’s arguments are entirely without foundation. However, we need to persuade the Commission, and in doing so we have recruited the support of other Governments, in particular the Estonian and Irish Governments. In addition, although minimum unit pricing will not apply in Denmark, the Danish Government and the Danish health minister have been very supportive of what we are doing in Scotland. I gently point out, of course, that if we were an independent member state we would have made substantially more progress than we have been able to make so far.

Ministers and Government officials meet regularly with representatives of all national health service boards, including NHS Lanarkshire, to discuss matters of importance to local people.

I asked the whole board to come to a meeting in St Andrew’s house just before Christmas to discuss the report that Healthcare Improvement Scotland produced, and I made it clear to the board members that I expected them to take the report’s findings very seriously and to implement its recommendations. I have given the board until the end of March to make significant progress. At that point, I and my officials, along with Michael Matheson, will review progress and decide whether any further action on our part is required.

This will come as no surprise. Both ministers and Government officials regularly meet representatives of all national health service boards, including NHS Lanarkshire.

I and my officials have had dialogue with NHS Lanarkshire to spell out in no uncertain terms the progress that we expect to be made on each of the 21 recommendations—and indeed on other elements in the report that are not covered precisely in specific recommendations—by the end of March. Beyond that, we have made clear how we expect the board to get NHS Lanarkshire into better shape. To be fair, the board and senior management team of NHS Lanarkshire have taken on board the recommendations and comments in the report and the additional points that we have made to them in subsequent discussions. I believe that they are committed to implementing all 21 of those recommendations to a high standard.

We are always glad to accept an invitation to East Kilbride. One of the frustrating things about the findings of the HIS report with regard to the deficiencies in NHS Lanarkshire is that, in a way, they distracted attention from many of the good things that are going on there. The member refers to one service; another would be the special dementia unit in the accident and emergency department in Monklands hospital. It is the first of its kind in Scotland, and perhaps in the United Kingdom. It is a great pity that the deficiencies that are identified in the report are distracting public attention from the good things that are happening in NHS Lanarkshire. We have to keep a balanced point of view and take a balanced approach. That said, the deficiencies are serious and they need to be sorted as soon as possible.

The rate per 1,000 people aged over 75 admitted to hospital as an emergency had been rising for many years. That was one of the reasons why we introduced our reshaping care for older people programme and the £300 million change fund. Most recent data shows a levelling off of admission rates. We are seeing impacts from interventions such as intermediate care alternatives to emergency admission, Scottish Ambulance Service see and treat models, anticipatory care plans and key information systems, the falls programme, carer support, the unscheduled care action plan and local unscheduled care action plans. Bed days spent in hospital following an emergency admission are a better measure of how the whole system supports the rising number of older people with multiple and chronic illnesses. In the period from 2009-10, there has been a year-on-year reduction in the days spent in hospital following emergency admission per 1,000 people aged over 75. That reduction has been one of 9.5 per cent between 2009-10 and 2012-13.

Under the dementia strategy, we now have a great deal of support that was not there even a few years ago. We have dementia consultants, dementia ambassadors and dementia champions, all of whom play different roles in different parts of the health service. The question was specifically about acute care, but the relationship between acute care and primary care is critical. Over the next 20 years or so, the number of over 75-year-olds in Scotland will rise by between 60 and 80 per cent. Clearly, unless a cure is found in the meantime, which is unlikely, many of those patients are likely to have dementia. The total number of people with dementia in Scotland at the moment is 77,000. If my memory serves me correctly, only 3,000 of those people are under 65. By definition, therefore, 74,000 of them are over 65, and a large proportion of them will be over 75. It is an area of priority in primary care services and in acute care services. We are building on the dementia strategy to ensure that the complete panoply of services and support that is required for dementia hospitals is provided in each of our 38 acute and general hospitals.

We expect the highest standards of care to be provided to all adults in all care settings. Our national care standards set out the responsibilities of care providers and their duty to ensure that residents are treated with dignity and respect. Care homes must have a written policy and procedures on when restraint can be used, and we expect staff to be fully trained and supported in the use of restraint. Any use of restraint must be recorded in the care user’s personal plan, which is reviewed every six months. The use of medication as a form of restraint is permissible only in very limited circumstances and within certain parameters, for example to safeguard the health of an adult who is unable to consent to the treatment in question, and where other alternatives have been explored and none is practicable.

I fully understand Alison McInnes’s concerns and I am happy to raise the matter again with the Care Inspectorate and the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, which are jointly responsible for that area of policy. As the member will know, every care home in Scotland is subject to an unannounced inspection once a year, and the Care Inspectorate is conscious of the need to ensure during inspections that there is no abuse of the system. I call on anyone, including Alison McInnes, to bring the matter to the attention of both the Care Inspectorate and the Mental Welfare Commission if they have any evidence of abuse. I am absolutely sure that both those bodies will investigate thoroughly where there is any prima facie evidence of abuse.

Further to my answer to Mr Fergusson’s question on 11 December 2013, I can confirm that NHS Dumfries and Galloway has put arrangements in place to ensure that it has strong and effective governance until the new board members are appointed. The member will wish to note that recruitment of four new non-executives and a new chair to the board of NHS Dumfries and Galloway will begin in the near future. The governance arrangements that have been put in place will be kept under review throughout that process.

If Alex Fergusson checks the terms of the legislation that was passed, he will see that I am required to act as I did, given the timetable that is required for intimating whether we would extend the pilot throughout the whole of Scotland. I believe that I had no choice but to do what I did to meet the terms of the legislation.

After Neil Findlay had been appointed as health spokesperson for the Labour Party, a colleague of his told me that Mr Findlay had told him that he did not know why he had been appointed to the portfolio, because he knew nothing about it. Quite frankly, the speech that we have just heard underlines the veracity of that claim.

Not at the moment. The motion before us is one of the laziest and most vacuous that I have seen from any Opposition party in my 15 years in the Parliament. A call for a review is the cry of a man in a party that has no policy, no plans, no ideas and absolutely no vision. The reality of the national health and social care system in Scotland today is that it clearly faces pressures, but it is not the basket case that Mr Findlay outlined—far from it.

I will give way later. The irony about this call for a review is that every time there has been a review of any aspect of policy the Labour Party has not submitted any oral or written evidence to it. The classic example is the access to medicines review that we had last year. The Conservative Party contributed ideas on access to medicines both orally and in writing, but we had absolutely nothing from the leadership of the Labour Party—and the same has been true of every other review that the NHS in Scotland has undertaken.

I will give way later. The call for a review is, therefore, absolutely absurd. Indeed, the major review—

I will give way later. The major review that the Labour Party carried out was the Kerr review, which led to the proposals to close the accident and emergency units at Monklands and Ayr. The member talks about Lanarkshire, but what kind of pressure would have been on Lanarkshire had Monklands A and E been closed as Labour had intended?

I will later. I do not mind criticism—indeed, I will be the first to outline the pressures on the NHS and the social care service—but criticism based on lack of facts or claims that are not true is not the way to criticise.

Of course. Members: Oh!

I heard the interview that Councillor Alex Rowley, the Labour candidate in Cowdenbeath, gave on “Good Morning Scotland” earlier this week, in which he claimed that he had written to me repeatedly about the Victoria hospital in Kirkcaldy. I have to say that that is not true. In fact, I have double-checked not just with my office but with Councillor Rowley’s office and can say that since I was appointed to this job 16 months ago I have not received one letter from Councillor Rowley in all that time. Like his colleague Neil Findlay, he makes it up as he goes along.

I will give way now.

What is required—

What is required and demanded by the RCN and all the other organisations is action, which includes our 2020 action plan for the future of the NHS. Mr Findlay not only makes selective quotations from a range of people but comes to this chamber with allegations that are not true. On 26 November, he told this chamber that someone at—I think—St John’s hospital had been on a trolley for 18 hours. When I double-checked, I found that it was not true.

Not only is that information wrong, but the member put out a press release yesterday saying that budgets had been cut. The budget for the national health service has increased by 27 per cent under the Scottish National Party Government. We have not cut the NHS budget. The only people who were going to do so were those in the Labour Party who, like their friends in Wales, would not commit to passing on the consequentials to the NHS in Scotland. Anything that Mr Findlay says and any claims that he makes have to be treated with a great deal of caution, because much of what he says is factually incorrect or inaccurate. Let me look at what we are doing in the national health service in Scotland. We have a 2020 vision; we have stated clearly what our plan is in respect of our route map to the 2020 vision; and we have a 2020 advisory board to develop the detail of that route map in every area. We know the way forward. We also know the problems, understand them and the challenges, and know what needs to be done, informed by the RCN, the BMA and a range of other organisations. Let me give some facts about what we are doing with the national health service in Scotland. First, on the budget, the funding increases for the territorial boards are 3.3 per cent this year, 3.1 per cent next year, and 2.7 per cent the year after. That could not be called a budget cut. I have compared the increase in the budget with the increased throughput of patients through the national health service since we came to power. Since then, there has been a 3.7 per cent increase in the number of out-patients per year; an 8.9 per cent increase in the number of in-patients per year; a 2.8 per cent increase in accident and emergency presentations per year; and a 9.3 per cent increase in general practitioner attendance. Not one of those figures is in excess of 10 per cent, but during that time, we have increased the budget by 27 per cent. That is nearly three times the average increase in the throughput through the national health service. By definition, we are therefore spending much more on our patients per head now as well as overall than the Labour Party spent when it was in power. If we look at the staffing situation, which is totally ignored by the Labour Party, we see that the number of medical consultants has risen by 28 per cent, the number of qualified nurses has risen by 2.7 per cent, and the number of beds per 1,000 of the population is 2.4, compared with England’s two and a much lower rate in Wales. If we look at patient safety, we see that there has been a 23 per cent reduction in surgical mortalities, and a 12.4 per cent reduction in hospital standardised mortality ratios. Of the 31 hospitals that are participating in the acute patient safety programme, 10 have already achieved an HSMR reduction in excess of 15 per cent, and three are showing a reduction in excess of 20 per cent. Scotland’s hospitals are far cleaner than they were under Andy Kerr. Clostridium difficile cases in patients aged 65 and over have reduced by 80.5 per cent since Labour was in power, and MRSA cases have reduced by 88.9 per cent in NHS Lanarkshire, for example, and 88.4 per cent nationally.

No, not at the moment.

We have also, of course, made significant reductions in premature mortalities from cancer, heart disease and stroke through a number of initiatives. In unscheduled care, based on the latest figures, 95 per cent of people are now being treated and discharged within four hours. To look at performance elsewhere, in Wales the comparable figure under Labour is 89 per cent. We have dramatically reduced waiting times for both in-patients and out-patients. The referral-to-treatment time and the time that people have to wait for diagnostic tests have been dramatically reduced. There are no hidden waiting lists. Neil Findlay quoted Caroline Gardner as referring to hidden waiting lists. Nowhere does the Auditor General refer to hidden waiting lists under the SNP.

Okay. I will do. Finally, our NHS workforce is rising not just in numbers but in skill levels. We are treating the workforce properly and dealing with any problems of harassment or bullying, to which I have said we take a zero-tolerance approach. All in all, of course there are problems and pressure points, but instead of exploiting them and turning a small number of cases into a large national crisis, we should look at the patient survey and the satisfaction rate of nearly 90 per cent. That is a far higher satisfaction rate than the Labour Party has had for the past 10 years. I move amendment S4M-08752.3, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “commends NHS Scotland’s staff’s commitment, professionalism and dedication as being key to patients, who are being treated faster than ever and at a time when the NHS is seeing more patients than ever before; welcomes the mandatory implementation of the nursing workload and workforce planning tools, and how staffing projections have been informed by these tools, which will be published regularly from summer 2014; notes the development of the new bed planning toolkit, which will support NHS boards to keep bed capacity requirements under regular review; considers that these evidence-based tools are vital to ensuring that the health service has the right skills and capacity in place to meet the needs of the people of Scotland; recognises that the Scottish Patient Safety Programme is a world leader in patient safety and has been the central force in driving up standards in Scottish hospitals since its inception; believes that health and social care integration will empower service planning and delivery, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s 2020 vision for health and social care in Scotland and the route map to focus on improving quality in Scotland’s health and care services.”

I agree with the gist of Hugh Henry’s argument. Particularly in relation to developing the detail of the 2020 vision, I am more than happy—indeed, I am very keen—to share how we do that with the other parties in the chamber. I recognise that other parties have views. We have heard Nanette Milne, Jackson Carlaw and others set out ideas. In mapping out the 2020 vision and action plan, I make that offer to all the parties. If they want to take up that offer, I will abide by it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Care homes increasingly provide specialist care for people with dementia. Last year, the Scottish Government set up a national task force on the future of residential care in Scotland, to examine the purpose and structure of residential care services that will meet the care needs of future generations and the increasing proportion of residents with dementia. The task force will shortly produce a report with recommendations, which will go out for consultation. As part of the national dementia strategy, we continue to implement the promoting excellence dementia skills framework, to help services in all care settings meet the standards of care for dementia. That includes the training of more than 300 dementia ambassadors from the social services sector, many of whom have key roles in a range of activities to support dementia workforce development and training in care homes. We know that there are people in care homes with moderate to advanced stages of dementia but who do not have a diagnosis. We are doing more to ensure that those people are identified and that those diagnosed on or after 1 April 2013 receive the benefits of the national post-diagnostic support commitment in a way that is meaningful to them given their particular care setting and stage of the illness.

I think that the member is getting slightly mixed up in his interpretation of the Care Inspectorate’s figures. It is true that more than 900 care homes in Scotland specialise in services for older people, 106 of which provide only specialist dementia services. However, many of the other 800 homes provide services for dementia patients. I accept that we need to estimate and evaluate the impact of dementia on the care sector and to ensure that services are provided—qualitatively and quantitatively—to meet the increasing need. As I said, the task force has been designed to do exactly that.

I have never felt under pressure from Jim Hume or indeed any Liberal Democrat anywhere in the United Kingdom, on any subject whatever. It is far better to take a bit longer to get the report right than to rush it out. A lot of research has been required, but the report will be published soon. We already have a dementia strategy that includes people in care homes and, as I said, we are already implementing a whole range of initiatives, including the 300 dementia ambassadors, to try to ensure that the skill levels that are required in the care sector are there.

We asked the Royal Pharmaceutical Society and the faculty of the psychiatry of old age of the Royal College of Psychiatrists to lead an expert group in developing a national commitment on reducing the inappropriate prescribing of pyschoactive medications, excluding cognitive enhancers, in all care settings, including care homes. The final recommendation will be made to the Scottish Government in the first quarter of 2014. We expect that it will include action on key areas, such as the initiation and review of medication, and on ensuring that all pyschoactive medication is administered in accordance with the law.

There are clearly changes in the profile of dementia patients, the stage at which they go into care homes, and how long they are in care homes for. The average length of stay in a care home used to be five, six, seven or eight years; now, a dementia patient is typically in a care home for the last two or three years of their life at most. Therefore, care is given at home for much longer than previously. I believe that there is scope to go further in trying to ensure that care at home remains the norm for as long as possible for dementia patients. On the specialist services and support in care homes to which Nanette Milne referred, we intend that they should eventually be available in the right setting in all care homes for dementia patients, but that obviously requires a level of investment by both the Scottish Government and care home providers.

Rubbish!

Will Gavin Brown take an intervention?

The Scottish Government is very proud of the high-quality social care that we have in Scotland and of the dedicated and skilled staff who work hard to support our most vulnerable children, adults and families who are dealing with challenging situations in their lives. The staff who deliver a huge variety of support and services are employed by a range of different organisations in the statutory, voluntary and independent sectors across Scotland. All those providers undertake a range of activities to ensure that services are of high quality and that they deliver good outcomes for users of services, such as improving life chances and enabling people to live longer, healthier and independent lives.

I see that Mr Findlay is full of his usual Christmas cheer. I can tell him that I have commissioned Healthcare Improvement Scotland and the Care Inspectorate to develop a new model of strategic inspections for adult services across Scotland that takes into consideration, among other things, some of the issues that he mentioned. In particular, I have asked them to look at the commissioning of visits of 15 minutes or less to get to the bottom of why such issues are arising in certain areas—not least those that are controlled by the Labour Party.

We are funding the better breaks programme to provide responsive and creative short breaks for disabled children and young people up to the age of 20 who have multiple support needs. If projects include some young adults over the age of 20, they can be considered for funding. We are also funding the take a break programme, which provides grants directly to families with disabled children and young people up to the age of 20. We are considering whether, next year, better breaks and take a break should be available to young disabled adults as well as to children and young people and their carers. A decision will be made in time for next year’s programmes. I am aware of the issue of the provision of suitable bespoke respite services for young adults, particularly in view of the age limit for Children’s Hospice Association Scotland services. My officials will consider options and will report to me with recommendations early in the new year.

My officials will work in the new year with a view to taking the issue forward. We will consider the views that are expressed in Robert Watson’s petition and the model that CHAS has suggested. As commissioners of care, local authorities and national health service boards have a statutory responsibility to determine the requirements of local services and to provide or commission services. Each local authority and health board will decide on its own priorities and how best to address the need for respite.

I am always willing to listen to the good fairy godmother, Jackie Baillie. She makes a very good suggestion—one that we have already implemented. We are already trying to quantify the demand for such services among this group but, in the spirit of Christmas, I am prepared to give Jackie Baillie the credit for her press release, which no doubt will be hitting the streets as we speak.

The Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act, which will come into force on 1 April 2014, provides a power for local authorities to support carers. At the discretion of local authorities, carers can be offered a choice of one of the four options for self-directed support as set out in the statute. Regulations about the waiving of charges for support to carers under the act and the accompanying guidance will come into force next April.

The member will be aware of the whole range of actions that we have taken to support carers in Scotland, including in the self-directed support act, where we have made clear what the policy is in relation to charging carers for services that they receive in their role as carers—in other words, such charges do not need to be made. As the member will also be aware, we have already announced our intention to introduce to Parliament—over the next 18 months or so—a carers bill, which will further enhance the rights of carers in Scotland.

In August of this year, the Scottish Government asked Healthcare Improvement Scotland to undertake a rapid review of NHS Lanarkshire’s services. The report that HIS published this morning is the culmination of that review, and I would like to make a statement that sets out the Government’s response. The HIS report uncovers a number of areas in which, at times, the standards of care have fallen short of the Scottish Government’s expectations for patients. All health boards in Scotland have been instructed that they must ensure that patient safety is their top priority. To support that, the Scottish patient safety programme has been working for more than five years to deliver ways to make Scotland’s healthcare safer. As part of the patient safety programme, hospital standardised mortality ratios are collected and published regularly online. The HSMR is based on a complex model that looks at the ratio of observed deaths within 30 days of admission to an acute hospital to the number of predicted deaths. Although a high HSMR is not, by itself, a definitive measure of the quality and safety of care, it serves as an important prompt for further investigation. HIS’s report today states: “a higher than predicted HSMR cannot be used to make judgements about the quality and safety of health services ... Instead it should be used as a ‘smoke alarm’ which alerts an NHS board to potential problems and leads to a more detailed review of safety and quality issues.” I highlight that the concerns about the progress in NHS Lanarkshire were identified thanks to our patient safety programme. The HIS rapid review was instigated on the basis of concerns about what the safety programme raised with regard to the HSMR figures that are routinely collected. It is worth noting here that, overall, NHS Lanarkshire has improved its HSMR. However, the rate at which Monklands hospital in particular is improving is insufficient and it lags behind other boards in Scotland. Wishaw hospital’s HSMR has reduced by 17.6 per cent, which is greater than the overall change across Scotland of 12.4 per cent, whereas Hairmyres hospital’s reduction is 7.1 per cent and Monklands hospital’s is 4.3 per cent overall. In conducting the rapid review we asked HIS, first, to provide an independent expert diagnosis of the factors that may underlie the HSMR figures, including assessing any systemic factors that may be impacting on the safety and quality of care and treatment being provided to patients in NHS Lanarkshire’s acute hospitals; secondly, to consider whether the existing action by NHS Lanarkshire to address any key issues identified in the diagnostic phase is adequate and whether any additional steps should be taken; thirdly, to advise whether any additional support should be made available to NHS Lanarkshire to help strengthen and accelerate its improvement programme; and, fourthly, to advise on any areas that may require further action. In reaching its conclusions, the HIS expert review team listened to the experiences of more than 300 patients and carers and of more than 200 members of staff, visited 40 clinical areas and reviewed 152 patient records. The team concluded that a broad range of improvements is necessary for NHS Lanarkshire to continue its commitment to deliver safe and effective patient care. That includes the need for stronger focus and leadership in implementing robust patient safety interventions and in the redesign of services. Today’s report makes 21 specific recommendations for NHS Lanarkshire to follow to improve its performance. To help NHS Lanarkshire deliver on those important recommendations, I am putting in place a governance and improvement support team to help NHS Lanarkshire make the changes necessary to improve its performance for the people of Lanarkshire. I have spoken this morning to the chair and chief executive of NHS Lanarkshire, and they have accepted the 21 recommendations from HIS in full and have welcomed the availability of the improvement support team to help them deliver the rapid and sustained improvements that are now needed. I expect those improvements to be made urgently and I have asked to be updated regularly. To keep Parliament informed of progress, I will ensure that regular updates are laid in the Scottish Parliament information centre and made available online. I have made clear this morning that there will be a formal review of progress against the recommendations by the end of March 2014. The improvement team will be led by Jeanne Freeman, chair of the Golden Jubilee national hospital; Malcolm Wright, chief executive of NHS Education for Scotland; and Professor Sir Lewis Ritchie, director of public health at NHS Grampian. Their focus will be on two crucially important areas: leadership and clinical quality improvement. NHS Lanarkshire has indicated that, throughout the review period, it was responding to concerns that were raised, and that it has already begun improvement work. That includes its planned investment of another £8.7 million to increase capacity, including the recruitment of 54 whole-time equivalent consultants, nurses and other clinical support staff in 2013-14. While we should be under no illusion about the difficulties that have been highlighted, we should not lose sight of the commitment and dedication of staff across NHS Lanarkshire and indeed the whole of our health service. We have a record number of staff working in NHS Lanarkshire, including a record number of nursing staff. Today’s report highlights areas for improvement, which will further support the staff of NHS Lanarkshire in providing the standards of care to which they rightly aspire. Our continuing commitment to quality means that we will shine a light on areas where our NHS does not achieve the high standards that we expect and we will provide clear opportunities for improvement. As a Government, we will continue to support our patient safety programme, monitor our health service and take action when necessary to ensure that the best service is provided for the people of Scotland.

First, on the detail, that is all in the report and the executive summary. I do not think that it would add anything for me to come here and repeat what is already in the report. The purpose of the statement was to give the Scottish Government’s reaction to the report, which is what I did. Secondly, I point out to the member that, under his Administration, we would not even have known what the problem was, because we did not have a patient safety programme and we did not measure hospital standardised mortality ratios. Those two initiatives alone are reasons why we now know what is going on. Thirdly, I point out to the member that we have a record number of staff in NHS Lanarkshire—a record number of nurses, a record number of qualified nurses and midwives, a record number of consultants, a record number of accident and emergency consultants and so on. The report is about the management of those resources. The budget for NHS Lanarkshire has been increased over the past six years by £180 million. It is getting £180 million more this year than it got in the year when Mr Findlay’s party left office. I believe that the onus is now on the board and the senior management team of NHS Lanarkshire to address the issues, to turn the situation round and to report back within three months on what I hope will be significant progress.

I have asked for a formal progress report by the end of March, and my team will monitor the situation on a week-by-week basis. We anticipate that a number of the problems will be dealt with very urgently, in particular the way in which we measure the deterioration of particularly vulnerable patients. As I said in my statement, I have been assured during the review by the senior management team that action has already been taken to improve policies and procedures in relation to that. I hope that we will now see progress right across the board on the issues that have been identified, and that it will be visible to the Parliament. As I have said, I am happy to report to both the Health and Sport Committee and the Parliament more generally.

On the last point, the HIS team interviewed quite a number of patients and carers—I mentioned the number—and families, and, of course, it has gone through a number of files, including complaint files, to read what people had commented on. It also held a number of sessions in each of the three hospitals. Those sessions were advertised for patients, carers and families to attend. An early-warning system is used in dealing with deteriorating patients. That is not a uniform system, as the early-warning system that would be used for particular types of disease is different from that which would be used for other types of disease. Therefore, there is not a single early-warning system, but the underlying principle is that the patient’s condition is measured using a number of parameters, on an hourly basis if necessary, to ensure that they are receiving all the medical support and attention that are required. That is a very robust procedure that has been in place since the patient safety programme was introduced. We are further expanding and developing the programmes on an on-going basis using examples of how the systems can be improved from across the board. We are also looking at international best practice to see where we can further improve in all aspects of the patient safety programme.

We have put in substantial additional investment. If members compare the spending in 2006 with this year’s spending, they will see that there is a difference of £180 million. Next year, we have budgeted for another £25 million on top of that for NHS Lanarkshire. In 2006, there were eight A and E consultants in NHS Lanarkshire; today, there are 29. There has been a 70 per cent increase in the number of paediatric consultants and a 55 per cent increase overall in the number of medical consultants. Monklands has had a substantial share of all those staff—including nursing staff—increases. As I have indicated, NHS Lanarkshire is in the process of recruiting further consultants and nurses, and a number of those will be allocated to Monklands. The situation in the other two A and E units would have been much worse had Labour’s proposal to close Monklands A and E gone ahead. [Interruption.]

As I said, I have spoken to both the chair and the chief executive of NHS Lanarkshire and I am meeting the entire board on Thursday. I have made it abundantly clear to the chair and the chief executive—as I will to the full board—that I hold them totally accountable for the quality and safety of patient care in NHS Lanarkshire and turning round the situation identified in the report, and that I expect significant progress to be made by the end of March 2014. I have explained to the chair and the chief executive that, if significant progress has not been made by then, I reserve the right to take whatever additional action is required.

Overall, one reason why there are so many vacancies is because we are recruiting so many additional staff. Today’s vacancy position in NHS Lanarkshire is 157 full-time equivalent nursing staff. That is because of the recruitment exercise that we are engaged in. By definition, if a board goes out to recruit staff, there will be a period before the post is filled when a vacancy technically exists. At this time in 2006, there were 41 consultancy vacancies in NHS Lanarkshire; today, there are 17. Bearing it in mind that we have increased the number of consultancy posts by 56 per cent and reduced the consultancy vacancies by more than half, that is a substantial achievement. We cannot blame consultancy vacancies as a contributory factor to the report’s findings.

We have a data initiative that operates right across the NHS, and there are two points to be made about data. First, the systematic collection of appropriate data is absolutely fundamental to a good health service. As a result of the data that we collect through the science of informatics, we have reduced the number of amputations resulting from diabetes by 40 per cent and the incidence of blindness resulting from diabetes by 80 per cent. Collecting systematic and comprehensive data is essential to a modern health service. The second issue, to which Clare Adamson referred, is that we sometimes collect the same data too many times. Therefore, a number of initiatives are in place to ensure that the same data are collected only once and are stored appropriately, so that they are available for analysis. I take the point that we need to be more efficient in the collection and collation of data, not just in NHS Lanarkshire but across the whole system.

I think that I have made it clear that I hold the senior management team and board of NHS Lanarkshire entirely responsible for NHS Lanarkshire’s performance. If I am not satisfied after the March review, I will take any additional steps that I require to take. There is no evidence of large-scale migration of patients from Lanarkshire to adjacent health board areas. Over the past six years there has been an 11 per cent increase in day patients across Lanarkshire, there has been a 2 per cent increase in in-patients, which is in line with the Scottish average, and the number of A and E presentations has remained static.

As the member knows, I have been very open about the need for staff to feel that they can report, without fear or favour, anything that in their opinion is going wrong. I am glad to report that the staff survey that Mr Matheson published on Friday shows that, for the first time ever, more than half the staff across the national health service in Scotland feel that they can blow the whistle on or report anything that is going wrong, without fear or favour. That is a very welcome development. I aim to get the percentage up further, because I want staff to feel that, if something is going wrong or something is happening that should not be happening, they can safely escalate their concern to the appropriate level of management at the earliest opportunity. As I said, we are putting a support team into NHS Lanarkshire. Indeed, the review team and expert advisory group have been providing some support in recent times. We will continue to provide such support for as long as it is required; we will ensure that the HSMR in Lanarkshire at least reaches the Scottish average and that all the indices of performance are at the required level before we consider withdrawing the support team that we are putting in today.

I think that I outlined in some detail the budget, the additional staffing, the facilities and the investment in Monklands, with £14 million invested in physical facilities over the past 18 months. There is no doubt about our commitment to Monklands—unlike that of the member, who wanted the Monklands A and E closed, campaigned for the mental health unit at Monklands to be closed and, I understand, is even suggesting that Monklands hospital should be closed. I will take no lessons from her about Monklands hospital.

I absolutely agree. The member will be aware that as of April this year I made the workforce planning tool compulsory for all health boards in all situations. We can already see that major improvements are resulting from that decision. It is very important that we get the right mix of skills, and the right number of staff in the right place at the right time. That mix has to be based on evidence, and the workforce tool provides the evidence to allow managers to ensure the maximum and most effective use of our staff throughout the national health service at local and national level. Those matters are reviewed regularly, and I am happy to publish any additional information that members require.

As I said earlier, on this Government’s watch, we have identified and quantified the problem and put a solution in place, none of which would have been possible without the patient safety programme and measuring HSMR. The member raised a valid point at the start of her question that goes to the role of the board of NHS Lanarkshire. I have been meeting non-executive directors of boards up and down the country and making it absolutely clear to them that their job is to scrutinise and question, to make sure that the information that they are getting is accurate, and to visit the front line and make sure that the information that they are being given reflects what is actually happening in the wards, hospitals and national health service. That has not been happening sufficiently at NHS Lanarkshire. When my colleague Michael Matheson did the annual review of NHS Lanarkshire two months ago, he specifically asked the non-executive directors whether they were getting all the right information, and he got a positive response. Something has clearly gone wrong, which is why I have asked the entire board to meet me on Thursday to discuss exactly those issues. In future, the board will need to be more effective in managing and monitoring performance.

Yes, I agree entirely. That is a fair point and we are reviewing the complaints procedure across the country. I believe that complaints should be used as a management tool to inform the board and senior management team about where things are going wrong in a health board area. A good example is NHS Grampian, which has devised a comprehensive complaints and concerns analysis system that does not look at just official registered concerns and complaints, but incorporates any adverse comments that are made in social, print and broadcast media of the services that it provides. I have asked the chairs of every NHS board in Scotland to look at NHS Grampian’s system and adopt it or adapt it by copying it into their system so that their complaints procedure, which must be robust, fair and comprehensive, is not just about answering individual complaints but uses the complaints system as management intelligence to highlight and raise the alarm when anything is going wrong.

We have a body called the quality, efficiency and support team, which spreads good practice in the national health service in Scotland. We are working in a range of areas in which that kind of activity can be improved dramatically. A priority must be to improve it in Lanarkshire. For example, at Yorkhill hospital, every morning at eight o’clock they have what is called a huddle, which involves a member of every ward in the hospital, usually the charge nurse. Accident and emergency is represented, too. They go through all the areas looking at the number of overnight admissions, the predicted admissions that day and the accident and emergency situation to ensure that all the requisite staff are being properly used, where they are needed, that people are in the right beds, in the right wards, and, generally, that the hospital is running efficiently. Another huddle is held at two o’clock every day. Since that system was introduced into Yorkhill, there have been substantial and significant improvements in patient safety and the standard of care, as well as in the levels of patient satisfaction, as measured by children and parents. I want to see a huddle carried out in every single hospital, every single morning, 365 days a year, throughout Scotland, because it is one of the initiatives that can help enormously in dealing with issues, particularly the changeover of shifts. It is a very good example, in practice, of how that kind of improvement can be made.

Absolutely. Again, while we need to take cognisance of and rise to the challenge of these problems, we should also get them in context. Even in Monklands hospital, which is the worst performer, the HSMR has improved by 4.3 per cent since 2007 against a Scottish average of 12 per cent. In Wishaw, it was 17.6 per cent and in Hairmyres it was just over 7 per cent. The objective here is to get NHS Lanarkshire up to and, ideally, beyond the Scottish average. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that the HSMR in Monklands hospital has improved, albeit not nearly fast enough. On that basis I would be happy to recommend to any of Bob Doris’s constituents—using my extensive medical knowledge—that they be treated in Lanarkshire.

The process for this report was exactly the same as for every other report produced by Healthcare Improvement Scotland. I emphasise that I did not see and had no part in any drafting of the report, and I did not see any draft until the final report was presented. However, as is standard, once the review team has completed a draft report, it submits it to the senior management team—in this case, in NHS Lanarkshire—to check for factual errors. I believe that some redrafting was done as a result of that consultation, which we would normally expect. The report is amended if it is believed that the points being made at that stage—by NHS Lanarkshire in this case—are valid. There is always a bit of redrafting. Nevertheless, the conclusions and recommendations are entirely the work of Healthcare Improvement Scotland. It is an independent regulator and the report must be its report, which is what is published today.

Our objective is for 95 per cent—rising to 98 per cent—of people who present to accident and emergency to be seen and either discharged back into the community or referred and admitted to a ward within four hours. The latest published figures show that the overall figure for NHS Lanarkshire was around 92 per cent, which means that it still has a way to go to get to 95 per cent and then 98 per cent. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that 92 per cent of people were seen and discharged or admitted within the four-hour timeframe. When there are breaches, that is unacceptable, and the objective is to have zero breaches. However, I was at Wishaw yesterday with a constituent, in my role as an MSP. That particular patient had been in A and E for a total of eight hours, but it was a medical decision to keep them there. On reflection, the medics now think that that was a wrong decision, but it was a medical decision. I hear all the time that the issues are because of a shortage of beds or a lack of assessment, but that case had nothing to do with assessment or beds. There is a multitude of reasons why a breach might happen, but we are making substantial progress towards achieving the 95 per cent target. We have achieved it with the Scottish average and we now want to get to 98 per cent. I should point out that, in 2006, the one time that the situation was measured under the previous Administration, the equivalent figure was that only 86 per cent of people were discharged or admitted to a ward within the four-hour period. We have substantially improved the situation.

The Minister for Children and Young People met representatives of the RCN on 28 November 2013 to discuss the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill.

We have 1,000 more whole-time equivalent nurses working in the health service in Scotland today than we inherited in 2007. We have also introduced and made mandatory the workforce planning tool, which will allow every health board to ensure that we have the right number of nurses with the right skills mix in the right place at the right time. We will obviously study the RCN survey and discuss with the RCN any points arising from it. I am satisfied that we are as skilled up as we can be, with plans to improve further the numbers and skilling of nurses to cater for the complex demands of the comorbidity and long-term conditions from which so many people suffer today.

As Nanette Milne knows, we are bringing back the traditional health visitor and school nurses, and we are looking at the demands on their services—in particular we are considering the intensive need to roll out the very labour-intensive family nurse partnerships throughout Scotland. I believe that that will produce substantive gains for the people who are involved and for society as a whole. We already have a workforce planning tool for nursing and we will be guided by that when deciding on the exact number of nurses and the skills mix that we require in any particular function or location at any particular time.

The standards at Aberdeen maternity hospital that were first exposed by the Healthcare Environment Inspectorate report, which was published on 29 October, were unacceptable. However, I welcome the latest report that has been published by the inspectorate on 4 December, which notes a series of positive quality improvements that will help to enhance patient care at Aberdeen maternity hospital. NHS Grampian has responded to the serious issues that have been identified, and has made tangible progress through the rigorous action plan that it has put in place. Staff should be commended on their work to date and on promising areas of progress, and I expect NHS Grampian to continue to ensure that quality, safety and cleanliness are key priorities for all its staff. It is encouraging that significant progress has been made through strong inspection followed by swift action. We will continue to work closely with NHS Grampian to monitor progress on its improvement plan and the standard of care that is provided across the health board area.

Absolutely. I should note that the HEI’s latest inspection report, which was published on 4 December, highlighted improvement through the work that was carried out to review the function and ease of cleaning of the beds that are in use. I understand that labour-ward beds have mechanical and electrical parts and have to be taken apart to be adequately cleaned. All the labour-ward beds have been dismantled and deep cleaned, and results of trials of alternative beds have confirmed that the beds that are currently in use in Aberdeen maternity hospital are the best that are available in terms of their cleanability.

The ear, nose and throat in-patient service will move to the new Southern general in 2015 as the single specialist site for in-patients for the whole of the Glasgow and Clyde area. That change, which was approved by the previous Administration in March 2007, affects a relatively small number of patients, with the majority of care continuing to be delivered locally as out-patient or day-case episodes.

That decision was taken by my predecessor, Andy Kerr, when he was Minister for Health and Community Care in the previous Administration. I assume that he undertook the necessary consultations. Obviously, he reached the decision that he did and it is now not appropriate to reverse that decision.

It is my policy always to consult when there is any major redesign of service provision. As the member will know, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is currently working on a review of clinical services throughout its area. Any proposals arising from that review will be consulted on widely.

Since I announced my decision to end the pilot health board elections, there has been on-going dialogue with NHS Dumfries and Galloway on the transitional arrangements that the board must put in place to ensure strong and effective governance. However, the member will recognise that the decision to end the pilot elections is subject to parliamentary process.

The legislation setting up the pilot elections to boards required me to make a decision on whether to proceed with the extension of the pilot throughout the entire system or to terminate the pilots. I had no choice; I had to make a decision within a certain timeframe. I am making it clear to the elected members, who will be required to stand down in accordance with future appointment processes to the boards of NHS Dumfries and Galloway and NHS Fife, which is the other health board that is involved in the pilot, that they will be entirely free to reapply for membership of the health board if they wish to do so. I should mention that we are going ahead with the extension of the other pilots, which involved unelected people, to improve the wide selection of people who are applying to and being appointed to health boards, and, in particular, to ensure that more women and members of underrepresented groups are appointed to health boards, provided that they have the merit and the ability to do the job.

The Information Services Division, which is part of the national health service for Scotland, provides quarterly statistical reports on vacancies in all NHS boards. Vacancies are defined as unfilled posts, as of each time point, which are subject to appropriate recruitment arrangements. Vacancy management processes are in place across NHS Scotland to support the implementation of local workforce plans. Those processes inform vacancy advertising requirements. Within NHS Grampian, reports on vacancies are regularly provided to the board’s staff governance committee, including quarterly information covering vacancies for consultants, nurses, midwives and allied health professionals. The committee met most recently on 19 November.

I do not believe that a high-cost-area supplement would be appropriate. If we got into that, we would have to look at other parts of the country. For example, in the Western Isles, there is a major shortage of maintenance engineers, because of the renewable energy industry success there. Should we then introduce a high-cost-of-living supplement or a skills-shortage supplement for the Western Isles because we cannot find a maintenance engineer there? Going down that road would have huge ramifications. We take a robust approach to filling vacancies in Grampian and elsewhere. I receive a monthly report on all posts in the national health service that have been vacant for more than three months. In such cases, we work with the boards to ensure that we fill those vacancies. To date, we have been able to fill the vacancies, and I anticipate that continuing.

One of the key outcomes for Scotland’s national dementia strategy for 2013 to 2016 is dementia-friendly and dementia-enabled communities. The Scottish Government’s standards of care for dementia in Scotland, which were published in 2011, state that people with dementia have the right to remain connected to and feel involved in their community, wherever they live. From 2014, the independent Life Changes Trust will make available about £25 million of funding from the Big Lottery Fund over 10 years to benefit people with dementia and their carers in Scotland, which will include helping to lessen the social isolation and depression that they often experience. The investment is likely to focus on areas such as developing dementia-friendly communities, and I expect the trust to consider closely the value of supporting accreditation initiatives as part of that. The trust’s investment will complement our key national activity, such as our continuing focus on timely diagnosis, more integrated community-based care and support and our world-leading commitment of a year’s worth of post-diagnostic support for everyone who has been diagnosed from 1 April this year.

I know that there is positive activity towards building dementia-friendly communities in East Dunbartonshire. From next year, we will work with the council there on dementia and co-production. That work will aim to create a local culture in which the approach to dementia across sectors and in the community is co-designed. That means that it is commissioned, delivered and evaluated not only with people who have a diagnosis of dementia, their families and their carers but with wider local society. I am aware that a range of dementia-friendly and dementia-enabled models will be adopted and I look forward with great interest to seeing how the agenda is developed from next year locally and nationally through the Life Changes Trust. I am happy to pass on Fiona McLeod’s point that the Fairtrade model provides a possible example to follow.

The Scottish Government set out a package of changes to improve access to medicines following the extensive work of the Health and Sport Committee. A pivotal part of that—with the potential for the greatest impact on access—is the work that is being done by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which will report to me before Christmas. The new PACS will be fully rolled out once we have national changes in place.

I understand Adam Ingram’s point. That is why I have asked national health service boards to act flexibly in view of the on-going work at a national level and why I have made it clear that I do not expect patients to be disadvantaged in any way because of the timing of events. We are talking about a relatively small number of patients and I know that the NHS boards have taken on board the request for flexibility and that IPTRs are being put forward. Ultimately, decisions need to be made on a clinical basis but I am absolutely clear that no patient should be disadvantaged because we are in a transitional period from one system to another.

The Scottish Government announced on 27 August that we had commissioned Healthcare Improvement Scotland to undertake a rapid review of the safety and quality of patient care in NHS Lanarkshire. I am aware that HIS has kept all Lanarkshire MSPs informed of its progress, as well as giving them opportunities to input to the review. In addition to considering a substantial amount of information and data, the review team has visited 43 clinical areas, spoken to more than 200 people—including patients, their families, carers and members of staff—received feedback from more than 300 patients and carers about their experience of the care that was received, and reviewed 152 records of patients who died within 30 days of admission across the three hospitals. I can confirm that HIS will publish its report by the end of the year.

I am sure that there will be a timely response, and the report will be published by the end of the year. It is rather hypocritical of anyone in the Labour Party to criticise A and E turnaround times in Lanarkshire, when Labour wanted to close down Monklands hospital’s A and E department.

Our framework for action document contains a package of more than 40 measures that seek to reduce consumption of alcohol; support families and communities; encourage more positive attitudes and positive choices; and improve treatment and support services. Together with minimum unit pricing and other regulatory measures on, for example, the irresponsible promotion of alcohol, this wider package will help to create the cultural shift that is required to change our relationship with alcohol. Considerable progress has been made on implementing key aspects of the alcohol framework, including a record investment of more than £237 million since 2008 in tackling alcohol misuse; the delivery of more than 366,000 alcohol brief interventions by NHS Scotland; the establishment of 30 alcohol and drug partnerships; the development of an implementation plan to deliver the recommendations of the quality alcohol treatment and support report; the commencement of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010; and the passing of the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Act 2012 in May 2012.

It is a bit rich for anyone from the Labour Party, with its constant opposition to minimum unit pricing, to demand action now. We have already implemented a 40-point action plan and, as the NHS Health Scotland report that was issued yesterday indicated, measures such as the ending of multiple unit sales are already having a positive impact in reducing alcohol sales in Scotland.

We have never claimed that minimum unit pricing is a single silver bullet, but it is a prerequisite to breaking the back of the problem of alcohol misuse in Scotland. I draw Rhoda Grant’s attention to what are now four reports that have been produced by Professor Tim Stockwell, the global expert on this matter, which demonstrate beyond any doubt—let alone any reasonable doubt—that, unless we affect the price of alcohol, we will not be able to beat this problem in Scotland. That is why minimum unit pricing is so essential and why, despite Labour’s opposition, the Government was determined to deliver it.

The Irish and Estonian Governments have adopted a policy on minimum unit pricing that is similar to the one adopted by the Scottish Government, and I know of other Governments that are giving similar consideration to following our example. Having spoken to the World Health Organization at a recent conference in Tallinn in Estonia, I can tell the member that we have its whole-hearted support in pursuing minimum unit pricing. There is no doubt that the almost unanimous view not just among health professionals in Scotland but, increasingly, among Governments and health professionals in Europe is that minimum unit pricing is the right policy for pursuing our objective of substantially reducing the harm that is caused by alcohol abuse.

I am pleased to open the stage 1 debate on the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. I thank Duncan McNeil and the Health and Sport Committee for their scrutiny of the bill and for preparing their stage 1 report, which contains interesting and welcome recommendations. I also thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, the Finance Committee and the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee for their consideration of the bill and for contributing to the Health and Sport Committee’s scrutiny of the bill. I am grateful to partner organisations across the national health service, local government and the third and independent sectors and to the broad range of stakeholder working groups that have helped the Scottish Government to develop the policy that is reflected in the bill, and I thank the organisations and individuals who provided oral and written evidence at stage 1. I am sure that the Parliament will wish to join me in welcoming those contributions. By definition, integrating health and social care requires a good team effort, and that is exactly what the work by a wide range of people and organisations represents. I am pleased that the Health and Sport Committee welcomed the bill in its stage 1 report and recommended that the Parliament should approve the bill’s general principles. The committee asked a number of questions on specific issues and asked for further clarification on a range of points. I am grateful for the committee’s careful scrutiny, to which I have responded in my reply to the stage 1 report. I will begin this debate by capturing once again the essence of what this legislation is about, why it is needed as a matter of urgency and why the principles that underpin it command widespread support. The 2011 census showed us that, for the first time, Scotland’s population included more people aged over 65 than people aged under 15. We all know that that statistic represents an extraordinary achievement on the part of our health and social care services, which have helped to enable so many people to live longer, healthier lives in Scotland. However, I need remind no one of the challenges that an ageing population brings as we consider how best we should plan and deliver services in the future. In particular, as more people live longer with multiple conditions and complex needs, we must make sure that the health and social care support on which their wellbeing relies works seamlessly, effectively and efficiently. That is why we are integrating health and social care: to improve outcomes for the growing numbers of people who need both health and social care support, most of whom have multiple complex needs, some of whom are older and all of whom should have access to the right care, at the right time and in the right place. Too often, people are admitted to hospital or to a care home when care provision and support in the community would result in better outcomes for them. Too often, the system is not configured to provide the right care in the right place at the right time.

Absolutely. It is very important that vital services such as housing and transport are actively involved in partnerships and that they feed into the design and commissioning of the services that we are talking about. Too often, people’s independence and wellbeing are diminished too early or to too great an extent by an overreliance on institutional care. We all accept that it is our responsibility as a Parliament to tackle these challenges, not least because the costs and consequences are not limited to the individuals involved. The consequences of our failure in Scotland to use different types of care and support to best effect undermine our entire health and social care system and are shared by everyone as public sector resources are spent on activities that do not deliver maximum possible benefit. The solution to many of these challenges is strong, effective leadership—from clinicians and care professionals, from people working in the national health service, local government and the third and independent sectors and, by no means least, from party and Parliament itself, which is why this legislation is necessary and important. This Government is committed to establishing a public service landscape in which different public bodies are required to work together and with their partners in the third and independent sectors to remove unhelpful barriers and use their pooled resources for the greater benefit of patients, service users, carers and families. That is fundamental to the ethos and ambition of this bill. I will now spell out some context for the bill’s provisions. As I have stated—and as the stage 1 report by the Health and Sport Committee reiterates—there is a clear need for legislation to provide the framework for driving forward change, because not enough progress has been made under the current permissive legislation. The purpose of this bill is exactly that: to establish that framework for integrating health and social care and to improve the quality and consistency of services by focusing on improving outcomes for service users, carers and their families. The bill will foster an environment that encourages constructive culture change by requiring health boards and local authorities to establish integrated partnership arrangements and to work more closely together day to day and via medium and short-term joint strategic planning arrangements. Evidence shows us that effective integration depends particularly on four key features. First, local systems must plan together for shared populations of need; in other words, health and social care with their third and independent sector partners must plan for people with complex needs together, not separately and in isolation from one another. Secondly, resources must be pooled to deliver population-based plans, which is why integrated budgets will be so important. Thirdly, clinicians and other professionals must be closely involved in and lead the design and planning of local services. Fourthly, both local and national leadership must be strong, effective and consistent. The bill is built directly on those four features of well-integrated systems. With regard to overarching arrangements for integration, the bill provides for local flexibility and leadership to determine which approach to integration is most appropriate to local circumstances. Two models are provided: delegation between partners—or, in other words, lead agency arrangements—and delegation to a body corporate. It will be up to each area to decide which is appropriate for them. Having set up the integrated partnership arrangement, health boards and local authorities will then be required to delegate adult health and social care functions and budgets to the integrated partnership. By bringing together integrated governance, integrated strategic planning and integrated budgets, we will create the environment not only for improving outcomes but for greater financial accountability by reducing the opportunities and indeed incentives for cost shunting between organisations. I intend to lodge at stage 2 an amendment that will set out on the face of the bill that only adult social care functions—and therefore budgets—must be included in the integrated arrangement. Regulations will set out the types of adult health care—and therefore budgets—for integration, including adult primary and community health care and, importantly, aspects of acute hospital care that offer the best opportunities for service redesign in favour of prevention and anticipatory care in the community. The bill requires each integration authority to put in place a strategic commissioning plan for the integrated services. Strategic planning lies at the heart of this process of reform and the bill is clear on the broad extent of consultation required to ensure strategic planning is robust and effective. A key feature of strategic planning arrangements is the bill’s requirement on the integration authority to establish locality planning arrangements, which will provide a forum for local clinical and professional leadership of service planning. Where the body corporate model is used, a chief officer must be appointed by the integration authority to ensure integrated oversight of strategic planning, budget management and service delivery. To facilitate such changes, community health partnerships will be removed from statute and national outcomes for health and wellbeing will be established via secondary legislation after consultation. Integration authorities will be required to publish a performance report to provide accountability and transparency for delivery against the national outcomes and any further outcomes agreed upon locally. The bill does not sit in isolation but fits within a wider agenda of public service reform that is currently taking place in Scotland. Reforms in other areas, including those in the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013 and the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill and our planned changes to community planning, all serve to complement the work of this bill, which in turn will reinforce that wider programme of reform for the benefit of our population. Through the creation of an integrated health and social care budget and a single set of joint outcomes, integration creates a positive policy environment for health boards to play an integral part in self-directed support policy and practice, and it is vital that we take full advantage of this opportunity. Should local authorities and health boards decide to include children’s health and social care in their integrated arrangement services, the planning requirements of the bill will feed into the development of the plans that will be required under the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which the Parliament is considering. Like other public sector bodies, integration authorities will be expected to play a strong and effective role in supporting the work of community planning to achieve better outcomes for communities on shared priorities. The bill deals with a number of important and complex issues, and this debate provides an important opportunity for the Parliament to consider, in some depth, the bill and the challenges to which it responds. I think that there is wide agreement in the Parliament and beyond on the aims of integration and the broad principles that underpin the approach. As Bob Doris, the deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee, put it when the committee’s stage 1 report was published: “whilst this legislation is not a panacea, it will provide a focus for cementing and reinforcing progress that has already been made”. I agree with that, and I look forward to working with members of all parties as we take this bill through Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill.

Scottish planning policy makes clear that, when identifying locations for new housing, planning authorities must take account of the availability of infrastructure, including community facilities. Under Scottish planning legislation, health boards are key agencies in the preparation of development plans and should be actively engaged with planning authorities in the process of planning for new development and the growth of communities. Regarding discussions on the provision of primary medical facilities for expanding communities in the north-east, there are no confirmed plans for medical facilities at present. However, NHS Grampian has been in discussion with the local authority on the matter, and those discussions will continue.

Alison McInnes raises a number of valid points, particularly regarding the new development at Chapelton of Elsick. As I said in my first answer, the health board and local authority are in detailed discussion. The matter is for discussion between the health board and the local authority. If, after those discussions, the health board has to come to me to request additional funding, we would obviously look at any proposal, but the priority is for the responsible local organisations—namely, the health board and the local authority—to agree a way forward. We can then see whether Scottish Government intervention is needed and how we can help in implementing any proposals that are agreed.

Significant progress is being made on improving the oral health of children in Scotland. For example, the national dental inspection programme has found that the proportion of primary 1 children with no obvious decay experience had increased to 67 per cent in 2012, compared with 44.6 per cent in 2003, and that the proportion of primary 7 children with no obvious decay experience has risen to 72.8 per cent in 2013, compared with 52.9 per cent in 2005.

This Government can be very proud of the steps that it has taken to improve access to NHS dentistry. For example, from 2007 to 2013, the period in question, the proportion of children and adults registered with an NHS dentist increased to 89.5 and 79.9 per cent. That compares to 67.2 and 46.2 per cent in 2007. Dumfries and Galloway has also shown a similar improvement from 2007 to 2013. The number of dentists working in the NHS also reflects our success. From 2007, the number has increased by 670, which is an increase of 27 per cent. There are also specific initiatives in place to support areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. I confirm that grant funding through the Scottish dental access initiative has been critical in providing funding for a range of new practices in the south of Scotland, including in Dumfries and Galloway, for the period in question. I also draw attention to the new dental school in Aberdeen. That will ensure a sufficient stream of newly qualified dentists for the NHS.

The Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill will make a number of changes to the law on marriage and civil partnership, but the centrepiece is obviously the legalisation of same-sex marriage, which will allow all people in Scotland who love each other the same opportunity to have their marriage recognised in the eyes of the law. That will create a more tolerant society in Scotland and will mean that there are genuine equal rights in respect of marriage across the entire community. The bill makes provides that married transgender people will be able to obtain gender recognition and stay married, thereby removing the need to divorce. That provision will make a huge beneficial difference to the lives of transgender people and their spouses. I will turn later to the detail of the bill and, in particular, to the points that the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report raises. Before doing so, I will give a brief general overview of the provisions in the bill. The bill contains a number of changes to marriage law that have been planned for some time, and some other changes to ensure that marriage ceremonies in Scotland continue to be carried out with due solemnity and dignity. The bill also provides greater flexibility on where civil marriage ceremonies can take place; it will permit civil marriage ceremonies to take place at any location that is agreed between the couple and the registration authority, as long as that place is not religious premises. The bill also clarifies the position of belief celebrants and puts them on the same footing as religious celebrants. That is a welcome change that acknowledges the role that humanists, for example, play in solemnising marriage in Scotland. The bill will increase flexibility in relation to civil partnerships and will allow the religious or belief registration of civil partnership where the religious or belief body is happy to take part. While providing greater freedom and flexibility for couples generally, the bill will also ensure that marriage procedures in Scotland remain rigorous. For example, the bill clarifies the offence of bigamy, and a number of other provisions in the bill show that we in Scotland will not tolerate sham or forced marriages, which are real problems in Scotland today, so I pay tribute to registrars and others across Scotland who are vigilant in tackling those issues. The bill will extend the normal notice period for marriage and for civil partnership from 14 days to 28 days. That reflects the reality of the length of time it can take to check that a person is eligible to marry or to enter into a civil partnership. It will also be a deterrent to sham marriages. The bill will allow district registrars to require specified nationality evidence when a couple is seeking to enter into a marriage or a civil partnership. Such information may be needed for a variety of reasons, for example for statistical reasons. Again, requiring such evidence could combat sham and forced marriages. The bill will also empower ministers to make regulations on qualifying requirements for religious and belief bodies to meet before their celebrants can be authorised to solemnise marriages or to register civil partnerships. Scotland has a rich diversity of religious and belief bodies that can solemnise marriage. That is very welcome, but it also means that we need to make certain that the dignity and solemnity of the ceremonies are upheld. The qualifying requirements could cover such issues as the requirement not to carry out ceremonies for profit or gain and the requirement to have an awareness of forced and sham marriages. We will consult widely with religious and belief bodies and with others before we make any regulations. I know that religious and belief bodies share our determination to ensure that marriage ceremonies remain dignified. Equally, though, the state must not interfere with the internal workings of religious and belief bodies, so we need to ensure that a reasonable balance is struck.

I will go into detail on such issues later when I discuss the recommendations from the Equal Opportunities Committee. I have already referred to same-sex marriage. Respect for religious beliefs and views has also been at the heart of our work on same-sex marriage and we have consulted twice. We have not consulted more on any bill that has passed through Parliament than we have consulted on this measure. There has also, of course, been detailed examination of the bill at stage 1 by the Equal Opportunities Committee, which was led initially led by Mary Fee and is now led by Margaret McCulloch.

We have found the submissions and we will put them on the website. As Alex Johnstone said, they were not lost through any fault of the Scottish Government. There was a technical hitch on the part of the people who submitted those 4,100 submissions. I know that the detailed examination of the bill by the Equal Opportunities Committee has been challenging, so I pay tribute to all the members of the committee—in particular Margaret McCulloch and Mary Fee, who have been the two conveners of the committee during that period. Throughout the consultations and the stage 1 process, the Government has acknowledged the diversity and strength of religious beliefs. In the foreword to the first consultation, my predecessor Nicola Sturgeon emphasised that “This Government believes in religious tolerance and the freedom to worship.” We recognise—although we disagree with them—that some people of faith sincerely believe that marriage should be between, and only between, one man and one woman. There is a vigorous and respectful debate on same-sex marriage in many religious bodies, as there is across society and in Parliament. Some religious and belief bodies wish to solemnise same-sex marriage, and the bill provides a balanced and fair package.

Believing in or opposing same-sex marriage is in itself no barrier to adoption. I am happy to write to Richard Lyle to clarify the law on adoption in relation to same-sex marriage.

That matter is currently under legal appeal. Therefore, it would be inappropriate for me to comment on that particular example. I am happy to clarify such matters more generally, either during tonight’s debate or by writing to Murdo Fraser. The bill establishes an opt-in system for religious and belief bodies in relation to same-sex marriage and civil partnerships, and makes it clear that there is no duty to opt in. The bill will impose no duty on any person who is an approved celebrant to solemnise same-sex marriages or to register civil partnerships. In addition, the United Kingdom Equality Act 2010 will be amended to protect individual celebrants who refuse to solemnise same-sex marriage from court actions claiming discrimination. Same-sex marriage will not be introduced in Scotland until the amendment to the 2010 act has been secured—as I believe it will be. We have reached agreement with the UK Government about the amendment to the Equality Act 2010, and we have published a detailed statement on what is planned. As we have indicated, the amendments that will be made will also cover other persons who play an integral part in the religious or belief aspects of the marriage or civil partnership ceremony. They will protect persons who control use of religious or belief premises and who refuse to allow those premises to be used for same-sex marriage or civil partnership ceremonies.

Absolutely; a number of religious organisations and churches are very much in favour of the proposed legislation—the Quakers being a good example. Until now, they have not been allowed to carry out same-sex marriages, and they want to be allowed to do so. We have carefully considered the need for wider protections across society as a whole. The issues are challenging ones, and we have to respect religious beliefs while ensuring that there is no discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities or individuals. We need to avoid interfering with the employer-employee relationship. We need to balance parental rights in areas such as education with the right of the child to receive a full and comprehensive education. Therefore, the protections that we are introducing more generally are a mixture of legislation and guidance. The bill has provision at section 14 that makes it clear that the introduction of same-sex marriage will have no impact on existing rights to freedom of speech, thought, conscience and religion. In addition, the Lord Advocate has issued prosecution guidance that makes it clear that “criticism of same sex marriage or homosexuality is not in itself an offence”, and that “Views expressed or comments made in relation to same sex marriage in ways which do not incite hatred or violence towards a particular person or group” of people “and which do not cause or intend to cause public disorder will not be the subject of criminal prosecution.” Moreover, the vigorous debate on same-sex marriage during our consultations and while the bill has been with Parliament shows that freedom of speech is very much alive and well.

I do not agree at all. The guidance is from the chief prosecutor to every prosecutor in Scotland. In my view, to say that it will have no impact is absolute nonsense. Of course it will have an impact—it says what will and will not be prosecuted in Scotland. I think that that is the right approach. With regard to education, after seeking views on updating the guidance on the conduct of relationships, sexual health and parenthood education, we have received around 60 responses and are currently considering the points that have been made by those who have commented on the draft guidance. We have said that, where teachers have concerns about educational material that they might be asked to use, they should raise those concerns with the school or the local authority. We believe that to be the right local approach; after all, such detailed issues are best discussed and resolved at local level, rather than being dealt with through our trying to dictate from the centre. There is also existing guidance reflecting the professional standards that teachers have to meet when giving classes. Similarly, we have indicated that we are opposed to a legislative opt-out from same-sex marriage for civil registrars, and that any issues or concerns should be dealt with at local level by employers. Turning to the Equal Opportunities Committee’s stage 1 report, I note that the committee has asked us to take account of stakeholders’ views on matters such as protection of celebrants. We will, of course, do that. That we have kept an open mind throughout the bill process is, I believe, shown by the balanced package that we have put forward. As for the committee’s other recommendations, we will consider the point about the distinctions between religious marriage and belief marriage. As the committee noted, we considered those points following the second consultation, but coming up with designations that please everyone is not a straightforward matter. The committee has suggested that couples in a non-Scottish civil partnership should be able to change their relationship to a marriage in Scotland. Although we need to respect non-Scottish jurisdictions as well as to ensure that we do not cause confusion with regard to a couple’s civil status, we will consider in detail the point that the committee has raised. We have also written to a number of religious bodies to seek their views on a change to gender-neutral marriage ceremonies. However, we have concerns about the committee’s recommendation on spousal consent. It is spousal consent to decide to stay in a marriage—and it takes two to stay in a marriage. As the committee has noted; “spouses of people seeking gender recognition may find themselves in circumstances that are very difficult to face”. That said, we will consider the point further with the aim of balancing everyone’s rights. On long-term transitioned people, we will seek to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to introduce provisions similar to those that were added to the UK legislation in the House of Lords. Finally, we will respond in detail with regard to lowering the age at which applications can be made to the gender recognition panel. We need more medical and psychological evidence of the potential effect of any possible change, but I recognise the points that were made in evidence to the committee and acknowledge the need for the Government to give further thought to the issue. In conclusion, I strongly urge my fellow MSPs to vote for a bill that will make sensible improvements to marriage and civil partnership law, that provides greater flexibility for couples who are seeking to get married or enter into a civil partnership, and which will introduce same-sex marriage, which will further promote equality and diversity in our society while respecting the views of those who do not wish to take part. I believe that the bill’s provisions will improve our society in Scotland and make it much more civilised in its treatment of LGBT people. I look forward to the debate and ask my colleagues to support the bill’s general principles at the vote at 8 pm tonight. [Applause.] I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill.

That will not be a problem, Presiding Officer. I begin by reminding the Parliament what the Equal Opportunities Committee said in its report. The committee hoped that members of the Parliament would “approach the Stage 1 decision with the same dignified tenor as our evidence sessions and with due respect for a diversity of views.” Everybody who has spoken has tried to live up to that ideal, and I think that this has been one of the most powerful debates that the Parliament has ever held. It is a real tribute to the Parliament. We have heard some wonderful speeches, from Ruth Davidson and many others, some of which have been very powerful indeed, putting the case for the bill. There have also been powerful speeches putting the case against. I will begin by dealing with two fairly fundamental points that have been raised by those who do not feel that they can vote for the bill tonight. First, I emphasise that there are essentially two aspects to marriage: there is the religious aspect and there is the state law aspect. What we are dealing with tonight is the state law aspect of marriage. We believe that the state should recognise marriage between same-sex couples as well as between mixed-sex couples. The bill does not in any way interfere with any religious or belief body’s approach to marriage. Indeed, there is only one way in which it even touches on it, and that is that churches and other religious organisations such as the Unitarians and the Quakers will now be able to have same-sex marriages, which they want to carry out, carried out on their premises under their religion. Those marriages will now be recognised by the state. Beyond that, the proposed legislation has no other impact on marriage as carried out by, defined by, exercised by or recognised by such bodies. Secondly, we are not redefining marriage. I refer to Mary Fee’s point, and I have heard the First Minister say this—and many of us would agree: the bill does not in any way redefine our marriage. It does extend the eligibility for marriage, which is the key point of the proposed legislation. People in Scotland who have been ineligible for marriage will now be eligible for marriage and for that marriage, and the love that it represents, to be recognised by the state and by those religious bodies—and only those religious bodies—who want to recognise those marriages out of their own choice.

Absolutely. Let me explain exactly why. We are giving four sets of guarantees. First, there are the guarantees in the proposed legislation itself. Probably the biggest single guarantee is that, in order to carry out same-sex marriage, any religious organisation, belief organisation or celebrant has to opt in. It is their decision to opt in, and they obviously cannot be forced to opt in. That is the case not just for the organisation. As the bill states, if, for example, the Church of Scotland changed its mind and agreed to recognise, participate in and carry out same-sex marriages, but its own celebrants—its own ministers—did not wish to do so, those ministers would still have the right not to opt in. The rights of the organisation, religious body or belief body, as well as those of the individual celebrant, are absolutely guaranteed under the bill, which is totally compatible with the European convention on human rights. If it had not been, the Presiding Officer would not have approved it as competent proposed legislation. Secondly—and on top of that—there are the amendments that we have agreed with Jamie McGrigor’s own UK Government. Maria Miller and I have been working very closely on this matter, and we have agreed amendments to the Equality Act 2010 that will underline all the relevant protections for those who take a different view or do not want to participate in same-sex marriages. In fact, some aspects actually go slightly further than the protections that were built in during the passage of the UK legislation. The third protection is in relation to education. My friend the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is at this very moment consulting on the legislation’s impact on educational guidance. He will announce the outcome of that consultation within the next two to three months. The final protection is the Lord Advocate’s guidance to all prosecutors in Scotland, which has already been published and which absolutely, explicitly and unequivocally guarantees the rights of those people who are opposed to the principle of same-sex marriage and those who do not wish to participate in or carry out such marriages. In short, we are providing not just one but four sets of protections specifically for this legislation. I believe that to be a very reasonable balance between extending the freedom and rights of those who are entitled to marry and extending and guaranteeing protections for those who disagree with the policy and do not wish to carry out same-sex marriages.

Yes, it is and I must also inform the chamber that I intend to issue the legal text of the proposed amendments to the 2010 act before the completion of stage 2. Obviously, we have to agree the legal text with the lawyers in London as well as the lawyers here, but if members look at the protections in our bill alongside the text of the amendments to the 2010, they will see that the protections are unequivocally unchallengeable with regard to the individuals and the churches in question. Indeed, the protections extend to organists, who are essential to a church ceremony. If an organist turns round and says, “I refuse to play the organ at a same-sex marriage ceremony”, they, too, will be protected from any prosecution. This is the most comprehensive set of protections imaginable for any piece of legislation that we have ever introduced. As a result—and I thank Jackie Baillie for emphasising this point—I think that we have achieved a balanced package. On the one hand, we are extending the freedom and rights of those who wish to engage in same-sex marriage and, on the other, we are putting in place all these protections for people who are either against it in principle or who do not want to participate.

Of course I will.

We are very clear that there is no chance of a successful appeal to the European Court. Apart from anything else, the European convention on human rights does not give someone the right to same-sex marriage in the first place. There are also other reasons, which I do not have time to go into tonight, why we are absolutely sure that any appeal to the European Court would not be successful. In summary, I believe that the bill is—as Jackie Baillie and others have said—a balanced package that allows freedom and rights to be exercised by those who at present cannot exercise them, without in any way diminishing or threatening the rights and freedoms of those who take a different point of view. More importantly, as many speakers have pointed out, it is not the text of the bill that matters but the message that it sends out about 21st-century Scotland. We are joining those 16 states in America, those nine European countries, our friends south of the border and all the other countries, including South Africa, that have already passed legislation to provide a modern framework of legislation relating to marriage that recognises the equality of all our people. As Rabbie said, we are all Jock Tamson’s bairns, and all the bairns are entitled to exactly the same treatment throughout our law, now including marriage law. This is a historic day for Scotland. Future generations will look back and congratulate the Parliament on passing this progressive piece of legislation. [Applause.]

We know that the earlier a cancer is diagnosed, the easier it is to treat. That is why the £30 million detect cancer early programme, which is initially focusing on breast, lung and colorectal cancers, aims to increase by 25 per cent the proportion of Scots diagnosed in the earliest stage of cancer. To support the programme, we have launched four detect cancer early social marketing campaigns. Although the initial evaluation of the campaigns that have been run so far has been encouraging, it is still too early to assess what impact the programme has had on early diagnosis. Capital and revenue have been made available to support an increase in diagnostic and treatment capacity. In addition, we have introduced a new two-year primary care initiative to support uptake of the national bowel screening programme. Health Improvement Scotland is also undertaking a refresh of the “Scottish Referral Guidelines for Suspected Cancer”.

There are two cancer waiting time targets: the 31-day target and the 62-day target. We are meeting the 31-day target overall, and we have been doing so consistently. In recent months, there has been a slight underperformance in meeting the 62-day target, one of the reasons for which is an acute shortage of specific oncology specialists, which is affecting not just Scotland but the entire United Kingdom. The northern area, and Grampian in particular, has been adversely affected by the shortage because of retirals and people relocating. We are addressing the situation as a matter of urgency because it is our intention to ensure that both the 31-day target and the 62-day target are met throughout the country and, ideally, in relation to all 10 cancers.

I, too, join the chorus of congratulations to Dennis Robertson on raising the issue. I also congratulate him on the tremendous contribution that, in his short time in the Parliament, he has made to bringing these important issues to our attention. Every speech tonight has been excellent. The debate shows the Parliament in its best light. If some of the members’ business debates were repeated during the day, people might see the Parliament in a better light. This is a complex and contentious issue and everyone should play their part in tackling the unhelpful and unrealistic ideals that can lead to unhealthy lifestyles. Debenhams has taken the lead in recognising that, and the store’s mannequins have been referred to by nearly every member. Dennis Robertson has suggested that Debenhams will roll them out across the country. I hope that that happens and that others in the industry repeat its example. I want to quote fairly extensively from an organisation called Beat, which has been set up to beat eating disorders. These quotations are extremely relevant to our discussion about the relationship between eating disorders and marketing and image in the modern world. Beat says: “Body image is a topic that continually seems to attract attention. A report published by the All Party Parliamentary Group ... on Body Image revealed that over half the UK public suffer from negative body image which can to leave to health and relationship problems, low self esteem and hinder participation at school and progression at work.” It says: “The causes of eating disorders are complex”— which we all know— “and not yet fully determined but include genetic, psychological, environmental, social and biological influences. Poor body image and low self esteem are key factors in the development of eating disorders and social and cultural pressures are strong in this area.” The image presented by modern advertising through mannequins, press adverts and TV adverts all play a part in that. Beat goes on to say: “A preoccupation with weight and shape is one of the key features of current popular culture. And these cultural ideals are not solely relevant to women—boys and men also feel these pressures but for them they relate to the ‘need’ to be muscular, toned and athletic.”

I agree entirely with what Christine Grahame said. Beat draws attention to a study carried out in Fiji on the influence of the media on body image “before and after the wide exposure to television. The study found that key indicators of disordered eating were significantly more prevalent following exposure. Narrative data revealed participants interest in weight loss was a means of modelling themselves on television characters.” The study, which was carried out by Professor Anne Becker about eight years ago, was called “Eating behaviours and attitudes following prolonged exposure to television among ethnic Fijian adolescent girls” and was published in The British Journal of Psychiatry. Another study, by Dr Aric Sigman, in The Biologist in October 2010, “showed that there is a strong link between eating disorders and visual media. Repeated exposure to images of thin women alters brain function and increases the propensity to develop eating disorders.” The 19 editors of Vogue magazines around the world have recently launched a welcome health initiative “to reflect their commitment to the health of the models who appear on the pages and the wellbeing of their readers.” That is an important initiative, because Vogue is a world leader in fashion media. It is a major statement, which I hope the rest of the industry heeds. The reason for my extensive quotes is that we now have scientific research to prove the links between eating disorders and what goes on in the media and television and with mannequins in shop windows. The industry can no longer be in denial about that link. It is incumbent on all of us to do everything that we can to get the industry more widely to recognise that link and the damage that it is doing by promoting an image of thinness, and to change its practice. As Jackie Baillie pointed out very articulately, the irony of the situation is that, if the industry does that, it will be good for business because it will clearly reflect the needs and aspirations of the wider population in our society.

Absolutely. Dennis Robertson makes the point very well indeed. The point that I am making, which I think Jackie Baillie was making, reinforces Dennis Robertson’s point. Promoting health can be good business as well. There is no conflict between promoting good health outcomes and being able to run a successful fashion business in all its different guises. Dennis Robertson has brought this issue to our attention in a way that has not been done before. By highlighting the example of mannequins, he has served this cause very well indeed. The Parliament has, I hope, responded accordingly. We should all commit ourselves to doing whatever we can to change the situation for the health of young women in our society in particular. I hope that we will see much less damage done to their health in future, particularly through eating disorders. As Dennis Robertson said, the size of mannequins—or indeed TV exposure—is not the cause of eating disorders, but it exacerbates the situation for young women in particular who are predisposed to trying to look like what they perceive to be the proper image of a modern young lady. Meeting closed at 17:42.

NHS Fife appointed additional consultants to the emergency department in 2012. That enabled the introduction of a fast-track process for the care of patients presenting to the emergency department with minor injuries. It also enabled extended consultant weekend working—there is now consultant weekend working in the department from 9 am to 11 pm each day. Further consultant posts have now been approved for the emergency department, which will further enable increased senior decision making across the 24-hour period. The redirection policy that was introduced in May 2013 has resulted in the redirection of some patients who do not require the specific services that the emergency department provides to a more appropriate care setting, such as a general practice. That allows faster access to treatment for patients who require the services that only accident and emergency can provide. Additional senior nurses have been recruited to the emergency department to provide additional resource to manage the patient journey and to provide clinical leadership to the multidisciplinary team across the 24-hour period.

The national unscheduled care team has established a robust performance framework to monitor NHS boards’ delivery of improved and sustained performance across the whole system, including in relation to A and E waiting times. As part of accessing an additional £50 million, boards submitted detailed local unscheduled care action plans, which set out their approaches, described how new service provision and personnel would positively impact on service quality and performance and offered an improvement timeline that showed in detail by month the progress that would be delivered. Since September, the unscheduled care team has established weekly and monthly performance protocols for reviewing the implementation of local action plans and the delivery of improved performance. A clear and explicit intervention and support system is available and will be deployed when agreed performance and/or quality is not demonstrated, to ensure that boards deliver effectively, according to their plans and the national plan.

I am confident that NHS Fife is in a much better position today than before. We are in constant contact with the board to ensure that, week by week, it is meeting not just A and E turnaround times but other performance targets, such as the treatment time guarantee.

The review that I announced in September is making steady progress and is nearing completion of its first stage, which has involved identifying the full range of powers that are available in primary and secondary legislation and how the framework can be better constructed to deliver the best possible outcome for patients and NHS pharmaceutical care and primary medical services in rural communities. As part of that process, officials have identified a range of important and complex issues that will be central to the review’s next stage, which will lead to amended regulations. I expect to announce shortly the next steps in taking that forward, including any consultation on the key issues that are identified.

I am very familiar with the situation in Uist and indeed in other parts of Scotland—in particular, in rural Stirlingshire. I explored the possibility of having a moratorium until my review was completed but I do not have the legal powers to impose a moratorium. If I had those legal powers, I would have used them.

I totally agree with Bruce Crawford. We are doing everything that we can to ensure that progress is speedy while, of course, adhering to overall rules and guidelines in terms of consultation.

I am very much aware of the situation that Rhoda Grant describes. I need to be rather judicious in any comments that I make because of the potential implications, but I am keeping a close eye on the situation. If Western Isles NHS Board requires my guidance—if it asks for any guidance—I will be happy to provide it.

The Scottish ministers are fully committed to working with general practice professionals to ensure that the framework within which primary care is delivered is fit for purpose and responsive both to local circumstances and to patient need. The Scottish Government is in regular dialogue with the Scottish general practitioners committee on those issues and on other important issues affecting patient care and service delivery. Freeing up GP time that is spent on bureaucracy to enable that time to be spent on patient care remains a priority for the Government in the development of a more Scottish contract, and it is something that we wish to explore with the SGPC at every opportunity.

I agree with all Stuart McMillan’s points. The UK Government’s damaging cuts—which started under Labour and are being continued by the coalition Government—and challenges to the welfare system could reduce benefit expenditure in Scotland by more than £4.5 billion in the five years to 2015, impacting on some of the most vulnerable in our communities, including women, children and disabled people. We are doing all that we can to mitigate the impacts of the cuts where possible. However, we can only do so much within our existing powers and strapped resources. The solution is for the Scottish Parliament to have full control over welfare so that it can put in place policies that benefit the people of Scotland. In the meantime, we continue to press the UK Government for fairer reform and to ensure that safeguards are in place for those who need them, while doing what we can to help those affected.

I am very much aware of the issues to which Linda Fabiani rightly draws attention. I have a meeting later today with the chair of NHS Lanarkshire in which I will highlight those issues, and I will work with the board to try to address the pressures on GP surgeries and the wider issues that are being addressed in the review by HIS.

Tavish Scott raises a legitimate question. I am aware of the particular challenges in oncology in Grampian, specifically in colorectal cancer. We are working with the clinicians and the boards to address those issues and, where necessary, we will continue to offer alternative sites for treatment for patients from Shetland and Orkney. Of course, the main issue is to address the challenges, which are not confined to that part of the country but are part of a general shortage of certain oncology skills throughout the UK.

I am always delighted to meet members of other parties, particularly when they have something positive to contribute. I look forward to Neil Findlay’s positive contribution as a new departure from his previous contributions.

All health boards have plans in place to ensure the quality and continuity of local health services during the winter period. NHS Dumfries and Galloway’s winter plan was endorsed at its October health board meeting and is available on its website. Such plans are informed by national guidance such as “National Unscheduled Care Programme: Preparing for Winter 2013-14”, which was issued to all health boards on 27 September. The plans are supported by additional Scottish Government investment, such as the £50 million unscheduled care action plan that was announced on 25 February to improve accident and emergency performance over the next three years.

Already whenever there is an outbreak of such a virus, limitations are placed on visitors and on the availability of particular wards. As part of our unscheduled care plan, every board has been asked to prepare contingencies in the event of something like norovirus breaking out and wards having to be closed, given the knock-on impact on patients, visitors and staff. Some particular challenges that we faced due to the norovirus outbreak last year were that, first, it started earlier than usual and, secondly, as well as the impact on wards and patients, quite a number of staff went off sick after contracting the virus. We are saying clearly to all health boards that they should have in place contingency plans for wards, bed availability, staffing and all other aspects of dealing with an outbreak of a virus such as norovirus, so that if there is an outbreak, the contingency plan can be implemented immediately.

The abolition of prescription charges has removed a barrier to good health for many people across Scotland, particularly those on low incomes or those with long-term conditions. Taking the prescriptions that they need, without the worry of cost, will help those people to keep well over the winter months.

I remind the member that when Andy Burnham was the health minister in England, he introduced the £20 billion of cuts in the health service down south that have been taken forward by the coalition Government. Of course, he was also very enthusiastic about privatisation of certain aspects of the health service. Certainly, the last thing that the people of Scotland need is the reimposition of prescription charges at £7.85 for a single prescription or £104 for an annual prepayment certificate. I look forward to the report of the Labour Party in Scotland’s cuts commission and to seeing whether it will reimpose those prescription charges.

That is a total misrepresentation of the situation, as we have come to expect from Jenny Marra.

NHS Grampian has already put in place an improvement action plan addressing the issues that were raised by the recent very unsatisfactory HEI inspection at Aberdeen maternity hospital. The chief executive has been required to take personal responsibility for delivery of the plan and the board will be held to account against that. The HEI will undertake further announced and unannounced inspections to ensure that there is robust evidence of progress against the actions that have been identified. NHS Grampian stated publicly in its media release of 30 October that all the issues that were raised in the report have been tackled as a matter of urgency and that all the requirements and recommendations are being addressed. It also stated that most of the actions have already been completed and that the remainder are at an advanced stage of implementation.

Last week, at the Scottish Government’s instruction, Health Protection Scotland visited Aberdeen maternity hospital to determine how the failures occurred, to co-ordinate support for NHS Grampian, to quickly rectify the problems that have been identified and to ensure that NHS Grampian puts in place systems so that those events are not repeated. Health Protection Scotland will co-ordinate support from other national agencies as necessary, including Healthcare Improvement Scotland, Health Facilities Scotland, NHS Education for Scotland and the Information Services Division.

I make it absolutely clear that there would be no excuse for what the Healthcare Environment Inspectorate discovered in any hospital, no matter its age. As NHS Grampian has accepted, what was found at Aberdeen maternity hospital was certainly unacceptable. As the member knows, there is an issue about the capital programme for either upgrade or replacement of Aberdeen maternity hospital but, when we receive detailed proposals on that, they will be given due consideration. Of course, it would be easier to confirm that capital programme if our overall capital programme had not been cut by 26 per cent in the coming year.

I thought that it would be useful for us to have a fairly wide-ranging debate on health and social care in Scotland, given where we are—particularly as we are approaching the time of year when the pressures on the national health service are always at their greatest. I will begin by summarising what I see as the three big strategic challenges facing the health service not only in Scotland but in other developed countries. The first and most obvious one is the financial challenge, not only as a result of the reductions in public spending overall that we have had inflicted on us but because costs in the NHS, particularly for new technology and new treatments, are continuing to rise. Secondly, as the Auditor General for Scotland outlined some months ago, despite all the excellent efforts of successive Governments over the past 30 or 40 years we still have a problem of inequality of access to health in Scotland. That is an issue that we must address. I do not think that the health service can address it by itself, but we have a part to play. The third challenge is the ageing of the population. We know that over the next 20 years or so the number of people over 75 living in Scotland will nearly double. Indeed, statisticians reckon that a fifth of all children born in Scotland today will live until they are about 100 years old. The people who will prepare telegrams for King William or King George to send will not be out of a job for some time. The key issue is how we respond to those challenges. I could probably spend three or four hours telling members about everything that we are doing in health and social care in Scotland. Members will be well aware of some aspects of what we are doing, such as the integration agenda, and there are other things that we are doing to innovate and take forward new ideas and ways of working. Our vision for the national health and social care system in Scotland is that by 2020 everyone should be able to live longer, healthier lives at home or in a homely setting. Moreover, our quality strategy delivers a high standard of healthcare through safe, effective and person-centred care. Person-centred care looks different in every setting but, fundamentally, it is about asking a person not, “What’s the matter with you?” but “What matters to you?” Later this month, my colleague Michael Matheson, the Minister for Public Health, will address the third national learning event of the person-centred health and care collaborative, at which more than 500 delegates will come together to learn from each other, service users and world experts in person-centred care, in which Scotland is a leading nation. The person-centred approach benefits our dedicated staff as well as the people for whom they care; after all, they came into healthcare to help people, not “the case in bed seven”. Over the past five years, we have invested almost £10 million directly in community-based projects across Scotland through the self-management fund. For example, Mr Matheson and I have on different occasions visited the Thistle Foundation in Craigmillar and both of us have met Brian Brown, an inspirational former soldier whose life had been wrecked by post-traumatic stress disorder but was turned around with the sort of person-centred care that we want to become the norm. On my recent visit, Mr Brown, who now supports others at the Thistle, told me: “I’ve learned that what I needed was to be listened to, to be treated as a person not as a diagnosis, and to be supported to find my own way forward and deal with my own demons.” Listening carefully to people and changing how we support them is not only right but necessary, as no nation can afford to continue with the healthcare model that we have pursued to date. It is right that we look at a person in totality rather than at a particular ailment that is giving them trouble at a particular time. We must transform our approach and the main focus of that transformation will be a shift towards primary care. Last month in Musselburgh, I met a group of local general practitioners who were concerned about their workload, bureaucracy and, more important, the length of time that they get to spend—or, to be more accurate, do not get to spend—with their patients. Like, I am sure, fellow members, I get complaints in my constituency mailbag about problems with getting a GP appointment. However, there are not two sides to this story. Patients and GPs want the same thing: a proper relationship with each other that is based on trust, local knowledge and clear communication. That is the view not only of patients but of doctors, and I am determined to make it the norm. Our 2020 vision sets out the urgent need for an expanded role for primary care and general practice in particular. We want to keep people healthy in the community for as long as possible, reducing health inequalities and unscheduled care; we will do everything possible to support our excellent primary care workers to deliver care, freed from avoidable bureaucratic paperwork; and we must further develop primary care teams, allowing them to work in partnership with patients and carers to deliver much more person-centred, safe and effective care. As a result, we intend to modernise the GP contract and transform our approach to primary care, and I want to talk about each of those aims in turn. With regard to modernising the GP contract, I have already said that GPs and the people of Scotland want the same thing—more quality time with each other. We know that getting appointments can be an issue and that the 48-hour access target can cause problems, albeit well-intentioned ones. We have a great opportunity at this time to make things better for Scotland. Late last year, we negotiated for the first time ever—and not for constitutional but for health reasons—a more Scottish contract with the British Medical Association in Scotland, allowing us to reach a negotiated agreement that differed from that imposed on GPs by Westminster and which has paved the way for a new approach. We are currently carefully considering with the BMA in Scotland what next year’s contract should look like. As part of that, I am today asking my officials to work with the BMA in undertaking a review of access across all GP practices in Scotland and to develop an action plan to address any issues that arise from that review. That is just the first stage. We need to move to a new contract for GPs to match our 2020 vision and to recognise that the direction of travel of the health service north of the border is entirely different from the direction of travel south of the border, particularly in primary care and how it is organised. That will take time, but my clear ambition is for a new Scottish GP contract that will ensure that GPs get the time to do what they need and want to do, which is to work with individuals to ensure that their medical care is right for them, for their family and carers and for the local environment. GPs are, of course, only part of primary care, and we must develop a full approach to safe, effective and person-centred primary care.

We are already looking into it, and a number of pilot schemes have been carried out in Midlothian. In one GP surgery, the patients preferred not to have an appointments system at all but to go back to days gone by, when they could just turn up and take the risk of having to wait half an hour or even an hour. My view is that we should look at what works best but leave it more up to local decision making and not have it centrally imposed through targets or otherwise by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. In primary care modernisation, throughout our health and social care system there are many great examples of innovation and improvement that are delivering for their local area. I have heard of examples from inner city Glasgow to rural Aberdeenshire and from the Isle of Arran to suburban Edinburgh, all of which suggest new ways of working and new models of care. For instance, the deep-end practices, ably led by Professor Graham Watt, are 100 practices that work in Scotland’s poorest communities and take a genuinely bottom-up approach. They demonstrate some of the very real health inequality challenges that are faced by our most deprived populations and suggest how we must begin to address them. I have also heard about an initiative in Buckhaven that is based on the Alaskan nuka model of care, which puts the needs of the community at the heart of the healthcare system and assists both in finding solutions to seemingly intractable healthcare challenges. A number of initiatives like the Alaskan model, such as patient access, productive general practice and managing patient flow, show that the solution lies in primary and social care teams focusing on the needs of the people whom they support. That is challenging for us, but it is at the heart of our moves towards the integration of health and social care and the legislation that we are introducing to make that happen. To make that a reality, we must understand what works, why it works and how it works. We must invest in developing new models of care and ensure that we spread the learning from the approach far and wide. That is why I am today announcing a modernisation programme to support innovation and best practice in primary care. I am also delighted to announce that, in year 1, there will be pump priming of £1 million to pilot the new developments and move the agenda forward, along with the massive resources that we already have in primary care. The first stage of that modernisation will be in commissioning strategic assessments of primary care from each of our health boards as part of their normal planning process. It will be a modernisation programme that truly delivers change. The transformation of primary care needs to be delivered in partnership across health and social care, and the mutual NHS model that we have in Scotland is the right one for delivering safe, effective and person-centred care. There is a sharp contrast between our approach, which is based on the founding principle of services being free at the point of care, and that in England, where privatisation is growing ever more pronounced and damaging. Although we have abolished prescription charges, in England they remain, with the result that some people on low incomes are forced to choose which of their prescribed medicines they can afford. We have legislated to ensure that there is no privatisation of GP services in Scotland, and we have banned the privatisation of cleaning contracts, which we have supported by providing more than £23 million of additional resources since 2009 to pay for the hundreds of additional cleaning staff who keep our hospitals safe. Free personal and nursing care, to which patients in England are not entitled, currently improves the lives of more than 77,000 older vulnerable people in Scotland. Those are achievements that not just the Government but the Parliament can be proud of. I have set out our ambitious approach to person-centred, safe and effective care and have announced a clear direction for the transformation of primary care to match our 2020 vision. Given the increasing divergence between what happens north of the border and what happens south of it, I hope that every member will agree that ours is the right way forward. I began by outlining the serious strategic challenges that health and social care services in Scotland face. We need to create a health and social care system that is fit for purpose in the 21st century. That is why we are taking forward our 2020 vision. My ambition is not just to have the safest health service in the world—which, according to the world’s leading expert on the issue, we already have; it is that the Scottish people will have the best health service in the world by 2020. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of person-centred healthcare in delivering the best health outcomes possible; supports measures to ensure that individuals are supported to be active partners in their own care; agrees that all parts of the healthcare system should be focused on the patient, and that should include both community and hospital care, and further supports Scotland’s modernisation programme to test measures to make GP services more accessible for patients, while reducing bureaucracy for GPs and freeing their time to focus on patients.

I explain to the member that one reason why there are so many more vacancies is that there are many more jobs because we have doubled the number of consultants since we came to power.

Our capital budget has been cut by 26 per cent this year alone. That cut originated from Alistair Darling. It is impossible to meet all the original commitments that we made all those years ago when our capital budget has been sliced to ribbons, first by Alistair Darling and then by the coalition Government.

The member and Mr Findlay are totally misinformed about the increase. I will be happy to send them the details, because they keep repeating something that is just not true.

The Scottish Government is fully committed to improving unscheduled care in NHS Scotland and has invested £50 million across three years in supporting health boards to make sustainable improvements. That includes dedicated funding of £1.8 million to support recruitment of emergency medicine consultants to reduce pressures and improve access to decision support. National health service boards’ local unscheduled care action plans also identify actions to recruit additional nurses, allied health professionals and support staff. I have been informed by health boards that the recruitment is fully under way. For example, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has informed me that it has successfully recruited three additional A and E consultants and NHS Lanarkshire has recruited an additional 5.24 whole-time equivalent nurses to support improvements outlined in local unscheduled care action plans. The number of consultants working in accident and emergency had risen to 152 whole-time equivalents in June 2013, which is a 100.6 per cent increase compared with September 2006. Although statistics do not identify the settings in which nurses work, overall we have increased the number of qualified nurses and midwives by 1,086.1 whole-time equivalents since September 2006.

No, I do not agree with the deputy chairman of the BMA in Scotland. The unscheduled care plan was agreed with the College of Emergency Medicine, which helped to devise the plan. There has been a huge increase in the number of A and E consultants and we now have twice the number that we had when Mr Hume’s Liberal Democrat party was in power. Of course, we could increase the figure if the Scottish Government was not facing overall a 12 per cent slashing of our operational budget, which is being imposed by Mr Hume’s Government in London.

I welcome this important debate on the highly complex and difficult issue of access to new medicines. As Duncan McNeil pointed out, it is worth remembering that the issue was originally highlighted in the experience of patients through the Public Petitions Committee. Their voice was put directly to the Parliament in the way that it should be. After consideration by the Public Petitions Committee, the matter was passed to the Health and Sport Committee for further detailed consideration. As Duncan McNeil said, its inquiry took evidence and took time to fully explore the position. I thank the Public Petitions Committee and the Health and Sport Committee—in particular, I thank Duncan McNeil for his chairing of that committee’s inquiry—for the rigorous and serious manner in which they approached this wide-ranging subject. Through the Health and Sport Committee’s questioning, a number of important aspects were crystallised, not least the desire for the development of a Scottish model of value and the shortcomings of the IPTR process. I commend the committee’s consensual and sensitive approach and feel sure that we can continue that approach right across the chamber today and beyond. The committee heard a wide range of views from the pharmaceutical industry, clinicians, patient charities, patients and their families, some of whom are with us in the gallery. Members will see from our written response to the committee that we have accepted almost all of its recommendations and those of Professor Routledge and Professor Swainson. I thank Professor Routledge and Professor Swainson for their efforts and suggestions, which will, I believe, make the system much more transparent. The committee broadly welcomed their recommendations but recognised that more would have to be done to increase access, as spelled out by Duncan McNeil. I agreed with that assessment. As time is short, I will focus my response on giving a brief overview of some of the steps that we propose to take. First, I want to describe the introduction of flexible decision making for medicines that are licensed to treat patients at the end of life and medicines that are licensed to treat very rare conditions. I have directed the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which is the body that approves medicines for use in the national health service in Scotland, to apply a more flexible approach to evaluating medicines for end-of-life care and treating very rare conditions to increase access to them. The SMC will carry out a review by Christmas at the latest and establish new approaches to facilitate improved access to those medicines for patients in Scotland. That will be the first step in a wider process to determine Scotland’s requirement to create a value-based approach to new medicines assessment. The second action is the introduction of a new peer-approved clinical system to replace current individual or group patient treatment requests. New detailed guidance for NHS boards on the new arrangements is being developed and will be issued shortly. The guidance will clarify that the peer-approved clinical system is a single national system—I emphasise that—that will be delivered locally.

My intention is to do this very early—certainly within the next couple of months or so—because it is clear, as Duncan McNeil pointed out, that people could be caught in the transition, which would be very unfair. We are cognisant of that particular situation. However, I should point out that 60-plus per cent of IPTRs are accepted, so we are talking about the 40 per cent of applications that are not accepted. In brief, the new system will be predicated on clinical opinion. Where all other treatment options have been exhausted, a lead clinician can make the case to clinical peers for a treatment that has either not been recommended for general use by the SMC or not yet been submitted for approval. The new system will for the first time introduce standardised paperwork as a requirement. Healthcare Improvement Scotland will continue robust auditing of decision making about medicines considered under the new system, and will facilitate the regular sharing of expertise between NHS boards across Scotland to eliminate unwarranted variation. The new system will be underpinned by a centralised patient support team to advise, support and advocate for patients and families to make it easier to understand and use. I am pleased to confirm the extension of the £20 million per annum rare conditions medicines fund. It was due to conclude in April 2014 but will now run until at least April 2016.

I will make available up to £20 million for this fund every year, but to date only £6.5 million of the £20 million that is currently available has been spent. In each fiscal year there will be up to £20 million available. The Scottish Government believes that the introduction of value-based assessments of new medicines, and the new interim arrangements that I have described for medicines that are to be used to treat very rare diseases, will significantly reduce the use of individual patient treatment requests currently and peer review in the future. In recognition, however, of the fact that medicines within those categories are often not routinely available, extending the rare conditions medicines fund will provide access to medicines to treat very rare diseases for people who make a successful request under the IPTR process or its successor, the peer-review approach. In talking about improvements to SMC submission arrangements, let me first state that the SMC is a globally respected health technology assessment organisation, which considers and weighs the evidence that it receives very carefully. I pay tribute to the tremendous work of that body. I want to build on that reputation and ensure that the SMC is as transparent as possible about its decision making. I have asked the SMC to transition and to hold its first public meeting by May 2014. The role of the SMC’s patient and public involvement group will be extended and supported to engage proactively with patient representative organisations. Patient representative groups will also be able to attend SMC meetings and to provide evidence, much as they have the ability to do within NICE’s process. This increase in the pace and depth of engagement with patients and the public will significantly contribute to the transition towards a wider assessment of value in relation to new medicines. The SMC will also develop processes and protocols to support the attendance at SMC meetings of a representative from the manufacturers of medicines that are being appraised in order that they may answer any questions that the committee has on the evidence submitted. In the longer term, the SMC will work with industry partners to establish scoping meetings with manufacturers, prior to a submission for a newly licensed medicine. That will ensure that pharmaceutical companies fully understand the SMC submission process and have the best possible chance to submit high-quality evidence to the SMC first time round. Protocols will be developed to implement a temporary pause in the SMC’s appraisal process, which will be instigated where a medicine’s cost effectiveness poses a stumbling block to its acceptance. The pause will facilitate a confidential discussion with the manufacturer, through an external negotiator, about improving the medicine’s cost effectiveness, through a new or improved patient access scheme. Consideration will also be given to the benefits and challenges of establishing arrangements to carry out external evaluation of medicines where no submission has been instigated by the manufacturer. The Scottish Government currently supports the retention of NHS board area drug and therapeutics committees as a tool to ensure safe and effective prescribing practices and ownership of the formulary by local clinicians. That will be contingent on NHS board ADTCs being able to demonstrate over the next three years that they are working well and are ensuring optimal clinical outcomes for their patient population. That is an indication of the Government’s commitment not only to medicines that improve people’s quality of life on a day-to-day basis but to medicines that sustain life or improve the quality of end-of-life care. The Government is committed to pursuing continuously improving, high-quality health and care services for the people of Scotland, with a focus on equity and clinical need. I believe that the measures that I have outlined will help us to secure that vision.

I thank every member who has taken part in the debate, which has shown the Parliament very much at its best in responding to the needs of the people. We should remind ourselves that the shapes in the windows are not whisky bottles; the concept is that they are the people looking in on their Parliament to see whether we are responding to their needs. We have done that this afternoon. I particularly thank those who mentioned me—Jackson Carlaw was extremely kind—but let me say that I have a first-class team in St Andrew’s house, some of whom are sitting here in the civil service gallery. Without them, we would not be where we are today. One of the key themes running through the debate, from all sides of the chamber, has been the need to spell out the detail much more, so let me make two pledges to the Parliament—well, three pledges really. First, in the time allotted to me—which includes an extra minute—I will try to answer as many of the questions that members posed in the debate as I possibly can. However, I will not be able to answer them all—we would be here until about 7 o’clock tonight if I was able to do that. We will go through the Official Report tomorrow morning and look at all the questions that have been posed by members; next week, we will place our responses in one document in SPICe, which members can access to see answers to the questions that we can answer at this stage. Obviously, there are some questions that we cannot answer yet. The third pledge—I have made this pledge already to Duncan McNeil as committee convener—is that I will report regularly to the committee before six months are up. In my first report, which I hope will be at the end of November or beginning of December, I will advise the committee of progress on all fronts, so that we are absolutely sure across the chamber that we are all moving together on this and that the committee is fully informed and able to get the information that it needs to monitor our performance in implementing the policy decisions that we have taken.

That would be no problem whatsoever—Christine Grahame makes a very good point, and we will do as she suggests. I will try to answer as many questions as I can in the six minutes that I have left. Christine Grahame raised the issue of what happens in the interim period. I have asked Sir Harry Burns, the chief medical officer, and Professor Bill Scott, the chief pharmacist, to provide the guidelines for the new PACS as a matter of urgency. I stress the urgency: setting up the PACS is not a long-term but a short-term game, and the quicker that we get it set up, the better. We will issue interim guidance on the IPTRs; the single biggest difference between the IPTR system and the new PACS is that the former had to show exceptionality vis-à-vis the population measured by the SMC in considering the drug’s approval, while the PACS criteria relate to the anticipated clinical outcome for the patient. That makes a difference not only to the decision itself, but to the way in which it is reached, as the process will be much more clinically led. In our statement yesterday, we accepted the recommendations in Tina McGeever’s original petition on the need to ensure that patients are properly informed at every stage of what their options are and how they can appeal a decision; to improve the turn-around time for decisions, which we will monitor very closely; and to improve the NHS inform website so that patients and their carers, friends and GPs and others can very quickly find out what they can do to appeal and find their way around the system. We will implement all those detailed proposals. Taken together as a package, they represent a very substantive improvement in how the individual patient is dealt with in the appeal process. We understand fully the need to implement the PACS guidance and to get the system set up quickly, and we will do that. I have directed the SMC to come back to me by Christmas at the latest on its review of the QALY thresholds—modifying the modifiers, if you like. I will stick to that timetable, because I honestly believe that we as a Parliament do not want to get into a position in which people who may be caught between the existing system and the new system pay a penalty because they are in the transition phase.

The SMC is a very intelligent organisation—it is aware of the Scottish Government’s desire and policy intention, and I am sure that it will take that into consideration in the meantime. What has happened this week is a very good example of the public interest in the matter. The publicity focused on the SMC’s decisions in its latest round on three particular drugs. One was a lung cancer drug, which it approved. Another was a drug to reduce the craving for alcohol—we are the first country in the whole of Europe, not just the UK, to approve that particular drug. The third was a breast cancer drug, which was turned down. First, I cannot comment on whether, under the new system, the SMC would have turned down or approved that particular drug. It would be wrong of me to make a clinical judgment in that respect, and I have no intention of doing so. The SMC may have approved it, or it may have paused, or got the drug through the patient access scheme, which it was not able to do before. A whole host of things might have happened under the new system that would not have happened under the existing system. Secondly, even if that particular drug had been turned down under the new system, the understanding of the public, the wider medical world and the manufacturer regarding the reasons for that decision should now be much greater because of the increased transparency and openness. That is very important indeed. As Willie Coffey rightly said, even under the new more flexible system, there will still be drugs that are turned down. However, if people at least know the reasons why new drugs are turned down—in much more detail than is the case today—there will, I hope, be greater public, political and media understanding about why such a decision was reached. That is an important part of the process.

Let me say that I have absolutely, totally and unequivocally made my position clear to the SMC. Obviously, we will work with the SMC. The chairman of the SMC has made a public statement endorsing the statement that we made yesterday, so we are talking to people who are on our side on this issue. As I said earlier, the SMC is an intelligent and world-leading organisation and it recognises that the additional changes that I have outlined are required to make the system even more robust. Unfortunately, that brings me to the end of my time. We will place in SPICe next week detailed responses, where we can, to the questions that have been raised but which I have not had time to answer today. Again, I thank members for their kind compliments.

NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has informed us that, as a result of a failure in its IT infrastructure yesterday morning, a number of out-patient appointments, in-patient procedures, day surgery cases and chemotherapy appointments have had to be postponed. Despite national health service staff working overnight to resolve the issue, it has continued into today. I stress right away that maternity and emergency services have been maintained throughout. I understand that the failure is related to network servers that serve a number of the board’s systems and sites. That meant that clinicians were unable to access some services, including some patient records and imaging. In addition, the recognised standby process did not kick in. There has been minimal impact on day cases and in-patient procedures. Only those procedures that require live access to images and theatres have been affected today. There has been an impact on out-patient appointments where the consultant is seeing a patient for the first time or requires access to electronic patient records. However, early indications are that, up to now, fewer than 10 per cent of out-patient appointments have been affected by the incident, and there has been minimal impact on day cases and in-patient appointments. That said, I express my concern for all those patients whose treatment was affected yesterday and today. This morning, I spoke to the chair of the board, and the director general for health and social care in the Scottish Government has spoken to the board’s chief executive. I can report that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has now been able to resolve the problem with the server and is incrementally reloading users back on to the system. No data appear to have been lost. Around 50 per cent of users now have access to the system, and the remainder should have access by later this evening. The system is being closely monitored to ensure that it remains robust. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is contacting all patients who have been affected by the incident to ensure that they receive their treatment as soon as possible and that appointments are rescheduled as quickly as possible. I have asked that the board keep in close contact with my officials to ensure that we are fully apprised of the situation going forward. In addition, my officials will work closely with the board to establish the root cause of the incident and share the lessons with other NHS boards. Finally, I thank all staff in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde for their efforts over the past two days in working to resolve the issue.

On the last point, I have already instructed a robust review right across the NHS in Scotland with all the NHS boards to ensure that the IT systems, including the back-up systems, are robust. Before I came to the chamber, I was updated on the figures for the people who are affected, as members would expect. Over the past two days until midday today, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has postponed 500 out-patient appointments, 14 planned in-patient procedures, 43 day cases and 48 chemotherapy patient treatments. However, in the same period, 7,400 patients have had their procedures and appointments maintained. On the first point that Mr Findlay raised, every effort will be made to ensure that those affected by the problem will be treated at the earliest possible opportunity. It will be a matter of urgency to ensure that all those affected by the crashing of the IT system will receive their appointments as soon as possible in the near future.

I can guarantee that no one requiring emergency or maternity services has been affected, nor is there any anticipation whatsoever that that would happen even if the problem was not resolved this evening. The essential impact of the IT failure has been to deny access to certain aspects of the IT systems. I can give the member a list of the systems affected if she desires that level of detail. The impact has been on planned appointments and planned procedures, and there has been no impact on emergency or maternity services, I am delighted to say.

First, I thank Mr Carlaw for the tone of his remarks, which are much appreciated here and which I am sure will be much appreciated by the staff who are working so hard to resolve the issue. It is too early yet to be absolutely sure why the problem happened and why the back-up system was not more resilient. The two software companies concerned—Microsoft and Charteris—are involved full time with our staff as well as with the staff of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde in trying to get to the root cause of the problem. I am obviously cautious, but it now looks as though we have broken the back of the problem in terms of the system being successfully rebooted and back up. We will know definitively how robust that is by later this evening. However, the top priority is to get to the root of the problem so that we can be absolutely sure that it does not happen again in Glasgow or in any other part of the national health service in Scotland.

Under the circumstances, every effort will be made to accommodate patients who have been affected by the impact of the IT system crash. We will be totally flexible in trying to ensure that people get appointments as quickly as possible. Inevitably, that will involve some people working longer hours for a short period, and extension of the hours for appointments to ensure that everybody who has been affected by the problem is treated within a reasonable period. I have had the total assurance of the chair of the board that absolutely every stop will be pulled out to ensure that patients get their postponed treatment or appointment at the earliest possible opportunity, which I hope in every case will be well within a month, or even a week or days.

First, on chemotherapy, I should say that the chemotherapy services are working fairly normally today. Yesterday’s chemotherapy appointments were affected, however. Again, I thank Jim Hume for the tone of his remarks. Until the IT system is up and running, I cannot give him any statistics or information on the numbers who have been affected in terms of the treatment time guarantee. Once I am in a position to do so, I will be more than happy to supply members with that information. I am sure that, when the formal TTG statistics for the period come out, members will be understanding of any breaches in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde.

Absolutely. There are two contingencies, one of which is the back-up IT system, which for some reason did not, as I said earlier, work in this case. That is particularly worrying and it is one reason why we are placing so much emphasis on getting to the root of the problem—the problem being not only the original malfunction but why the back-up system did not work when it should have done. We are testing that elsewhere. There are other back-up systems for, for example, chemotherapy, in order to ensure that patients are treated as they would normally be treated. Where necessary, paper exercises have been undertaken to minimise impacts, in particular on chemotherapy and patients who require very serious treatment.

Duncan McNeil has made a number of reasonable points. I point out that 10 hospitals across NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde have been affected, but some of the patients come from further afield, including from Ayrshire and parts of Lanarkshire, and in particular for chemotherapy services, for example. I emphasise to Duncan McNeil that the problem is not with any particular software but with the server. Although TrakCare has been adversely affected, that was not a result of a problem with TrakCare but a result of the problem with the server. So that Parliament is fully informed, I confirm that the systems that have been adversely affected are TrakCare—as I said, not because of a problem with that system but because of a problem with the server—Portal, Ascribe and PACS, plus other diagnostic systems, laboratory systems, chemotherapy systems and the contact centre.

Once the IT systems are up and running again, I will ask for an analysis of the home areas of the patients who have been affected, if we can do such an analysis, so that we can find out how many patients from Ayrshire and Arran, Lanarkshire and other health board areas have been affected. Because of the problem itself, I am not in a position to give reliable statistics at the moment, but I will be more than happy to supply members with reliable analysis when it becomes available.

It seems as though it is becoming bitter together, rather than better together. There have been one or two good speeches in the debate. Kezia Dugdale, Mark McDonald and John Wilson made good speeches, but the key point was made by James Dornan. Whether we are talking about poverty and deprivation in recent years, over the past decade or over the past 20, 30 or 40 years, the fact of life is that, irrespective of which Government has been in power in London, the union has failed to deliver for the Scottish people, and far too many of our people, generation after generation, have been forced to live in poverty and deprivation. As James Dornan rightly said, achieving independence is a prerequisite to solving the problems of poverty and deprivation in Scotland.

While we are on that point, one or two Labour speakers alleged that childcare in Scotland is the most expensive in the UK. That is not true. The Daycare Trust’s report of March 2013 made it clear that Scotland has cheaper nursery places and childcare overall compared with south of the border. At least let us get our facts right about the achievements of the SNP Government over the past six years. I find Labour’s position lacking credibility, for three reasons. First, during Labour’s 13 wasted years, it made practically no impact on the measures that we are talking about today. Members should consider the facts, as opposed to what Labour alleges. Let us consider Labour’s record during those 13 wasted years. There has been a report out in the past two weeks showing that there are 1.5 million more children in the UK living in poverty now than there were 40 years ago—and Labour was in power for 18 of the past 40 years.

Not at the moment. Given that Labour was in power for nearly half that period, it has to share some of the responsibility for that.

Secondly, after the Labour Government had bankrupted Britain, unemployment was in the millions, and the issue was not just the unemployed but the underemployed and hidden unemployment.

Thirdly, when we look at Labour’s record, we see that, after 13 wasted years, Britain was the fourth most unequal country in the western world. Of course I will take an intervention—choose between yourselves who it is.

The member always misses the point, which is that, when we get a yes vote next year, child poverty in Scotland will not be dropping, it will be eliminated. What an ambition for a Labour Party that tries to call itself socialist to want to reduce child poverty by a few percentage points. We should be talking about the elimination of child poverty in Scotland. The real poverty is the poverty of ambition of the Labour Party in Scotland. It is a disgrace. I hate to agree with the Tories, but Alex Johnstone is correct to say that the Labour Party introduced the bedroom tax. Quite frankly, Labour members should be ashamed of themselves because, as with privatisation and many other policies, Labour paved the way for the most right-wing Government since Mrs Thatcher’s.

Actually, the member should listen to Caroline Flint, Labour’s housing spokesman at Westminster, because she specifically ruled it in and said that a Labour Government would keep the bedroom tax. Labour members are all over the place. One week they are for it, the next they are against it. It is like the old music hall song that goes: “She wouldn’t say yes, she wouldn’t say no, she wouldn’t say yes”—[Laughter.] “She wouldn’t say yes, she wouldn’t say no, she wouldn’t say stay, she wouldn’t say go.” I am better at singing it than saying it, but the reality is that Labour is all over the place. My friend Malcolm Chisholm is all over the place—totally muddled. The logic of Malcolm Chisholm’s position is to vote yes next year, because that is how we avoid the kind of policies that he has fought against all his days.

I gave way because I thought that the intervention was going to be original. I am fighting against Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council, which is evicting disabled people as we speak. We will not take the two-faced approach from the Labour Party on evictions as a result of the bedroom tax. I started by saying that the Labour Party has no credibility. On the one hand, Labour members talk about tackling poverty but, on the other hand, they are planning the cuts commission. They cannot have both. Either they believe in the social wage, concessionary fares for the elderly and disabled, free personal care, free prescriptions and all the other things that this Government has introduced, or they believe in the cuts commission. It is a little ironic that the phraseology that George Osborne and Iain Duncan Smith used at the Tory conference this week was about a something for nothing culture, while Johann Lamont has talked about a something for nothing culture. The Labour Party speaks with a Tory voice in Scotland.

We know that, of the 86,000 people currently living with dementia in Scotland, around 3,000 are under 65. Next month, NHS Health Scotland will publish “Younger people with dementia: living well with your diagnosis”. Developed in partnership with Alzheimer Scotland, the booklet will provide a range of insights and information from younger people with dementia and their family carers, in their own words, about what helps them to live well with the diagnosis. Under-65s with dementia face specific challenges. Rarer forms of dementia are more common in under-65s and can be more difficult to diagnose. Under-65s have different post-diagnostic support needs in, for example, maintaining their community connections and accessing peer support. Our national post-diagnostic target—underpinned by a commitment that, from 1 April this year, everyone diagnosed will, regardless of age, receive a minimum of a year’s worth of dedicated support that is co-ordinated by a trained link worker—is based on Alzheimer Scotland’s five-pillar, person-centred support model and will help to meet those needs.

A range of additional support services are available to people with dementia under 65 years of age, including, in some cases, continuing healthcare. We keep such issues under constant review, because we want to ensure that the best health service support as well as the best social care support are available to people of all ages who have dementia.

Ministers and Government officials regularly meet national health service boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to discuss matters of importance to local people.

Obviously, we take any such complaints very seriously. In Glasgow and throughout the health service in Scotland, we immediately take action to ensure that, where something has gone wrong or should not have happened, it does not happen again. We have certainly done that in this case.

The Scottish Government continues to encourage and promote a culture of openness whereby NHS staff are actively encouraged and supported to raise any concerns about practices in NHS Scotland. My letter of 22 February reaffirmed the Scottish Government’s position on that matter. We continue to work closely with employers and the staff side to ensure that staff are engaged and involved in any decisions that might affect them. That includes influencing all partnership policies, which underpin the staff governance standard. That ensures that all staff are empowered and involved in shaping Scotland’s NHS within a culture that is open and fair.

The member should do a bit more research, because there is clearly a difference between gagging orders in respect of such documents and other aspects that might remain confidential. Often for very good reasons, it is agreed—or, indeed, requested by the individuals concerned—that certain aspects relating to a person’s departure should remain confidential. Those reasons might involve pension arrangements or a host of other issues. The important point is that such arrangements are not a cloak for gagging orders. Under my predecessor, we put an end to gagging orders, which were rife during the previous Administration.

It has already happened.

In 2012-13, the NHS in Scotland paid £215.1 million in unitary charges under private finance initiative/public-private partnership contracts. Of that, £86.6 million related to service charges and £128.5 million related to financing costs.

I totally agree with the member. This is another legacy of 13 wasted years under the previous Labour Administration. Even the Tories have abandoned PFI as a way of funding such projects. In Lanarkshire—in the area that the member represents—Hairmyres hospital is probably the worst example of a complete rip-off of the public purse by PFI contractors, probably not just in Scotland but in the whole United Kingdom.

Absolutely. I am seeking such assurances and I also seek the assurance that the contractor will in no way hold the public purse or NHS Lothian to ransom in how it handles the situation.

I will announce imminently the publication of the Scottish Government’s vision and action plan for national health service pharmaceutical care for the next 10 years. I will send a copy to Rhoda Grant as soon as it is published. The vision and action plan will build on the direction of travel of our progressive and developing policy landscape for high-quality and sustainable health and social care and on the comprehensive study on NHS pharmaceutical care of patients in the community that Dr Hamish Wilson and Professor Nick Barber undertook last year. The vision and action plan will be placed on the Scottish Government’s website.

I share the concerns but, under current legislation, I am not allowed to place a moratorium on such matters.

I share Bruce Crawford’s concerns, as I do Rhoda Grant’s, about the impact on rural communities. That is why I have decided to review immediately the regulatory framework that supports the pharmacy applications process and the powers that boards are given in relation to dispensing GP practices.

I am very much aware of the issues that have arisen in North East Fife, as they have in Uist, Killin, Drymen and other parts of the country. I am very sympathetic to the points that members who represent rural areas have raised. Roddy Campbell has made a good point, which we are taking cognisance of.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with all health boards on that, and on a number of other matters. The next meeting will be in November, when NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s annual staff projections are reviewed.

One of the reasons why there are more vacancies is because we are recruiting more staff, in particular into nursing and midwifery and consultant positions, including in accident and emergency. By definition, when we increase the number of people who are being employed, there will for a period be an increase in the number of vacancies. However, I have made it absolutely clear to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and to every other health board that I do not want bank nursing to be a substitute for employing permanent, full-time staff in our hospitals. We must ensure that the staffing levels are appropriate at all times, so I have taken measures to make sure that we closely monitor the situation to ensure that the system of banking is not abused in any way whatever.

I, along with my officials, monitor closely the length of time for which there are vacancies in each NHS area by employment category as well as more general total figures. However, I appreciate the point—being a Lanarkshire member myself—about some of the particular issues in relation to NHS Lanarkshire. We have raised those issues with NHS Lanarkshire to ensure that it fills those vacancies as soon as possible. It has to be said, however, that some shortages do not just relate to Lanarkshire or to Scotland, but are UK-wide shortages of particular skills. A very obvious example is the shortage of paediatric skills that applies right across the United Kingdom. Such strategic shortages present particular challenges but, in general, I absolutely accept the points that have been made by Drew Smith and by Linda Fabiani that we should delay no longer than is necessary the filling of vacancies in the national health service.

Scottish ministers and Government officials meet regularly with representatives of all national health service boards, including NHS Grampian, to discuss a wide range of matters that are of interest to local people.

We take the issue very seriously. Our 2020 workforce vision specifically addresses the question of how we fill vacancies and tackle issues around strategic shortages. Sir David Carter, who is the chair of the board for academic medicine, and his committee are also looking at the issue to consider the link between throughput of training and the need to fill, in the medium term, a number of strategic shortages. NHS Grampian is experiencing particular pressure in rheumatology, and has recently secured a locum rheumatologist. He will start in early November and will contribute to solving the waiting-time difficulties, of which I know Maureen Watt is aware and which a number of members from Grampian have raised with me.

Absolutely, I will join Nanette Milne in congratulating the first graduates in Scotland to become physician assistants. From my experience in NHS Lanarkshire, I know that physician assistants have already been operating in a number of areas and making a substantial contribution. They have tended to be recruited from the United States, where use of physician assistants is widespread and is viewed as a major way to provide enhanced quality and safety in healthcare throughout the system.

Statutory responsibility for service provision rests with national health service boards, so the issue is primarily an operational matter for NHS Lanarkshire. The aim of NHS Lanarkshire’s review of treatment rooms is to provide a high-quality, standardised and equitable service for all its patients—an aim that the Scottish Government supports. NHS Lanarkshire advises that the Douglas Street treatment suite has increased the number of available appointments for patients and has enabled district nurses to spend more time caring for vulnerable housebound patients. Apparently, feedback received by NHS Lanarkshire from patients has been broadly supportive. However, I am aware of the concerns of a number of Lanarkshire members and I have asked NHS Lanarkshire to look at the matter to address the concerns of patients and their representatives.

I have made it clear that I am very well aware of the concerns of patients and their representatives, including GPs. I remind the member that, as I am sure he knows, NHS Lanarkshire reviewed all treatment room services in 2010—three years ago—and the proposals have been phased in across Lanarkshire. Hamilton was the last area to be taken forward, and a decision is yet to be taken with regard to the site for the treatment room suite for outer Hamilton practices. As I have said to the member, I am seeking assurances—and, where appropriate, action—from NHS Lanarkshire to address the specific concerns that patients, GPs and others have raised about that service.

As I have made clear, I have asked NHS Lanarkshire to address the concerns that have been raised. Obviously, if there is an alternative proposal, NHS Lanarkshire should at least give it some consideration.

Decisions regarding the older people’s care in acute hospitals inspection programme are a matter for Healthcare Improvement Scotland. Currently, its programme of work is focusing on acute care. Across Scotland’s 14 territorial national health service boards, there are 23 acute hospitals that are subject to inspection against a range of priority areas. To date, including the inspection of NHS Forth Valley whose results were announced this morning, there have been 17 inspections across 11 health board areas. The future of inspection and scrutiny within the NHS is constantly reviewed by the Scottish Government and Healthcare Improvement Scotland.

First, let me say to Malcolm Chisholm that patients throughout the national health service in Scotland benefit not just from the particular quality objectives but from the requirements of the patient safety programme, which has been described by Professor Don Berwick as the best in the world. Those patients include the people that Malcolm Chisholm referred to. I accept that there is a need to take a strategic approach to the future, given the doubling of the number of older people aged over 75 over the next 20 years. I do not believe that the issue is as narrow as Malcolm Chisholm identified. With the emphasis on treating people at home, we also need to look at the future quality and safety issues and inspection issues in caring for people in their own homes, and we are looking at that as a strategic issue. Obviously, I am happy to meet the member to discuss his ideas on the matter.

The Scottish Government has introduced a national improvement programme to support improvements in unscheduled care across NHS Scotland. An expert group identified five key themes of activities that will lead to improved sustainable performance: getting emergency patients to the care that they need; promoting senior decision making; assuring effective and safe care 24/7; making the community the right place; and improving the primary care response. In June 2013, all national health service boards, including the Scottish Ambulance Service and NHS 24, submitted local unscheduled care action plans that describe the whole-system approaches and changes that the boards will implement across those five key themes. The plans and trajectories for improved performance have been reviewed and evaluated, and further revenue of circa £6.3 million has been released this month to support early action towards further improvement in winter planning and sustainability.

First of all, the figures are not worse than those south of the border. The difference between us and south of the border is that our figures are improving, whereas figures south of the border are getting worse, because the priority there is to privatise the health service. That is not a priority north of the border. As the member should know, our interim target is 95 per cent, which we are achieving, more or less—

Well, we are. I think that 94.6 per cent is near enough to 95 per cent, and I assure the member that we are heading towards 98 per cent. Under previous Administrations, the figure was not even measured, except on one occasion, which was in the last year of the Lib-Lab pact in Scotland, when the figure was 86 per cent. So we are doing very well, thank you.

Will Neil Findlay give way?

A review has already been announced. It will be carried out by Healthcare Improvement Scotland and it will consider the causes and reasons behind the pattern of aggregated mortality statistics—hospital standardised mortality ratios, or HSMRs—in Lanarkshire, which do not reflect the reduced mortality ratios that have been recorded by other Scottish territorial health boards. It will identify whether any additional action needs to be taken, or whether any aspects of NHS Lanarkshire’s existing action plan need to be strengthened or accelerated.

Obviously, I cannot say what the action will be until we have had the findings from HIS and NHS Lanarkshire. However, whatever recommendations are made about improvement, they will be implemented, because we are determined to ensure that we have the safest possible hospitals in Lanarkshire and, indeed, elsewhere in Scotland. I can confirm that we will publish the report when it is available from HIS.

There is a wider problem of capacity in neurological consultancy. I am happy to meet the member or, indeed, any member or collection of members to discuss the specific issues in relation to NHS Lanarkshire. Clearly, we do not want to be in a position in which people feel that they have to go private because they cannot get the service timeously within the national health service.

Ministers and Government officials regularly meet with national health service boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to discuss matters of importance to local people.

NHS boards have to work towards priority criteria. I fully understand and appreciate the concerns of the member, who represents one of the poorest constituencies in Scotland. I am more than happy to arrange a meeting between NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and the member to see how we can take those projects forward faster.

It is clear that, after three months of hibernation, a leadership contest is on in the Labour Party in Scotland. Far from criticising Mr Salmond, Mr Gray wants to do what he did and come back to leadership after a period out of it. Iain Gray rose— Aha! I will give way to Mr Gray

Well, I must say that that is the first time we have seen life from Iain Gray in about 14 years. There is something that I do not understand about Iain Gray. Given that he is so proud of what Labour achieved during its eight years in power here—free personal care, concessionary fares and his claim about abolition of tuition fees—why is he supporting the cuts commission that Johann Lamont has set up to get rid of all those things? We know that behind the scenes Johann Lamont’s previous finance spokesman, Ken Macintosh, did not agree with her. I wonder whether Iain Gray agrees with the cuts commission. Is Iain Gray to be the fall guy who must come forward with the cuts commission’s recommendation that we abolish all the great achievements of not just the Labour Administration but the entire Parliament? Aspects of the debate have been very interesting, but there is something that I particularly want to pick out. Mary Fee, who is not a lady whom I often quote, complained about our dealing with the constitution. She spoke almost as if “constitution” were a dirty word. Let me say to Mary Fee that, in any country, the constitution matters. Mary Fee should look at the honourable history of the labour movement and the example of the Attlee Government in the 1940s. The constitution of India mattered to India, and by changing the constitution and passing the Indian Independence Bill, in the face of opposition from Winston Churchill, that Labour Government freed the Indian people from colonial rule. In South Africa, it was the constitution that mattered. To see the constitution as some paper exercise is nonsense. The constitution is about power and where that power lies.

No. [Interruption.]

The fundamental issue about independence is this: where will power lie in relation to Scotland in the 21st century—economic power, political power and legislative power? Let us take the example of the bedroom tax. The fact is that it was the Labour Government that introduced the bedroom tax in the private rented sector. Jackie Baillie tells us that she wants to see the abolition of the bedroom tax, but her problem is that the power to abolish the bedroom tax lies not with Jackie Baillie or even this Parliament. The power to abolish the bedroom tax lies with Westminster and, unless we gain control of the power, that will continue to be the case. Ed Miliband, the alternative Prime Minister at Westminster, has today again ruled out any prospect of a Labour Government abolishing the bedroom tax. [Interruption.] The excitement is getting to Jackie Baillie—it is the first time that she has broken a glass for me. The only way that we can abolish the bedroom tax is by voting yes next year.

After last week’s events in North Lanarkshire—this was in the Daily Record, so it must be true—where Jim McCabe, the Labour leader of the council, was evicting a disabled woman because she could not pay the bedroom tax, we will not take any lessons from the Labour Party in relation to the bedroom tax.

No. The reality is that there is only one way to abolish the bedroom tax, and that is by voting yes next year. The incredible position of the Labour Party in Scotland is that its aspiration on the bedroom tax is that, in the future, it will be able to lobby a Labour Government at Westminster to abolish it. It would be far better to have the legislative power in this assembly. Had we had that power, the bedroom tax would never have been introduced in the first place. Jackson Carlaw rose— Ruth Davidson (Glasgow) (Con) rose— There is obviously another leadership competition going on. Is it going to be Jackson Carlaw or Ruth Davidson? Before I let one of them in, I do not want to be rude so I should congratulate Jackie Baillie on her reshuffled appointment just before the recess. I knew that, with all the nonsense that she was talking, she would not last as my shadow for much longer. Having listened to Neil Findlay, my prediction is that by Christmas Helen Eadie will replace him as the shadow health spokesperson. Jackson Carlaw rose— Ruth Davidson rose— I will give way. I ask the members to decide among themselves.

All I can say in response to that comment is that Jackson Carlaw must not have done first year methodology at university. If I were him, I would stick to being a used car salesman. Let us look at where power resides because that is what this constitutional debate is about.

No. I want to refer to the ridiculous speech that Gordon Brown made yesterday during one of his rare visits to Scotland. His argument is that the only way to abolish child poverty is by sticking with the United Kingdom and Scotland remaining within it. Has Gordon Brown not read last week’s report from the National Children’s Bureau? It reported that, over the past 40 years, the number of children in poverty in the UK has risen by 1.5 million. That destroys Gordon Brown’s argument in a oner, particularly because he was the Chancellor of the Exchequer and then the Prime Minister for 13 years and still the number of children in poverty has risen by 1.5 million. Those were 13 wasted years by Gordon Brown. If the great Gordon Brown cannot deliver the abolition of child poverty in 13 years when in Downing Street, what chance do George Osborne and David Cameron have of ever delivering the abolition of child poverty? The reality is that the UK has been tested and tried, and it has failed. Yesterday, we heard Ruth Davidson describing the UK as one of the most successful unions ever. Let us look at the state of the UK. Leaving aside the fact that we have 1.5 million more children in poverty than we had 40 years ago, the last time that the UK had a trade surplus was 1997. That is not a measure of success. The UK’s debt figure is up to £1.4 trillion. Does Ruth Davidson regard that as success? The UK’s level of unemployment and underemployment is one of the worst in Europe, particularly compared with the small Scandinavian countries in northern Europe. The Conservatives cannot say that the UK has been or is a successful country—they must stick to the facts.

Of course I will take an intervention from Neil Findlay. Neil Findlay—

I will give way but, as always, it will be in my own time, Presiding Officer. Each year, Neil Findlay organises and chairs a fringe meeting at the Labour Party conference, the theme of which is to get rid of Trident and invest the money in health and education. I say to Neil Findlay that, given the Labour Party and its Tory and Liberal Democrat friends’ commitment on Trident, there is only one way to achieve that: vote yes next year.

I am just coming to health. I want to compare the health service in Scotland—where we have independent control of health under this Parliament—with the health service in England. Fact number 1: in England they are privatising the health service, but we are keeping it in the public sector. Who started the privatisation? The Labour Party. Fact number 2: we have free prescriptions, while the poor folk in England have to pay nearly £8 for theirs. Fact number 3: we have more nurses per head of population than any other part of the United Kingdom. Fact number 4: we have more GPs per head of population than any other part of the UK. Fact number 5: according to Professor Don Berwick, Obama’s adviser and Cameron’s adviser on the health service in England, we have the safest health service in the world. I have been listening to the nonsense from Neil Findlay and his predecessor Jackie Baillie, to the point that I am looking forward to Helen Eadie taking up the post—I think that she will be a big improvement. Last week, we were criticised by Neil Findlay because we went public and transparent with the hospital standardised mortality rates in the two Lanarkshire hospitals. The standardised mortality rate has improved by 12 per cent over the past five years. Labour cannot say that, because it did not measure the hospital standardised mortality rate. Labour did not bother about patient safety: it did not measure what the reality was in its hospitals and it had no definition of an adverse event. The reality is that, under Nicola Sturgeon and now under me, the NHS in Scotland has grown and prospered, and we will continue to make it a service that the Scottish people can be proud of. Power is about what we can achieve. I have been listening very carefully to Labour. Over the summer, I was waiting for some speeches by Johann Lamont, but there were none—she was clearly hibernating along with Ed Miliband. I have been listening to the speeches by Labour members over the past two days and they have been a constant stream of moaning and groaning and criticism. The one thing that we have not heard from them is one new policy idea—in fact, we have not even heard any of their old policy ideas—and that is why Labour is languishing so much in the polls. A classic example of Labour’s real problem is the party’s campaign on the independence referendum. People who believe in the fundamentals of the labour movement—people who believe in a more equal society, in getting rid of poverty and in full employment—cannot achieve any of those things as long as we remain part of the UK. There is only one hope for Scotland to realise the dreams of our people. It is not true to say that we do not believe in devolution—we are proud of the Parliament’s achievements. Our criticism is that the Parliament’s powers are far, far too limited, which means that we cannot implement the far-reaching agenda that we need to put in place for a 21st century Scotland.

Yes.

That was an extremely worthwhile intervention—not. What we are talking about is policy, aspiration, what we have achieved in the Parliament and, more important, what we will achieve in the future. We will not be taking any lessons on policy from Mr George Osborne or Mr David Cameron because, as long as they have any control over affairs in Scotland, we will continue to languish in terms of our potential as a nation. Last year, Jackson Carlaw told me that he was thinking about voting for independence. I say to Jackson, “Come and join us—we take all types.”

We are proud of the achievements of this Parliament but what we want to do—

The car trade must have flourished enormously in your day, Jackson. We are proud of the Parliament’s achievements, but we want a yes vote so that we can use the powers of sovereignty to transform the economy and social justice in Scotland.

NHS Lothian is progressing the reprovision of the hospital, and Hub South East Scotland—a hubco—has been appointed as the development partner. Work is under way to determine the size of facility required for the current and future needs of the East Lothian population and for the services that are provided to the whole of Lothian. It is expected that the first stage of the business case—the initial agreement—will be completed in September 2013. It is anticipated that construction could start in 2015, with completion in 2017.

I am absolutely committed to the timetable, and we will do everything that we possibly can to ensure that it is adhered to. We recognise the importance of the project to East Lothian’s health provision and local economy. It is very much our intention to adhere to the timetable that I have outlined this morning.

Our new mental health strategy commits us to publishing guidance that promotes the evidence base and good practice for what works in employability for those with mental illness. That work is under way and when published will encourage redesign in health systems and the wider employability system to refocus practice on more effective approaches and realise mental healthcare savings.

I absolutely agree with the sentiments expressed by Mary Scanlon. People in work with mental health problems should be given every support, opportunity and facilitation to retain their employment while dealing with their illness. I am happy to meet Mary Scanlon—perhaps with Billy Watson, chair of the Scottish Association for Mental Health, who is chairing the sub-group on this matter—to discuss the way forward.

I am grateful to the member, NHS Highland, the Dewar group, the Royal College of General Practitioners and others for their invaluable advice on the key issue of recruiting GPs in remote and rural areas. The Government has promoted a range of initiatives on additional skills to support GPs who work in remote and rural areas. Those include the remote and rural fellowship scheme for newly qualified GPs and the remote and rural healthcare educational alliance. Delivering safe and sustainable services in remote and rural areas, including island communities, is challenging. During my visit to Ardnamurchan on 28 January 2013, I announced that NHS Highland had been commissioned to develop a proposal, which will be relevant to all remote areas of Scotland, for new models of integrated healthcare delivery, in line with the healthcare quality strategy and working towards achieving the 2020 vision. I am glad to say that the proposal is currently being finalised. Once that happens, I will consider the advice carefully in light of the recognised needs for alternative models of sustainable healthcare delivery in remote, rural and island communities.

On the project, a team of eight doctors will work in two sub-teams, one based in Mallaig and the other in Acharacle. NHS Highland is working on the recruitment of suitable applicants to ensure the continuation of out-of-hours services as well as the full range of routine care and treatment. That is in addition to the investment that we are making in telecare services in remote and rural areas specifically and across the wider health service network.

Absolutely. We are already considering whether there are areas where it would be more appropriate to provide an opportunity for salaried GPs, because it is particularly difficult to recruit GPs to independent practices. Clearly, every option has to be explored, because we need to ensure that our remote, rural and island communities are as comprehensively covered by GP primary care services as our urban communities are.

Ministers and Government officials meet representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde regularly to discuss matters of importance to local people.

The member will be aware that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is conducting a comprehensive review of local services. It is right that health boards keep their services under review to ensure that they are consistent with national policy such as the 20:20 vision and that they continue to offer the highest-quality services to local people. Obviously, any recommendations that arise from that review need to be widely consulted on and will eventually come to me for approval. I will look at any recommendations in detail, including the provision for the local area and the extent to which there has been proper consultation. I will also ensure that all possible options have been examined.

We have a £50 million unscheduled care and emergency action plan in place, which obviously includes Glasgow. I think that we will see a major improvement—not just in Glasgow but in many other board areas—in the weeks and months to come. There are two streams to that work: one is in hospital and the other one is external. We are looking at the profile of demand in A and E services and at the internal resourcing of those services. Earlier this week, I announced substantial additional resources for A and E consultants, who will be appointed throughout Scotland. We are looking at the issue of earlier discharge and at a range of other issues. Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is looking at all those issues and I am sure that we will see a major improvement in the official statistics of turnaround times in the period ahead.

It so happens that I was at Yorkhill hospital this morning. As a result of a range of initiatives that have been taken to address the balance between capacity and demand, in particular since January this year, the performance of Yorkhill—with regard to accident and emergency, for example, and the reduced number of breaches, and so on—has improved quite dramatically in the past four or five months. Before the move to Southern general, we will want to ensure that there will be adequate bed capacity in the new Yorkhill at the Southern general.

Age Scotland’s still waiting campaign calls for the national concessionary travel scheme arrangements to be extended to all community transport services. There are some practical issues around that, over and above affordability, but ministers are listening to the points that are being made as the campaign progresses. Scottish ministers recognise the important role that community transport services play as part of the transport network in Scotland and we recognise that they play a major part in reducing isolation and increasing social inclusion. We recognise that they allow people to play a greater part in their local community, thus helping them to be independent, have a more active lifestyle and have less reliance on social care and health services. Local authorities are provided with resources to support community transport services through the local government finance settlement. We have no current plans to extend the national concessionary travel scheme to include all community transport services. Nevertheless, changes to bus registration legislation from 1 April last year allow demand-responsive transport services that are available to the general public to qualify for concessionary travel and bus service operators grant. Changes to that grant from 1 April last year benefit many rural bus operators, including eligible community transport operators.

Claudia Beamish makes a fair point. The Minister for Transport and Veterans, Keith Brown, and I have agreed that we must take a cross-cutting approach to the matter. We are very conscious of the issue and of the level of unmet demand. I expect the health board and the relevant transport partnership to work together to reach local solutions for local problems, where they are identified, including in the Borders.

Absolutely—we will look with interest at that and at the experience in Dumfries and Galloway with the rural transport solutions project to see what lessons we can learn more generally on how to tackle transport issues, including those relating to health and social care in rural areas.

The study confirms a number of factors that we are aware of and that are similar to the alcohol problem that we have in Scotland. I have studied the Alcohol Focus Scotland report that I mentioned. That will help to give us a wider understanding of the impact that alcohol has not only on a minority of individuals who may misuse alcohol, but on the wider community who are impacted. That was recognised at the time when we took forward our alcohol framework—the framework has more than 40 measures in it—in which we have taken a whole population approach. That approach recognises that alcohol misuse affects the whole community and not just individuals. We must build on that in order to deal with a complex and harmful part of our society.

The 98 per cent four-hour accident and emergency performance level—to be treated, admitted, transferred or discharged—was set by the previous Administration in 2004 and was never met by that Administration. An Information Services Division sample survey for April 2006 shows that the performance standard at that time was 87.6 per cent. ISD statistics show that the 98 per cent standard was first exceeded in May 2008 and last exceeded in September 2009. Through the £50 million three-year unscheduled care action plan, the national health service will be reshaping and enhancing services to ensure that the 98 per cent standard is met sustainably in the future.

As a supporter of an Administration that never once achieved a target that it set and a member of a party that made no promise to sustain the budget for the national health service, Ms Baillie is not in a very strong position to criticise others. It is highly irresponsible to describe the situation in accident and emergency in Scotland as a crisis. She is referring to the position south of the border, where the Tories are implementing Labour’s cuts of £20 billion in the health service.

The Scottish Government is satisfied that the current regulation and enforcement powers of the Care Inspectorate are appropriate and allow it to discharge its statutory responsibilities, but obviously we will keep that under review.

I believe that the chief executive of the Care Inspectorate has met the Highland Senior Citizens Network to discuss these issues. She has reassured the network and me that whatever action is necessary to deal with any risk in any care home, in the Highlands or anywhere else, the Care Inspectorate’s full panoply of powers will be employed appropriately to deal with that situation. As the member knows, the Care Inspectorate ultimately has the power to seek the closure of a care home when it fails to satisfy the implementation of any recommendations. The Care Inspectorate also has emergency powers that it can employ as and when required.

I expect all national health service boards to work towards delivering the 20:20 vision by providing sustainable, safe, effective and person-centred services that are designed to meet the healthcare needs of their resident populations.

If the member has specific concerns, he can write to me and I will certainly address them. More generally, the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill was introduced to Parliament on 29 May to provide the legislative framework for integration of health and social care services. Integration is a prerequisite to providing the quality and range of services required and the co-ordination required to ensure that we deliver the best possible services in healthcare and social care. If the member has specific concerns, I will certainly investigate them.

The review that I commissioned into individual patient treatment request processes was carried out by Professor Swainson. The review recently identified unacceptable patient experiences, such as that of the member’s constituent, and has demonstrated that there is clearly room for improvement. A recurring theme is the lack of good communication between the national health service board and the patient, an issue that we must address when we consider the outcomes of the Health and Sport Committee’s on-going inquiry.

I understand that the chief executive of NHS Ayrshire and Arran has recognised the failings in the way in which Mrs Rankin’s case was dealt with, and has reiterated his offer to her to carry out a very short-term expert review to hear all the evidence in her case so that a clinical decision can be reached in relation to the availability of the medicine that she has requested. I am not aware of whether she has agreed to that, but I know that on Monday, when the Healthcare Improvement Scotland report was agreed—it was published on Tuesday—the chief executive was going to make that offer.

A detailed delivery plan to improve capacity and flow across the health and social care system has been in development for some months. That work will inform the basis of the board’s local unscheduled care plan, which includes both a workforce framework and a financial investment framework.

The unscheduled care programme team is working closely with the Forth Valley team to support its performance improvement. All national health service boards, including Forth Valley, will submit their strategic plan for sustained unscheduled care performance improvement at the end of June. That will be reviewed by the national programme team and signed off by it and the respective NHS board by the end of July. The sign-off of each strategic board plan will see the second tranche of the 2013-14 national unscheduled care programme investment funds being released to boards. I totally agree with Bruce Crawford that while Forth Valley has made significant improvements, there is still much to be done.

All boards are making progress in increasing the use of digital technologies, increasing access to information, improving efficiency and reducing reliance on paper across all clinical settings. NHS boards are committed to the provision of technology that positively improves the care that healthcare workers can provide in hospital wards and clinics. Boards are actively seeking to address that by using mobile, whiteboard and related technologies. Each NHS board has a delivery plan that outlines how that will be achieved. The Scottish Government regularly meets NHS boards to review progress and consistency with the national e-health strategy.

I am aware of the positive results that emerged from the telescot trials and I am pleased that a growing body of evidence shows the effectiveness of supported telemonitoring in achieving clinically important outcomes in primary care settings. The fact that the trial was developed and researched in Scotland is just one reason why, in my view, Scotland is rightly held up across Europe as being in the vanguard in integrating telehealth and telecare into the delivery of services. At a recent visit that was kindly hosted by East Ayrshire Council, I was able to see at first hand the benefits that home health monitoring brings, not only from enabling individuals to stay in their own home rather than be unnecessarily admitted to hospital, but from improving their health through better self-management. Both of those are key Government policy objectives. In that pilot, the rate of hospitalisation among those involved decreased by 70 per cent.

Ministers and Government officials meet regularly with representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to discuss matters of importance to local people.

We are taking a range of action. For example, one of the best ways that we can deliver better primary care services for the more deprived areas is through the deep-end practices, many of which are in Glasgow and some of which are in the member’s constituency. We have received a set of proposals from the deep-end practices in Glasgow about how we can further expand their role in the community so that they can perform even better than they do at present on tackling the inequalities to which the member refers. I would be happy to send details to him once we make decisions on those proposals.

No specific briefing has come to me so far but, if the member has concerns and writes to me, I will raise them with the health board.

I have instructed greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board to review its bed capacity and, in particular, not to implement any policies for further reduction in bed capacity until it is entirely satisfied that it has enough beds not only to deal with any accident and emergency issues but to ensure that it continues to meet the treatment time guarantee.

Scottish ministers and Government officials regularly meet representatives of all national health service boards, including NHS Lothian, to discuss a wide range of matters of current interest to local people.

We are not only concerned but have taken action, along with NHS Lothian, to deal with the accident and emergency situation throughout the NHS Lothian area. Additional consultants and nurses have been recruited, which will continue. The fundamental strategic problem with capacity issues in NHS Lothian is a result of the fact that, when the previous Administration planned the construction of the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, it grossly underestimated growth in the population of Edinburgh by 20 per cent. We are now having to deal with failures resulting from decisions that were made when Sarah Boyack was a minister.

Elaine Smith raises a very valid point. As she knows, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency is the responsible body for the safety, equality and efficacy of all United Kingdom-licensed medicines. On 21 May, it issued advice to healthcare professionals regarding alternative arrangements for a continued supply of triiodothyronine, or T3. The issue is very much a reserved matter, particularly in relation to pricing, but I share Elaine Smith’s frustrations about the inflated prices. We are taking up the issue with the relevant authorities at United Kingdom level.

We have invested in St John’s and I have made it clear—and Tim Davison, who is the chief executive of NHS Lothian, has made it clear—that we are totally committed to 24/7 good-quality services. I absolutely deplore the scaremongering by Neil Findlay and his Labour colleagues about the future of St John’s. It is highly irresponsible of them.

The Scottish Government is given independent advice by the United Kingdom national screening committee. In November 2012, the NSC undertook a review of the policy for group B streptococcus, using all the available medical evidence on the risks and benefits of screening all pregnant women. The committee agreed that a national screening programme for group B streptococcus should not be introduced. The NSC will continue to keep screening for group B streptococcus under review, and will consider the policy again in 2015-16—or earlier, if significant new evidence emerges.

I am always happy to meet a member to discuss a constituency case. Obviously, I am aware of the case that Margaret McDougall cites and all our thoughts are with the family. The concerns that the NCS raised regarding screening of all pregnant women followed the submission of many hundreds of pages of evidence, as well as consultation of experts and the clinical community throughout the UK. Its conclusion was that national screening would not prevent all deaths and disability from EOGBS. The potential harm that could be caused by administration of antibiotics to many thousands of pregnant women was a major factor in its decision, given the very low risk of harm from the disease. The NCS has considered the matter in a great deal of detail. The balance came down in favour of not screening all women, because that would not be appropriate. I am obviously happy to meet Margaret McDougall to discuss the issue and to fill her in on any more details that would be helpful to her and her constituents.

I have great pleasure in speaking to my motion on chronic pain. In doing so, however, I want to pay tribute to those who have campaigned long and hard on the matter, some of whom are in the public gallery today. I hope that they will be cheered by what I have to say about the substantial progress that I believe we will make on chronic pain. I particularly mention Jacquie Forde, Susan Archibald—who led the petition to the Public Petitions Committee on the issue—and Dorothy-Grace Elder. All have campaigned very vigorously on behalf of the 800,000 or so people in Scotland who suffer from chronic pain. I think that I am right in saying that the only other debate that we have had on the subject since the Parliament was established in 1999 was a members’ business debate that Dorothy-Grace Elder secured when we were in the other place up the road—I remember that the public galleries were full to the gunwales for that debate. I am delighted that we are having another debate not just because it means that we are talking about the subject but because we are acting in a number of ways to address it. As I said, we estimate that about 800,000 people in Scotland suffer from chronic pain, of whom a quarter suffer from possibly life-long chronic pain syndrome. Also among that number are 70,000 children who suffer from what is by any standard a debilitating illness. Today, I will spell out the progress that has been made and, more important, look to the future with regard to our plans for taking matters forward. Early on—indeed, about five or six years ago—we recognised chronic pain as an illness in its own right that required a dedicated solution, dedicated care and dedicated services, and the budgets to go with them. I start by making absolutely clear the situation with regard to residential facilities. As we know, an average of 20 people every year have to go down to Bath to receive the specialist treatment that is available for sufferers of the most severe chronic pain. We intend to end that situation by ensuring that those facilities are available in Scotland. We will consult on that because there are different ways of delivering such a service. First, we could establish a centre to serve the entire country; secondly, we could have a mobile service; and, thirdly, we could have a range of services in different parts of the country. However, as with all such services, we will consult patients and other stakeholders before we make a final decision on the most appropriate model. I give the guarantee that, once we take that decision and the facilities are in place, there should be no need for anyone to travel to Bath to get the support and services that they need.

If the member got his Government to reverse its cuts, I might be able to afford all three. As there are at least three possible scenarios, I cannot accept Labour’s amendment, which would commit us to only one scenario, with one centre. I am absolutely sure—I hope that Jackie Baillie will confirm this—that we are all in the same place in the debate, and that we all want to end up in the same place in respect of the quality and range of services available. However, it would be rather foolish of me to accept an amendment that committed us to only one centre when we will consult on whether there is a better model.

Absolutely. We will publish a document fairly soon on the pros and cons of each model. We will then go out to consultation, and everybody will be free to have an input. Once we have evaluated the findings from the consultation, we will reach a decision. I encourage as many people in Scotland as possible to participate and to tell us their preference, because I want the process to be driven as much as possible by the needs of the people who require the services. Clearly, we will take into account the views of patients and other stakeholders before we make any final decision. I am determined that we will make a decision on the model around September this year; I do not want the process to drag on. We will have a period of consultation, listen to what people say, and then make a decision and deliver on the promise to have an alternative to Bath in Scotland as soon as possible.

Margo MacDonald makes a very fair point. One of our clear objectives is to raise awareness in the medical profession of not only chronic pain but what can and should be done to help people who suffer from it. The second major point that I want to make is that we have already substantially reduced waiting times for psychological services from more than 80 weeks to just over 60 weeks. In the immediate period ahead, we will continue the drive to reduce waiting times significantly, particularly for services that are crucial to sufferers of chronic pain. I do not believe that it is right that people have to wait that length of time for essential services that they need fairly urgently. The third point that I want to make concerns the petition that was submitted by Susan Archibald, which was supported by many people. It made the key point that, in delivering services for sufferers of chronic pain, we should think about not just a medical health model but a social model. We are very committed to that principle; indeed, the bill that was published today on the integration of adult health and social care should help us to deliver integrated health and social care services for sufferers of chronic pain. If there was ever an example of where the integration of services is important, it is in dealing with chronic pain. I will set out some of the work that is already going on and the approaches that are being taken. I recognise that there is still a wide variation in access to certain services in Scotland. One of our key policy objectives is to ensure that there is no postcode lottery in the delivery of services; we want consistent delivery of high-quality services in both the primary care and acute sectors for the sufferers of chronic pain. Clearly, a tiered approach is required, because most services will be delivered not in the acute sector but, inevitably, in the primary care sector. We have long advocated the role of managed clinical networks in co-ordinating a multidisciplinary approach to service provision. We need to ensure that they give a strong voice to patients in shaping local service delivery. As I will outline, we will place an obligation on the territorial health boards to provide a minimum level of good-quality services and, in doing so, we will require them to discuss the shape of their local services with local populations and stakeholder groups representing chronic pain sufferers. Some areas have made more progress than others. For example, the MCN in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which has been operating for five years, has demonstrated real improvements, including developing a pain management programme, setting standards for chronic pain services, developing primary care guidelines and, more recently, setting up specialist nurse clinics to provide patients with more local care. That is a very good example of the ambition that we have for the delivery of the service. The figures that were published yesterday on workforce development across the board show an increase in the appropriate skills and occupations in the health service that service chronic pain sufferers and others. For example, compared with last year, there has been a 5 per cent increase in the number of clinical and other applied psychologists working in the health service. In the mental health strategy for Scotland for the next three years, there is a commitment to continue our work to deliver faster access to psychological therapies. The programme is delivered locally but supported nationally and includes support for local service redesign, which is aimed at achieving service improvement within existing resources. Obviously, the territorial boards are receiving a real-terms budget increase this year and next, so the resources should be in place to allow them all to deliver the quality of services that we demand. We are supporting the development of MCNs and service improvement groups with pump-priming funding of up to £50,000 per year over two years for each group, with the purpose of each putting together a local improvement plan in their area. So far, the following health boards have participated in the programme: Ayrshire and Arran, Dumfries and Galloway, Forth valley, Lanarkshire, Lothian and Tayside. Between them, they cover 73 per cent of the population. Our aim is for the programme to have 100 per cent coverage to ensure that local service delivery plans are in place from next year at the very latest. The main priority of those groups is to focus on and accelerate the implementation of the Scottish service model for chronic pain. In particular, as they develop, the groups will look to improve links with primary care services, paediatric services and the voluntary sector. Patient participation will be an essential feature of their work. Some work is obviously in the early stages. For example, NHS Ayrshire and Arran’s work to improve chronic pain services has been closely aligned with the redesign of musculoskeletal services, which will allow for early identification and rapid triage and assessment, with timely onward referral to appropriate services, including chronic pain management, self-management support and working health services Scotland. NHS Fife and NHS Borders are currently working on draft proposals for their groups. NHS Fife already has a fully integrated chronic pain management service—Rivers—which has been established for more three years and fulfils a number of aspects of the MCN approach. We will work with that group and others to take the programmes forward to ensure coverage throughout Scotland. I have told boards to accelerate progress and I have set an expectation that improvement plans will be in place for every board by the end of this month. In addition, I have advised chairs of boards that I will be calling on them to update me on progress when I meet them in June. I will be looking to them to identify and seek solutions to barriers to delivery. I have commissioned work to consider how most efficiently to include chronic pain in boards’ local delivery plans from 2014-15 and ensure that clear reporting mechanisms are in place to monitor progress through the annual national health service board review process. I could mention many other initiatives, but no doubt other members will do so. The Minister for Public Health, Michael Matheson, will cover initiatives that I have not been able to get to. On behalf of the Scottish Government, I spell out our commitment to improving the chronic pain service throughout Scotland and to ensuring that we have the indigenous services in Scotland that our patients need, to deal with this very debilitating condition. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government’s plans for the implementation of the Scottish Service Model for Chronic Pain, which will ensure the best outcomes for the care and support of people living with chronic pain; further welcomes that the Scottish Government has committed to providing a highly specialist intensive pain management service in Scotland; notes that, prior to consultation, the NHS is working with partners, including patients and clinicians, to assess appropriate options for a Scottish intensive pain management service; also welcomes the decision of the Scottish Government to provide appropriate residential accommodation in the options for the new Scottish intensive pain management service, and further notes that each territorial NHS board in Scotland will be required to prepare and implement a service delivery plan for covering all aspects of chronic pain services, from April 2014.

Does the member accept that I am delivering on her manifesto commitment?

As the First Minister set out in the programme for government on 4 September 2012, we will introduce the marriage and civil partnership (Scotland) bill within the 2012-13 parliamentary year, so the bill will be introduced before the forthcoming summer recess.

We have made substantial progress in co-operation with Maria Miller, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, who is responsible for such matters in the UK Government. When the marriage and civil partnership (Scotland) bill is published, I hope to be in a position to confirm the details of the amendments that will be made to the UK Equality Act 2010 in respect of the Scottish bill.

As the member will be aware, Maria Miller has ordered a review—indeed, she has built it into the legislation on same-sex marriage down south. As well as covering devolved matters in respect of England, that review will cover reserved matters such as pensions. I am giving consideration to how we should address the issue, and I hope to make an announcement to Parliament fairly soon.

I am thinking about the principles of the bill rather than the referendum. After our extensive consultation, we have given a commitment to introduce the bill as quickly as possible, which is what we are doing. It will be up to the relevant committee and the Parliamentary Bureau to timetable the bill, but I hope that the timetabling will be such that we see the bill become law sooner rather than later.

The main protections with regard to what the member refers to will be in amendments to the Equality Act 2010, because much of that relates to reserved matters rather than devolved matters, and reserved matters cannot be dealt with in a bill on devolved matters. However, I think that the key point on which the member will want reassurance is that the civil rights of those who do not wish to carry out a same-sex marriage will be fully protected.

Cancer remains a top clinical priority for the Scottish Government. Through the implementation of the better cancer care action plan, we are committed to ensuring that people with cancer in Scotland receive the best possible treatment and care. The chief executive’s letter issued in 2009 sets out the criteria for the management of women with a family history of breast cancer, and in April the Scottish genetics consortium agreed that it would be right to implement the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence proposals and extend genetic testing for people at risk of developing breast cancer to bring the risk estimation level down to 10 per cent. As with the NICE recommendation, it is planned that that will be implemented in June. That said, it is important to stress that patient care is ultimately a matter for discussion between the clinician and the patient. This is an excellent opportunity for us to encourage people who have concerns to go to their general practitioner, who will advise as appropriate.

First of all, the detect breast cancer early campaign, which was fronted by Elaine C Smith, has already led to a very welcome 50 per cent increase in the number of women presenting at their GPs. Secondly, I point out to Jackie Baillie that we have made substantial progress in reducing cancer waiting lists and waiting times as a result of the additional oncologists, clinical cancer nurses and radiographers who have been recruited in recent years. We will continue to ensure that our targets of 31 and 62 days respectively are met; indeed, they are being met and exceeded.

We are making improvements all the time. However, once the initial period of referral, diagnosis and then referral for treatment is over, it is up to the clinicians and the patient to determine the pace of any further treatment that is required. That issue is already covered in great detail by clinical guidelines and, although we do not have targets for turnaround times as they do south of the border, we are absolutely sure that clinical guidelines are the way to go, because they are very patient centred and focused on a particular patient’s needs. Of course, one patient’s needs will be different from those of another patient and we must ensure that the whole system is patient centred. I also point out that the mortality rates for all sorts of cancers across the board has fallen by 10 per cent over the past 10 years or so and 6 per cent in the past five years. That is a welcome development.

As I have said, the number of GP consultations relating to breast symptoms increased by approximately 50 per cent during the successful detect breast cancer early campaign. Approximately 21,000 women consulted their GP with regard to breast symptoms such as lumps, pain or infection. That is a significant increase on the figure for the same period in 2011, when there were approximately 13,900 consultations. Although it is too early to say what impact these consultations have had on the rate of diagnosis, we will publish an evaluation in due course.

We have put in place a £50 million action plan to improve how quickly people are seen and who treats them, so that they can leave hospital as soon as they are ready. We are also improving links with other areas of healthcare so that support is in place for people to be treated at home if possible. We have discussed with NHS Lanarkshire and other national health service boards at a number of meetings the development of the national unscheduled care action plan. We have written to all NHS boards, outlining requirements for the development of a local unscheduled care action plan and advising on the protocol for submitting bids for the national funding that will be released. Scottish Government officials met with the unscheduled care leads of all NHS boards on 24 April to discuss local action plans. Those plans are due to be submitted to the Scottish Government by the end of June.

I assure Margaret McCulloch that I have got a grip. Margaret McCulloch asked a number of questions. First, in relation to Hairmyres, I have received her correspondence, and we are investigating the matter. I am absolutely assured that there is no inherent shortage of staff at Hairmyres, but we are double checking so that I can reassure her that that is the case. Secondly, I have had a great deal of analytical work done on whether there is a correlation between any reduction in overall bed numbers and areas in which we have had the most difficulty in accident and emergency. There is no such correlation. Thirdly, I point out that, had Labour’s proposal to close the accident and emergency unit at Monklands hospital gone ahead, we would have been in a terrible situation in Lanarkshire. In fact, it would have been nearly as bad as the situation under the Labour Administration in Wales.

In NHS Lanarkshire, the number of medical healthcare science staff who work in the emergency medicine speciality has increased from 58 in September 2008 to 66 in December 2012—an increase of eight, which is equivalent to almost 14 per cent. In NHS Lanarkshire, the number of consultants who work in the emergency medicine speciality has increased from 12 in September 2008 to 29 in December 2012—an increase of 17, which represents a 142 per cent increase.

Since May 2007, NHS Ayrshire and Arran has made substantial progress in the provision of national health service general dental services. From March 2007 to September 2012, the proportion of children registered with a dentist under national health service arrangements increased from 71.2 per cent to 88.9 per cent; for adults, the increase was from 53.2 per cent to 83.9 per cent. In 2007, approximately 42 per cent of dental practices in Ayrshire and Arran accepted new NHS patients; the current figure is 93 per cent. Moreover, the number of dentists reflects the increase in provision. As of 31 March 2007, 163 dentists provided NHS general dental services in Ayrshire and Arran. The comparable figure for 31 March 2012 was 212, which is an increase of 30 per cent.

By the measure of the proportion of patients registered with an NHS dentist, NHS Ayrshire and Arran is the leading board in Scotland. As a result, the board’s future plans reflect the need to consolidate the successes that have been achieved as well as the need to address new challenges in future oral health priorities. Although it will continue to promote dental registration, the board also has plans to improve access for certain priority groups, such as dependent older adults, adults with additional needs and homeless people. More work is planned on developing pathways of care to give those groups of people better access to dental care. The board is also committed to the development and delivery of specialist oral healthcare services, such as oral surgery and restorative dentistry, with greater focus on the provision of those services in a primary care setting.

National contracts are a matter for the national procurement division of NHS National Services Scotland. The Scottish Government has no direct involvement.

I am happy to write to the member but I point out that Sheds Hairdressing, which is based in Dunfermline, did not tender for the new contract; instead, it was put forward as an agent for A&amp;A Studios, which was one of the successful tenderers. The member might have a total misunderstanding of the contractual position, and I am happy to write to her to explain it.

I am happy to investigate why that has happened but, of course, the tender, like every other tender, has to comply with European Union procurement rules, and the rules said that the contract had to go out to tender. It is fairly straightforward to see that, if the company did not tender for the contract, it could not win it. The company was an agent for another tenderer, which was a successful tenderer for the contract. I am happy to provide members with detailed information on the issue, because I think that there is a misunderstanding of the contractual position.

The obvious question in my mind is about why A&amp;A Studios—for which Sheds Hairdressing is an agent under the contract—is not offering the service. I am more than happy to arrange to meet members from Fife so that we can try to bottom out the matter.

Information on the accreditation of funeral directors, which are private sector organisations, is not held by the Scottish Government.

The trade body, the National Association of Funeral Directors, is represented on the death certification national advisory group, which is directing the implementation of the work. More specifically, the association is working with the Scottish Government, the Institute of Cemetery and Crematorium Management and the Federation of Burial and Cremation Authorities to ensure that awareness raising takes place and that relevant guidance is provided to the industry in advance of national implementation of the 2011 act.

Since February 2012, there have been three phases of public awareness campaigns: a priming campaign that was aimed at tackling fears and negative attitudes about cancer; a bold breast cancer awareness campaign in September; and, more recently, a campaign to encourage uptake of bowel screening. The initial evaluation of the social marketing campaigns has been encouraging. Published data indicates that more women are reporting breast symptoms and more people are enquiring about participating in the bowel screening programme. It is too early yet to assess what impact that is having on early diagnosis. A general practitioner contract proposal to encourage primary care to contribute to screening uptake is at an advanced stage. A refresh of the “Scottish Referral Guidelines for Suspected Cancer” is under way and is being led by Healthcare Improvement Scotland. The programme’s £30 million funding is supporting increases in diagnostic, screening and treatment capacity so that the 62-day and 31-day cancer access standards are maintained. Additional capital and revenue have been made available to support an increase in colonoscopy capacity. Baseline setting and submission, analysis and reporting of staging data to monitor progress towards the programme’s aims are also well under way.

I do indeed applaud the Teenage Cancer Trust’s work in raising awareness of the importance of early detection of cancer. It has been shown that, as a result of the trust’s presentations in schools, awareness raising extends beyond the young people who attend the talks and benefits the wider circle of friends and family. That contributes positively to the overall aim of improving early diagnosis. For the detect cancer early programme’s social marketing campaigns to be most effective, it is important that the target audience is reached in as many ways as possible. That is why the programme is engaging with and supporting the Teenage Cancer Trust’s education programme, which provides teenagers with the information that encourages them to give their older family members a nudge to ensure that they know the benefits of early presentation and to find out more about screening participation. Breaking down barriers and getting people to talk about cancer are important parts of the detect cancer early programme.

We have not set specific targets for the number of days within which follow-up treatment should begin because that is very much determined by the clinical situation for each patient. However, clinical guidelines on follow-up govern the situation and, as far as we can tell—we monitor these matters fairly closely—those guidelines are being adhered to throughout Scotland.

The evidence that we have is that the programme is having an impact on older age groups as well as on younger age groups. I am happy to send the member more detailed information on uptake among older age groups.

We will give further consideration to the future of the programme once we have done a proper evaluation of its impact, particularly on breast and bowel cancer. As I said, the early indications are that the programme is very effective indeed, but we must wait for the evaluation before we decide to spend additional resources to cover other types of cancer.

Dementia services in NHS Shetland, including any staffing issues, are assessed by Scottish Government officials as part of their twice-yearly visits to all national health service boards to review mental health services, and as part of the annual review of boards. A local dementia action plan for Shetland was produced for 2012-13 and the board and local authority are working together to redesign services to better meet the needs of people with dementia.

I am aware of the circumstances that the member describes and I am extremely sympathetic to the point that he raises. We recognise that there are particular challenges in island communities because of the number of people involved. Specialist services are sometimes required that are available only on the mainland. Shetland has a dementia services manager, who is funded by the Scottish Government and Alzheimer Scotland, a clinical nurse specialist in dementia and four dementia champions. There is also a great deal of community activity in Shetland to support people with dementia, including the Annsbrae supported housing scheme, which has a team of workers that is led by a service manager and which provides an alternative model to going into a care home or acute services. I am aware of the specific challenges that are presented by the kind of case to which the member refers. We are considering whether, in future, we can handle more of those cases in Shetland.

We are in the process of finalising the dementia strategy. I will certainly take into consideration the very substantive point made by Mary Scanlon.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with Healthcare Improvement Scotland. Monthly meetings are arranged between the Scottish Government and the HIS chief executive; the last took place on 11 April 2013. At times there is almost daily contact, during which operational issues are discussed, such as the Scottish patient safety programme, hospital standardised mortality ratios and other HIS organisational issues.

I am very aware of that issue. We are talking to the HIS and many other people about how to address those concerns. The system is being developed in a way that will minimise delays; processes are being put in place that will ensure that medical reviewers can assess the information that they need quickly, in order to enable reviews to be carried out within a day or so of registration. We anticipate that once the system is up and running, in the vast majority of cases there will be little detectable delay as a result of the new system.

First, I totally disagree with Jackie Baillie’s depiction of “doctored ... reports”. No reports have been “doctored”, as she called it. Secondly, as far as Labour’s proposals are concerned, we already have independent arrangements for inspection of hospitals, whether in relation to issues such as Clostridium difficile or the circumstances of older people in hospitals. Of course, we also have an independent inspection agency to cover our care services.

In my reply to Mr Kelly in the chamber on 6 December last year, I indicated that the Scottish Government has no role in monitoring applications or appeals relating to the opening of a community pharmacy. Those are entirely matters for national health service boards and the national appeal panel, respectively. However, the Scottish Government keeps under review the National Health Service (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 2009, as amended, which regulate the applications process. We propose to update in the near future the control-of-entry guidance that is issued to all NHS boards and contractors.

I am aware of the application to which Mr Kelly refers. My understanding is that the issue is that there is sufficient local provision, which is why the application has to date been unsuccessful. However, I am absolutely sure that my colleague, the Minister for Public Health, would be more than happy to meet Mr Kelly to discuss his concerns about the process.

Appeals can be complex and the complexities can vary from case to case, depending on the merits of individual cases. That is especially so where there is more than one interested party lodging an appeal, or there is new evidence to be considered. I understand that the national appeal panel usually considers appeals in order of the date on which the chair receives them, and aims to consider appeals within three months of receiving all the relevant papers. It can sometimes take longer if several appeals are received around the same time. However, I will monitor the situation; if I believe that timescale is becoming an issue, I will be prepared to consider the matter.

We believe that legislation already adequately provides for entitlements to health services. Universal services are delivered by a range of practitioners, not solely by public health nurses. They can be delivered by health visitors, general practitioners, midwives and family nurses, based on the needs of individual children and families.

We have to distinguish between two issues. The first is entitlement to care, which already exists. The second is identification of people who, for some reason or other, have been bypassed by the system. We have a range of mechanisms in place to ensure that as few people as possible are bypassed. For children, the mechanisms include nursery education, family nurse partnerships and a range of other networks and mechanisms. One of the key objectives of integration of health and social care is to ensure that all those who need and are entitled to universal services—health and social care services, in this case—receive them. I share Alison Johnstone’s objective, but I do not think that we need to change the law in order to achieve it.

Officials are in regular contact with colleagues in NHS Lothian on a range of issues, including the contract that was signed by NHS Lothian with Consort Healthcare for the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh.

My concerns about the PFI contracts for hospitals such as the Royal infirmary, Hairmyres, Wishaw and many others is well and truly on the record. Many aspects of the contracts are costing the public purse very dearly, so much so that the Government down south has abandoned PFI as a method of funding future capital projects. I share many people’s frustration about the cost of the contracts to the public sector. We review them constantly to see if there is any way in which we can reduce the costs to the taxpayer.

One of the unacceptable aspects of these contracts, which were signed by the previous Administration when Sarah Boyack was a minister, is that one of the provisions in the contract is that only the contractor can reopen the contract. That is an absurd provision. Frankly, the ministers who signed these contracts have a lot to answer for.

The review report on the role and remit of national health service board area drug and therapeutic committees and individual patient treatment request arrangements was published on Friday 3 May 2013.

I met Mr and Mrs Glasswell some time ago and I fully appreciate the difficulties that the family are now facing. Clearly, one of the reasons why we set up the reviews in the first place was the degree of public dissatisfaction with the current process in a number of cases. We now have the reports from Professor Swainson and from Professor Routledge, which we discussed at the Health and Sport Committee meeting yesterday. The committee will produce its report and recommendations—hopefully before the summer recess. The recommendations—particularly Professor Swainson’s in the case of IPTRs—should go a long way towards assuaging the concerns of families who might find themselves in a similar situation to the Glasswell family in the future. Our intention is that clinicians—and, importantly, not politicians—should take the decisions. When clinicians cannot support an IPTR, there should be a proper explanation of the clinical reasons why the application has been unsuccessful. I fully appreciate that many members have constituents who are in a similar situation. We will wait for the committee’s recommendations and I hope that, once we implement the recommendations, we will have a more robust system that will be able to deal with such a delicate situation more sensitively in the future.

Jackie Baillie rightly said—it was one of the few things that she got right—that society is constantly changing and its needs are evolving. The remarkable achievement is that the health service is, and has been, changing with it. I welcome the opportunity to put on the record my gratitude for the dedication and commitment of all our hard-working NHS and social care staff across Scotland. I recognise that all parties share that gratitude. Although the shape of the NHS has evolved since its foundation, its core principles of providing the best possible healthcare, free to all regardless of their income or need, must be preserved. For those principles to be protected, we must ensure that the health service develops with the needs of the Scottish people. This Government will maintain and improve—as we have been doing—the levels of quality and provision that the health service requires. The Government will protect the health budget. We recognise that, if we want a first-class health service, the resources must be there to deliver it. As we look to the future, the twin challenges to be met are the ageing population and the increase in healthcare demands as a consequence of changing lifestyles, including those related to tobacco and cheap alcohol. Some of the picture that Jackie Baillie painted was rather dark and inaccurate, so let me deal with a number of the issues that she raised. First, she ignored some real improvements in the national health service in recent times. She mentioned the number of beds: the total number of beds in the national health service today is just more than 24,000, which represents a 12 per cent drop over the past five years. However, I have checked the bed numbers for the five years previous to that, while Jackie Baillie’s colleagues were in Government and in charge of the health service. Between 2002 and 2007 the number of beds declined by 13 per cent.

I say with all due respect that were Jackie Baillie to check the figures, she would find that the Labour Government closed a substantial number of acute beds, too. I will make three points. First, we need a proper planning tool to manage bed capacity in a fast-changing health service. Today, I have announced major advances in the development of a bed-management tool. Secondly, this is not only a numbers game; it is also about the mix of beds. For example, a big challenge in our 30 acute hospitals is the balance between medical and surgical beds. Thirdly, there have been very good reasons why there have been particular reductions in bed numbers. For example, there has been a drop in the number of long-term psychiatric and geriatric beds because we have been treating people in the community rather than in hospital. If one looks at the shift in many areas to day surgery, by definition the same number of beds are not needed for the throughput in day surgery—which has risen by 10 per cent in recent years—as are needed for longer stays in hospital. If one looks at the turnaround time between coming into hospitals for elective procedures and discharge, for example, that time is reducing all the time. Those issues quite rightly drive bed numbers. I clarify that the point that I was making at the Unison conference—which I have made many times in the chamber—is that when one looks at the particular challenges relating to over 75-year-olds, one sees that there will be, roughly, a doubling in their numbers over the next 20 years or so. If we were to achieve a 50 per cent reduction in hospital admissions among those 75-year-olds and go no further, the same number of beds would still be needed for that particular group. That is the part that Jackie Baillie missed when she was quoting my speech.

I do not have time, unfortunately. I believe that we can reduce the hospitalisation rate even more. Recently, I have seen a pilot in East Ayrshire, which through new innovations and new technology has resulted in a 70 per cent reduction in hospitalisation among members of the older age group. On the other hand, we will continue to expand day care services. I will give Jackie Baillie some workforce numbers. In the past five years, the number of qualified nurses has increased by more than 700, the number of consultants has increased by more than 800, the number of general practitioners has increased by more than 250 and the number of allied health professionals has increased by more than 650. Investment in the workforce has been paired with the increasing demands on the NHS. The health service is diagnosing, treating and caring for far more people than ever before. In the past year alone, the number of in-patient cases grew by almost 5,000 to 253,000 and the number of out-patients grew by more than 20,000 to 1.1 million. The number of accident and emergency presentations exceeded 1.5 million. Since 2006-07, the number of day cases has grown by 43,000 a year to nearly 450,000. I would have thought that those were all welcome developments. Over the past five years, the number of GP appointments has gone up by more than 3 per cent, the number of GP practice-nurse appointments has gone up by more than 10 per cent, the number of out-patient attendances has gone up by nearly 5 per cent and the number of in-patient and day-case discharges has gone up by nearly 7 per cent.

I do not have time, unfortunately.

I still have quite a lot to say. [Interruption.]

I am outlining the improvements that are referred to in the amendment. I thank Mr Carlaw for his point of order. Over the past six years, the measure of patient satisfaction has risen dramatically, from just under 81 per cent to more than 88 per cent. That indicates to me that patients are increasingly satisfied with the quality and range of provision that they are receiving from the NHS in Scotland. As we look to the future, we face major challenges. I have already mentioned the ageing population. I have no doubt that Mr Carlaw will point out that over the next 20 years he and I will come into the category of over-75-year-olds. It is not just the ageing population that presents a challenge; our population is at a record level, which means that demands on the health service are at a record level. We know about the budgetary situation and the constraints that it is operating under, even though we are passing on the Barnett consequentials. Inflation in the health service is twice as high as inflation generally. In addition, of course, there is the challenge of addressing the inequalities in access to healthcare, let alone the particular challenges that relate to overuse of tobacco and alcohol abuse. The reality is that, despite the huge increase in demands, despite the constraints on our budget that have been imposed on our budget by our friends in London, and despite all the challenges to do with an increasing and ageing population—

Despite those things we are providing a far better health service, in which we are investing a record amount. That is why I am proud to move my amendment. I move amendment S4M-06474.1, to leave out from “an ageing population” to end and insert: “Scotland’s health service faces many demographic and lifestyle-related challenges in the coming years; recognises that the population of over 75-year-olds in Scotland is set to double over the next 20 years and that Scotland pays too high a price for the consequences of cheap alcohol; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to at least maintaining the level of quality and provision in NHS Scotland in the face of these challenges; further recognises that adult health and social care integration is vital to meeting the future care needs of Scotland’s ageing population, and reiterates its support for the introduction of minimum alcohol unit pricing as one of the measures that will help improve the health of the nation.”

I rise to support John Swinney’s motion. It is four years since Alistair Darling, the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, promised us cuts that were “deeper and tougher” than those of Margaret Thatcher. At that time, he was promising a 40 per cent reduction in the Scottish Government’s capital budget and a near 10 per cent reduction in our resource budget. When we got that news, the Scottish Government had to take important, difficult, tough and strategic decisions. Contrary to what Duncan McNeil said, we faced up to the reality that it would be another 16 years before the real-terms value of our budget would be back to what it was before Alistair Darling became Chancellor of the Exchequer. We took decisions, led by John Swinney in the Cabinet. First, we had to make a choice about whether to maximise the number of jobs in Scotland and the number of people in work or allow pay rises to continue in line with inflation. Given that inflation at that time was between 4 and 5 per cent, we took the difficult decision that jobs were the priority because it is much more important to keep as many people in work as we possibly can. The price that we all had to pay for maximising the numbers in work was a pay freeze. That was a tough decision and choice; this Government faced up to that reality.

I will in a minute. Our second major decision was that we would ensure within that policy that, as far as possible, those who had the broadest shoulders would bear the bulk of the burden and we would help those who were low paid, in poverty and most vulnerable. Therefore, although we froze wages for everyone else, we gave a pay rise to everyone who earned less than £21,000 a year.

I will in a minute. We took other major decisions. We took the decision to pass on the Barnett consequentials to the national health service, at a time when no one else in this Parliament agreed with such a policy. We took the decision to make prescriptions universally free, because of the evidence to which Christine Grahame referred. We took the decision to maintain concessionary travel for our older and disabled people and extend it to disabled veterans. We took the decision to abolish the tuition fees that Labour had introduced. Most recent, we took the decision to give all-out opposition to the Tory-Liberal policy of a bedroom tax, which will do so much damage in Scotland and elsewhere.

I am happy to take an intervention from Duncan McNeil, if he can finish the conversation that he is having. Duncan, I am happy to take your intervention—okay, he is not making an intervention.

I will come to that. As a nation, we face three major strategic challenges, because we are living in austerity Britain. The first is the budgetary challenge. As I said, the budget cuts that have been imposed on this Parliament are deep and damaging. We live on a fixed budget. We do not currently have the power to borrow or to tax; we have to accept whatever budget is handed down to us. I have to laugh at the Tories’ demand for a 10-year forecast. The chancellor, in his budget two or three weeks ago, cut our budget for this year by another £50 million and cut our budget for next year by another £50 million. The Tories cannot forecast days ahead, never mind decades ahead.

Mr Swinney explained in inordinate detail why that is not possible. Let me say this about the budgetary challenge. If we had not had the Scottish Futures Trust we would have had to invent it. I remember the Labour Party, the Tories and the Liberals ridiculing the Scottish Futures Trust—another policy that was led by Mr Swinney, Mr McNeil. If we did not have the Scottish Futures Trust, we would not be investing the £2.5 billion that we would not otherwise have.

Now I will take an intervention from Mr Macintosh.

It means that we have to cope with the budget cuts that were imposed by Alistair Darling and by George Osborne. I said that we took a strategic decision to keep jobs, as a number 1 priority. We have stuck to that and we have had a policy of no compulsory redundancies. I have to say, in my capacity as cabinet secretary for health, that we will take no lessons from the Labour Party on cuts in budgets or jobs. That is the party that, down south, cut the NHS budget by £20 billion, whereas we are passing on the Barnett consequentials to the national health service. Unlike the three unionist parties, we are rising to the challenge—[Interruption.]

Malcolm Chisholm said that the underlying current of this debate was not universalism but independence. I say to Mr Chisholm, for whom I have the highest respect, that he and many others like him will have a choice to make next year. It will be a simple choice between two futures: a future in austerity Britain, being run by the Tories and their Liberal poodles, or a future in a prosperous Scotland. Given that everyone wants a forecast, I will finish with three of them.

Forecast 1 is that next year we will get a yes vote; forecast 2 is that we will be independent by 2016; and forecast 3 is that within five to 10 years we will be one of the richest countries in the world.

The Scottish Government is in continuous discussion with Healthcare Improvement Scotland as part of the standard performance management arrangements for NHS Scotland. Those arrangements are supported by local delivery planning and the publicly held annual review. In February 2013, to strengthen its inspections, Healthcare Improvement Scotland invited external experts to review the processes surrounding the inspection that was carried out on the care of older people at Ninewells hospital. The review team will seek input from all those involved in the Ninewells inspections and from other stakeholders. A report is expected from the team in May 2013.

Pots, kettles and calling them black come to mind in relation to Ms Marra’s behaviour regarding this situation. She has already had to retract at least one of the statements that she made on the BBC in relation to a meeting with the chief executive of NHS Tayside. If Ms Marra wants to get the detailed information that she is looking for regarding the inspectors, I am happy to ensure that she is provided with it. Healthcare Improvement Scotland continues to carry out inspections to a high standard. The review of the situation at Ninewells is being carried out by a team of three people external to HIS, all of whom are highly qualified: Audrey Cowie, David Cumming and Francis Dowe CBE, who is a former vice-principal of the University of Edinburgh and chaired a review of professionalism in nursing and midwifery. That is a strong team to carry out that review. We will listen to what the review has to say and we will learn the lessons. I am sure that the team will come up with much better ideas than Jenny Marra.

I place great emphasis on the need to ensure sustainable healthcare services in remote and rural areas, and I recently announced that NHS Highland will develop and test models of healthcare delivery in remote and rural areas.

I am happy to do so and I can confirm that the Angus community health partnership has been working closely with Letham residents on the issue. It is also in dialogue with the local Forfar practice, as Mr Dey said, with a view to extending the service provision that independent contractor GPs already deliver to Letham residents. It is anticipated that services will be developed as quickly as possible, subject to the satisfactory conclusion of on-going negotiations. I will certainly do all that I can to encourage all sides to reach a quick conclusion.

Generally speaking, I think that the issue is not so much the availability of resources as it is other factors to do with recruiting and retaining GPs in rural areas, particularly in more remote and island communities. That is why, for example, three practices on the Ardnamurchan peninsula have come together to form one practice, which will allow every GP to have to work only one weekend in eight instead of one weekend in two. A range of other factors influence the recruitment and retention of GPs in rural areas; we are addressing those and we are looking at different models in different parts of the country, particularly in the Highlands, to see what works best in particular situations. In Grampian, for example, one way in which GPs are retained is by extensive use of GPs with special interests. When I was at the Turriff hospital two weeks ago, one of the GPs there, who has a special interest in ultrasound technology, was examining people using ultrasound. I asked her whether one reason why she stayed there was the opportunity to develop such other interests and she said, “Absolutely.” There are different ways to tackle this problem, but tackle it we must.

It is thought that acquired brain injury is the most common cause of disability in working-age adults, and people with ABI can require treatment and care for a complex range of needs. For many people, the effects of ABI will often be lifelong. The emphasis on treatment will be through a multidisciplinary approach involving a wide range of services from different specialities, including accident and emergency, general surgery, orthopaedic surgery, neurosurgery, neuro-rehabilitation and psychiatric services. We understand that co-ordination of care for such complex needs is challenging and we have supported the development of the national managed clinical network for ABI. That national network works to promote consistency of treatment across Scotland and improve the quality of services for children and adults with ABI.

As I mentioned previously, the national managed clinical network for ABI works to promote consistency of treatment across Scotland and to improve the quality of services for children and adults with ABI. In 2009, the network published its standards for traumatic brain injuries in adults, which cover a number of areas and are available on the network’s website. I am happy to provide the member with the details on that. Although the standards were developed for TBI, many of the recommendations are equally applicable to ABI. The network is exploring the potential to evolve into a managed care network that will help to support and recognise the long-term social care needs of people with ABI. I understand that that work is in its early stages and will take time. However, it is envisaged that the network will include developing pathways between health and social care to deal with the very issues that Mark McDonald has rightly highlighted. That work will be helped by the recently published Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—SIGN—guideline 130 on brain injury rehabilitation in adults.

The group’s work is fairly detailed, so perhaps it would be best if I wrote to Dr Simpson and placed a copy of the letter in the Scottish Parliament information centre so that every member has access to it.

The Scottish Government’s position is that any organisation caring for dying people should be able to demonstrate best practice in care of the dying. The Liverpool care pathway is recognised as one pathway that national health service boards can use to support high-quality end-of-life care. The responsibility for use and monitoring of the Liverpool care pathway lies with the organisation using it. The use of the Liverpool care pathway should be part of a continuous quality improvement programme within an organisation’s governance structure and must be supported by a robust education and training programme.

I wholly agree with the sentiments that have been expressed by Michael McMahon. I am prepared to work with all the relevant stakeholders to ensure that the reputation of the Liverpool care pathway is enhanced, which it should be. From time to time, obviously there will be levels of dissatisfaction among patients, their carers and their family with particular issues. I draw the Parliament’s attention to the Patient Opinion website, which I launched yesterday, through which any patient, carer, family member or visitor will be able to record any concerns, which can immediately be brought to the attention of ministers. We are administering the website in relation to both the Liverpool care pathway and any matter that people are concerned about with regard to service provision in the national health service.

Both north and south of the border, this is very much work in progress. We recognise that there is a major education and training programme to be undertaken, and part of that is about communicating with the public, patients, carers and families. I know of some incidents. Indeed, there was a case recently, which was highlighted by the cross-party group on palliative care, in which a patient was having Liverpool care pathway treatment administered, and the family expressed a number of concerns primarily around the lack of proper communication with them, as they perceived it. I do not think that there is a silver bullet here, and education and training continue to be required at all levels. It is undoubtedly the job of all of us to reassure people that the Liverpool care pathway, properly administered, is a very acceptable pathway in the circumstances.

The Scottish Ambulance Service is responsible for providing the patients of Caithness and all other parts of Scotland with high-quality, safe, effective and compassionate care. It is responsible for the delivery of the 999 emergency ambulance service, the air ambulance service and the non-emergency patient transport service for those patients who have a medical or mobility need for the support of an ambulance crew to access their healthcare appointment. I expect the Scottish Ambulance Service to work in partnership with the communities that it supports to ensure that it meets their needs in a way that is underpinned by the NHS Scotland healthcare quality strategy.

I would be more than happy to provide that information and to have a meeting with Mr Gibson to discuss the various issues. I draw members’ attention to a very comparable situation in Inverness, which I saw for myself last week. A mental health consultation was held from Raigmore hospital, where the mental health consultant was, with a patient who was a resident of a care home in Ballachulish. That is a very good example of where telecare services can be extremely helpful. We have given high priority to the development of telecare services, particularly in the Highlands, Grampian and Islands, where it can make transport unnecessary without in any way diminishing the quality of care; indeed, it can improve it. One of the points made to me by that patient and their carers and family was that the fact that they did not need to make a five-hour trip between Ballachulish and Inverness was a major benefit to the patient and meant that the extreme stress of the journey was avoided. I am more than happy to have a discussion with Mr Gibson about such issues around Caithness.

The remote and rural implementation group that oversaw the implementation of the Scottish Government’s report “Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare” was disbanded in 2010. Its final report confirms that 63 recommendations were delivered. The north of Scotland planning group continues to provide support to delivering sustainable remote and rural healthcare in that part of Scotland.

I could not agree more. Indeed, having listened to the budget before I came in here, I am even more firm in my view that it would be far better for Scotland to have full control over all aspects of the governance of Scotland.

Ministers and Government officials regularly meet national health service boards, including NHS Lanarkshire, and a range of matters of importance to local people are discussed.

I am aware of the issue that my colleague has raised. He and Jamie Hepburn have raised it on a number of occasions. I am monitoring the situation closely to make sure that the capacity at Monklands is satisfactory, that it can cover Coatbridge and Cumbernauld and that the quality of the service is in no way diminished as a result of its relocation last year.

Culture, values and behaviours will be a fundamental cornerstone of the 2020 workforce vision, which we aim to launch at the NHS event in June. That will present a further opportunity to restate our commitment to providing a working environment in the NHS that is free from bullying and harassment.

I am aware that the national confidential alert line is keenly awaited. The contract to provide it has been awarded to Public Concern at Work, and I am pleased to say that we are making excellent progress in preparing for the launch of the freephone service on 2 April this year. I am confident that the service will support and enhance existing procedures by providing an additional level of support for staff who wish to raise concerns about practices in NHS Scotland.

In preparing the tender document for the alert line, I consulted Dr Kim Holt, a founding member of Patients First, to get her input and feedback on her experiences in London, particularly with Great Ormond Street hospital, to ensure that we were covering all the right angles for the tender specification. I received positive and helpful input from Dr Holt, and I will continue to talk to Patients First about the development of a policy to ensure robust implementation of our intention to eliminate bullying and harassment in the NHS in Scotland.

I recently approved the establishment of a national managed clinical network to promote the improvement of high-quality, safe and person-centred services for children and adults with congenital heart disease in Scotland. The Scottish congenital cardiac network will be launched on 1 April 2013.

I am actively pursuing all the issues mentioned by Malcolm Sturgeon. I am sorry—I mean Malcolm Chisholm. That is an easy way to answer a question. [Laughter.] My mistake was, of course, deliberate, Presiding Officer. We are doing so in consultation with our colleagues south of the border. As the member probably knows, the Department of Health set up a review of the 2006 commissioning standards for England and Wales. We will take cognisance of the review when developing our own national standards.

I hope that today’s debate will be slightly more consensual than yesterday’s debate was, but one never knows. I am very pleased to open this debate on integrating adult health and social care in Scotland. We will introduce a bill in Parliament on that important area of public service reform by the end of this parliamentary year. During the debate, I will restate our commitment to integration and outline our priorities for the bill. I thank partner organisations in health and local government, stakeholders across the professional organisations, the third and independent sectors, and patient, service-user, carer and staff representatives for their contributions. I also thank the Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee for its contribution in the very productive period that has led up to where we are. Since I became Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, it has been clear to me that the Scottish Government is by no means alone in recognising that, as society’s needs change, so, too, must the nature and form of public services. It is also abundantly clear to me that the successful delivery of integrated health and social care services depends on effective partnership working across both the statutory and non-statutory sectors. Getting that right is a priority for Scottish society as a whole, and it requires leadership, engagement and involvement across the health and social care landscape. I was pleased to receive 315 written responses to last year’s consultation. Those responses have added considerably to our collective stock of thinking on the matter. As part of last summer’s consultation process, the Scottish Government ran nine public and practitioner events, which approximately 900 people attended. At those events, my officials heard from health and social care professionals, statutory and non-statutory organisations, carers, users of health and social care services, and members of the public more widely, and all the contributions were immensely valuable. On top of that, my officials were involved in around 50 local events, including focus groups, local forums and seminars. In total, around 2,000 people were directly involved in those discussions. That shows two things: that we have gone to some lengths to ensure that the matter is thoroughly consulted on, and that the challenges that are being discussed really are important and matter very much to many people in Scotland. Following the consultation, we published an analytical report that reflects the consultation responses, and our response to the consultation responses has also been published. That approach is consistent with our priority to continue the invaluable on-going partnership work involving the national health service in Scotland, local government, the third and independent sectors and professional bodies, including allied health professionals. We are committed to ensuring that effective integration is informed by the knowledge and experience of those in the public sector and beyond who have a key interest in health and social care. We must continue to work together to ensure that public services evolve effectively, so that people receive the support that they need both quantitatively and qualitatively, and that we use all our resources to best effect to achieve the best possible outcomes. That is why the integration of adult health and social care is a key part of the Scottish Government’s commitment to public service reform in Scotland, and why what we achieve with that programme of reform matters so much. What do I mean when I refer to the changing shape of Scottish society? The 2011 census showed us that for the first time there are more people aged over 65 in Scotland than there are people under 15. It is great that more people are living longer, healthier lives, but for us, as for the rest of the developed world, an ageing population means that we must look carefully at how we plan and deliver services. Recent research shows that one fifth of all girls born in Scotland today will live until they are 100. As well as the ageing of the population, we have also had the increase, to record numbers, in the population of Scotland. That is a welcome development, but one that presents another challenge that we need to rise to. However, this is about more than just older people and longevity; it is about improving outcomes for people who have a range of complex support needs and for their carers and families. Too often people in those circumstances are admitted to hospital or to a care home, when a package of care and support in the community could deliver better outcomes for them and would be more their choice. When people are admitted to hospital or a care home, the costs are human and financial, and the consequences are not just personal but felt across the whole system and by other people as resources are tied up inappropriately in care that is not best suited to the individual. This is also about putting the leadership of clinicians and care professionals at the heart of service delivery for people with health and social care needs. Perhaps most ambitiously, it is also about establishing a public service landscape in which different public bodies are required to work together and with their partners in the third and independent sectors, removing unhelpful boundaries and using their combined resources to achieve maximum benefit for patients, service users, carers and families. Like other areas in Scotland, West Lothian has developed a universal reablement service, which responds to all hospital discharges, where needed. Staff come from different agencies and organisations but work in an integrated way to deliver what is a truly personalised service for the individual. Early indications are that that service has saved West Lothian more than 800 care hours per week and resulted in individuals being able to complete everyday tasks for themselves again. That is a very good example of health and social care partnership working, leadership, engagement and involvement in action. In many ways, it was no surprise to me that the response to the consultation was so thoughtful and thorough. We have an excellent record of partnership working over many years in Scotland. Nevertheless, we all recognise that our current health and social care system still incorporates barriers relating to structures, professional territories and silos, governance arrangements and financial management. Often those have no helpful bearing on the needs of the large and growing group of service users, many of whom have multiple health and social care needs. Many barriers also work against the general aspirations of efficiency and clinical and care quality. Our forthcoming bill will reform the system to enable delivery of care that is better joined up within health and between health and social care and which, as a consequence, will deliver better outcomes, as I have said. Indeed, the hospital at home programme in North Lanarkshire is a very good example of joined-up working between a health board and a local authority, enabling more people to be treated in their local community. The project, which involves a team of nurses, allied health professionals, healthcare support workers, social care staff, general practitioners and consultants caring for patients at home, is to be adapted for use and rolled out across Scotland. The programme has enabled 80 per cent of patients to stay in their home rather than be admitted to hospital. That is an example of what integration can achieve. The bill will start from the principle of person-centred care, focusing on the importance of prevention and anticipation. That is in line with our ambitions as a Government for community planning and for the reform of children’s services, and it recognises the findings of the Christie commission. It is also based on the wealth of evidence that tells us that a person-centred approach delivers the best outcomes. Therefore, the starting principle of the bill will be a requirement on health boards and local authorities to deliver, jointly, a set of nationally agreed outcomes that are focused on improving the individual’s experience of care. We will remove from the statute community health partnerships and establish health and social care partnerships to provide an environment of joint governance, joint accountability and integrated oversight of service delivery. Each health and social care partnership will be accountable to its council and health board for the delivery of nationally agreed outcomes and any other appropriate outcomes agreed locally, using an integrated budget covering adult social care, community healthcare and aspects of secondary healthcare. We will legislate to require health boards and local authorities to integrate those services, but we will leave to local agreement decisions on whether to include children’s services within the scope of the partnership. The proposals will allow for local agreement of the range of areas of service provision to be integrated. Two possible models of integration have been agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. One is similar to the Highland model, which is a single agency model, and the other is a corporate model, involving a partnership between the health board and the council, with a joint accountable officer in charge of the day-to-day running of the partnership. We believe that that is the most effective way to ensure that our objectives are met by the legislation. It is also extremely important that we totally involve other key stakeholders, such as the patients, the end users, the third sector and the independent sector, to ensure that, in every area, the design and architecture as well as the delivery of services are up to the standard that we demand. This is a revolution in the delivery of health and social care in Scotland. It is a positive, radical step to improve the quality and quantity of service provision throughout health and social care. We believe that it is a major step forward and we look forward to taking the legislation through to the statute book, in collaboration with others in the chamber. I spoke at the COSLA conference this morning, and my loud and clear message to every health board, council and stakeholder in Scotland was that there is no need to wait for the legislation to pass before we get moving. Already, many parts of Scotland have their foot on the accelerator. We must encourage everyone to move on this as quickly as possible, get the partnerships established and, most important of all, ensure that we are delivering the quality of provision that our people deserve. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the importance of assuring successful integration of health and social care services, on which the Scottish Government will soon introduce a bill for the Parliament’s consideration; agrees that a key aim of the legislation should be to improve outcomes for people using these services; notes that the foundation of reform should be based on nationally agreed outcomes and joint and equal accountability for the delivery of outcomes by the statutory partners, and notes the importance of integrated budgets and a strengthened role for clinicians and care professionals along with the third and independent sectors in the planning and delivery of person-centred services.

I thank the member for taking an intervention, as I am genuinely interested to get a clarification from her. Is she suggesting that councils alone should run these partnerships? Does she believe that councils should take over the work of health boards?

Nanette Milne makes a fair point about cases in which there is a desire for the partnership to cover more than one local authority area. I intend to make provision in the bill that, where there is a local desire and agreement for that to happen, it can be achieved. There are areas in which we have three local authority areas within one health board area. If the three local authorities and the health board agree that they should have one partnership instead of three, the bill will allow that to happen.

It is consistency.

As this is my own production, I will try to be as loquacious as possible. Integration is not new—there are examples of successful integration in Scotland. I have used the example of West Lothian many times. The West Lothian integration project has been running successfully for eight years. It started as the integration of adult health and social care; it then incorporated children’s services; and it is now quite rightly incorporating acute services. The West Lothian example clearly shows that integration can work and that many of the problems that have been identified are not necessarily endemic in every local authority area across the country. West Lothian is not the only area in Scotland to have successful integration. I was up in Turriff on Monday and I visited Turriff hospital. As Nanette Milne will be aware, Turriff hospital has a totally integrated operation, with a health centre, a hospital, and social care workers from the local authority who work side by side with the health workers in the health centre. Aileen McLeod mentioned the example in the Dumfries and Galloway area. We have good examples of successful integration across Scotland as well as down south. We have also seen that, where there is successful integration, we achieve the outcomes that we are trying to achieve through this bill. Having said that, I recognise many of the points that have been made, very fairly, by Iain Gray. That is precisely why we need legislation; it is precisely why, in the bill, I will take reserved powers to deal with either a recalcitrant health board or local authority and to ensure that integration happens. That will include powers, if necessary, in relation to budgets and other matters, because we are not prepared to sit back and allow integration not to happen in any part in Scotland. Iain Gray raised valid points, which are obviously based on his experience of trying to make integration work—an experience that many of us have had.

Without being specific about that, I am open to suggestions from other parties, particularly from somebody such as Iain Gray, who as a minister had direct experience of trying to make integration work. I am happy to meet individual members and talk through some of the issues. We have been in sustained negotiation with COSLA and other stakeholders, and we have a bill advisory committee. I have agreed that any proposals or amendments will go through the bill advisory committee to ensure that we take as many stakeholders with us as possible. The other parties in the Parliament are also stakeholders. My door is open to suggestions on how we might improve our proposals and the bill once it is published.

Absolutely. I intend to use that framework as and when it is necessary. The irony is that just the knowledge that legislation with those reserved powers is coming will in itself, I hope, force people in many areas to work together and reach agreement, rather than continually wrangle about issues that, at the end of the day, are not the most important aspects of the exercise. The issue of national standards was initially raised by Duncan McNeil and came up a couple of times. I can confirm that we will publish our consultation paper on the national standards prior to the publication and introduction of the bill. I absolutely accept that the national standards are a vital part—a linchpin—in the success that we are trying to achieve, as are the outcomes that we have included in our response to the responses.

We will synchronise the standards and outcomes and all the other decisions to ensure that there is a logical flow. I anticipate that it will be well after the summer recess before the bill gets properly into the committee stages. By that time, I hope to have reached decisions on the national standards and have agreement on them. We have already indicated the high-level outcomes that we expect and that we must ensure that we get from the integrated partnerships. That is absolutely right. I will turn to some other points that have been raised. I share the concerns about the arm’s-length external organisation in Aberdeen. It is fair to put that on the record, although I will not get into the internal politics in Aberdeen. I do not accept that it would be right to have a majority of local authority representation on the partnership committees. The reasons that were given for that were that it would make the process more democratic. This is not a party political point but, believe you me, some of the practices in North Lanarkshire Council in the area that I represent are anything but democratic.

I will in a minute, and I will do it this time—I will keep my promise to you, Jackie. I will not concede on the principle of equal representation between the health board and the local authority. Presiding Officer, I should have said, “I will keep my promise to Jackie Baillie,” which I now do.

My view is that health board representation will be up to each health board, and it will primarily be the non-executives who are the representatives on the new bodies. It would not be right to have the executives of the health board as members of the board of the partnership. First, I do not think that that is right in principle. Secondly, the health board needs to ensure—and most have done this—that the places that it has on the committee are taken not just by non-executive directors but by patient representatives. I want to see end users on the board, because no one is better placed to drive up standards than the people who use the services. That will be crucial. There is an issue in that respect, and we are still in discussion about it with COSLA and other stakeholders in the third sector and the independent sector. We have to be clear about two separate functions. There is a precedent for that. When I was convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in the first session of the Parliament and Jack McConnell, now Lord McConnell, was education minister, we had the crisis at the Scottish Qualifications Authority. A reason for the crisis was that the SQA’s board was made up of people who were primarily there not to run the organisation on the basis of what the organisation needed at the time but to represent their own interests. I suggested and Jack McConnell accepted that we needed to separate the two functions: the management and running of the organisation, which should be done by a fairly tight, reasonably small and manageable management board; and the separate issue of the involvement of stakeholders. In each area, there are tens if not hundreds of stakeholders who want an input into service design, architecture, delivery and so on—and they should have an input. What I am saying is that the management board must be of a manageable size, so that it manages the organisation, looks after the money and ensures that the outcomes are achieved. That is not necessarily the same as a wide-ranging stakeholder group, for which there is also a role. It will be important to get those two things right in each area. There will have to be a close relationship between the partnership boards and the community planning partnerships. The logical place for the board to report locally will be the community planning partnership, because all the other relevant services will be represented round that table. One member quite rightly made the point that we need better involvement of housing services. Council housing services and housing associations will be much more involved in community planning partnerships, which, when they have been reformed by my friend Mr Swinney, will be the logical platform through which the partnership boards should report to wider stakeholders and the wider community. Finally, on culture, I have heard it said many times that there are two cultures: the local authority culture and the health board culture. That is a gross underestimate. In each health board there are many cultures. There is the culture of GPs; there is the culture of almost every allied health professional organisation; and there is the culture of secondary care. As for local authorities, I can tell members that in North Lanarkshire Council, which is a good example, there are a lot of sub-cultures. The point is that we must develop one culture, one organisation, one integration, one delivery and one set of budgets for each area, so that there is one set of outcomes and standards and, I hope, one big success in each area, which delivers for the people of Scotland.

As you know, Presiding Officer, I used to go to Ayr academy and the school motto is “Respice prospice”—look backwards, look forward. All I can say about Jackie Baillie is that she is all respice and no prospice. I welcome the opportunity to yet again put on record my gratitude for the dedication and commitment of our hard-working NHS staff across Scotland. This Government, unlike the Labour Party, has the highest respect for the staff of the NHS—unlike the Labour Party, we do not seek to paint a picture of dishonesty and a lack of integrity. Let us get things in perspective. As the First Minister said last week, of course there are problems in the national health service, but the national health service this year will spend £12 billion; 6 million times this year, someone will see a doctor in the national health service in Scotland; and more than 1.5 million people will be referred to A and E. One half of our entire population have something wrong with them at any one time, and one third of the population have more than one thing wrong with them at any one time. Clearly, those are major challenges for any health service. One of the big policy differences between us and the Labour Party is that we made a commitment, which we have stuck to since 2007, that we would pass on every penny of the Barnett consequentials every year for the health service in Scotland. The Labour Party refused to make that commitment and if it had been in power over the past six years, the total amount of money spent on the national health service over those six years would have been £1.1 billion less than it has been under this Administration. Jackie Baillie and her mob have a real cheek to complain about waiting times in accident and emergency. If we look at the figures per health board, two boards that have had more problems than most are Ayrshire and Arran and Lanarkshire. What did Labour try to do in Ayrshire and Arran and Lanarkshire health boards? It wanted to close the A and E units at Monklands and Ayr hospitals. If Labour had succeeded in doing so, the A and E waiting times today would have been much worse than the problems that we have had over the winter. Let us consider the difference between the Labour Party’s performance and our performance. Prior to this Government coming to power, patients were waiting six months for an out-patient consultation, following a referral from a GP, a dentist or an optometrist; there was six months’ wait for in-patient and day-case treatment; there was no target for diagnostic tests; there was no delivery of the old 62-day cancer target—at the beginning of 2007, only 84.6 per cent of cancer patients started their treatment within 62 days; and there were tens of thousands of patients languishing on a hidden waiting list, waiting for treatment with their guarantee removed. The Labour Party does not have the moral right to criticise anyone, because its performance was dreadful. Under this Government, waiting times are now significantly better and, on the basis of an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development comparison, are among the best in Europe. On cancer, we delivered the old 62-day target by December 2008. We have also extended the target to include thousands more patients a year, referred through the screening programme. We have added an additional target: 95 per cent of patients who are diagnosed with cancer should start their treatment within 31 days, and we continue to deliver on both those targets. We extended the out-patient waiting time standard to include all source referrals, such as consultant-to-consultant referrals, which Labour never did. That means that tens of thousands more patients are covered by our waiting time standard than were covered under the previous Administration. On diagnostic tests, most patients are now receiving one of the eight key diagnostic tests within four weeks. We also continue to deliver the 18-week referral to treatment time standard. The latest figures show that 90.9 per cent of patients receive treatment within 18 weeks of initial referral. We have also enshrined in law a 12-week treatment time guarantee for in-patient and day-case treatment, and 99.9 per cent of that target was achieved in the first quarter—a percentage that no one ever gets anywhere near for anything.

No, Jackie Baillie would not give way to me, so I will not give way to her. That all shows that this Government is committed to patients being treated more quickly, and that more patients are being covered by our waiting time standards. Jackie Baillie tries to say that people cannot have any trust on the issue of recording. In 2010, the UK Statistics Authority published an assessment of compliance with the code of practice for official statistics on waiting times. The report found that the changes that were introduced through our new ways programme improved the quality of the statistics. It stated that the statistics that were covered by our report were “readily accessible ... produced according to good methods, and ... managed impartially and objectively in the public interest.” That is a claim that Labour could never make about any statistic on health or anything else. Jackie Baillie’s allegations about widespread manipulation of waiting times are a real slur on hundreds of NHS staff throughout Scotland. Her view is totally unfounded. Indeed, at last week’s Public Audit Committee meeting, Caroline Gardner, the Auditor General, stated—read my lips: “we have not found any evidence of manipulation at all”. She went on to say, as I have said, that the “IT systems need to improve”.—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1238 and 1240.] Under this Administration, we have made significant improvements. We have replaced social unavailability and placed in legislation patient-advised unavailability. The directions for the legal treatment time guarantee place a clear duty on boards to record not only the period of unavailability but the reasons for it. The boards also have a duty to write to patients to confirm any periods in which unavailability applies. Finally, let me make this point. For A and E, Labour ministers did not actually measure what happened against their target because they were too feart. They had only one survey in April 2006, according to which 87.6 per cent of patients waited less than four hours. That compares to December last year—at the maximum period of challenge—when we achieved an equivalent figure of more than 90 per cent. Next year, we will vote on two futures, but let us compare the two records: their very poor record of not measuring, not performing and not delivering, and our record of measuring, targeting, performing and delivering for the people of Scotland. I move amendment S4M-05813.2, to leave out from first “believes” to end and insert: “welcomes the significant progress made on improving waiting times in recent years; recognises that the Labour administration’s hidden waiting lists meant that over a third of all patients in Scotland were on a hidden waiting list and had no treatment time guarantee; notes that this system has been scrapped and replaced with a system designed to be patient-led to ensure fairness; further notes that both the internal audits of NHS boards and the recent Audit Scotland investigation found no evidence of deliberate manipulation of waiting lists; further recognises that under the current administration the number of A&amp;E consultants will have more than doubled by the end of 2013; further welcomes the £50 million unscheduled care action plan that has been developed by the Scottish Government, NHS Scotland and medical colleges, and supports an NHS that has care of patients at its centre and that values the work of its hard-working staff.”

I put it on the record that, where we get evidence that a target or standard is distorting clinical decisions, I would be happy to review that target or standard. The intention is to deliver, and we do not want artificial distortion of clinical decisions that is driven by targets or anything else. If I get evidence, I am prepared to look at it.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Just so that the Parliament is not misled, let me say that we did not abandon the target. There is still and always has been a standard of 98 per cent. We have added a new target of 95 per cent. The member should get his facts right.

Just to clarify that point, the 98 per cent standard is still there; the 95 per cent is a new target that will be achieved from April—from next month. The distinction between the standard and the target is what the member does not understand, with all due respect. [Interruption.]

Will Dr Simpson take an intervention?

Healthcare Improvement Scotland reports its inspection findings independently. It would be inappropriate for the Scottish Government to interfere with its processes. We asked for the programme of inspections to be carried out in order to drive up standards of care for older people in acute hospitals. Of the 23 acute hospitals in the inspection programme, 12 hospitals across seven national health service boards have been inspected and reported on to date. The last published report was on the inspection at Ninewells hospital in NHS Tayside. The inspection programme continues.

As the First Minister advised Parliament on 31 January, Healthcare Improvement Scotland had previously produced a combined report for Wishaw general hospital. That report was published on 19 July 2012. It included the announced inspection that was carried out at Wishaw general hospital on 28 to 30 May, and the unannounced follow-up inspection on 19 June.

It is part of the usual procedure for chief executives of NHS boards, following an inspection, to receive a copy of the draft report and have the opportunity to comment on matters of factual accuracy. Healthcare Improvement Scotland looks into the comments and either accepts the inaccuracy and amends the text, or concludes that the original text is an accurate reflection of its findings on the day—or days—of the inspection and retains the original content.

First, my powers are of a general nature. I make it absolutely clear to the member that I cannot direct how an individual inquiry is carried out. It is correct that Ms Cunningham wrote to me in her capacity as a local MSP on behalf of a constituent. That was after the Scottish Government was informed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland that it was working through quality assurance issues raised following the initial inspection. I sought assurances at that time from Healthcare Improvement Scotland that it was following the appropriate due process in its then current inspections and reporting. I got such an assurance.

I have made it absolutely clear to HIS that there must never be a situation in which there is even a perceived conflict of interest, let alone a real conflict of interest. Last November, I instructed my officials to abide by a new rule about future appointments to the boards of Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland and Healthcare Improvement Scotland. In future, a serving member of staff or a serving director of a board that could be the subject of investigation would not be appointed to avoid any perceived conflict of interest between their role on the board of Healthcare Improvement Scotland and their role working as a director or a member of staff of a board under investigation.

It is primarily the responsibility of HIS to ensure that its recommendations are fully implemented. I am advised by HIS that, in the case of the Ninewells inspection, more than 70 per cent of the recommendations have already been fully implemented or are in the process of being implemented. As the relevant Government minister, I take a general overview of the performance of HIS. By definition, I want to ensure—and do ensure—that the work that it recommends be implemented by individual boards is carried out. I do that through a number of means, including the annual review of HIS, as well as the annual review that we undertake of every one of the 22 health boards in Scotland.

Richard Simpson raises a very fair point, which is one that I have made to the chair and the board of HIS. In the case of Ninewells, the original report was not published because, once it had reviewed the comments from the clinicians at Tayside and the error report from Tayside NHS Board, the view of HIS’s senior management team at the time was that its procedures had been shown not to be sufficiently robust and, therefore, it did not have full confidence in the draft report. However, it would appear—according to the Sunday Herald story—that the draft report is now in the public domain. My view, as I have made clear to HIS, is that if that report is in the public domain, for the sake of balance it would be only fair for the letter from the clinicians at Tayside NHS Board and the error report to be in the public domain as well, so that people can get a balanced view of why that report was not published when, normally, it would have been.

With all due respect to Malcolm Chisholm, he has got his facts slightly wrong. First, other than Roseanna Cunningham, only one person contacted me to express concern about what was happening with the Ninewells inspection. On receiving that call, I took immediate action with my officials and asked a series of questions about the procedure, the processes and the robustness of the report. I made it absolutely clear that, in my view, people on all sides should be frank, open and honest. There was clearly a dispute between the inspectors’ view of matters and Tayside NHS Board’s view of matters. Normally, that would have been resolved by the senior management of HIS accepting or rejecting the errors and publishing the report. It did not do so in this case, and I have made it abundantly clear to the chair of HIS that I am not impressed by the way in which the matter has been handled, and that I expect it to ensure that any issues that arise from the way in which the Ninewells report has been handled are rectified timeously.

I welcome the opportunity to make a statement to Parliament on the report prepared by the Auditor General for Scotland, “Management of patients on NHS waiting lists”. First, I welcome the findings and accept the recommendations of the Audit Scotland report, and in particular the fact that after extensive investigation no examples were found of any deliberate manipulation of waiting list records. The Audit Scotland report is entirely consistent with and accords with the findings of the 15 internal audits reported to Parliament by me on 20 December, which also found no examples of deliberate manipulation. I remind Parliament that this is the largest investigation into the management practices of waiting times ever carried out in NHS Scotland. Between both sets of audits, more than 500,000 transactions relating to periods of unavailability were scrutinised, and 400 staff were interviewed as part of that process. Consistent with the internal audit review last year, Audit Scotland commissioned consultants to extract extensive data from national health service board systems and to provide a breakdown of that data, which was then analysed in detail to identify any unusual patterns and practices. That information was used to select samples, which Audit Scotland used to carry out more targeted investigation of individual patient records. I refer to some of the detailed findings of the report. Audit Scotland comments that “Systems for managing waiting list information have inadequate controls” and that a number of different systems are in operation in Scotland. We accept that systems needed to be modernised and that information contained within those systems has to be timely and accurate and must serve patient needs. Audit Scotland also makes several references to the rise in social unavailability since 2008 and the fall in 2011-12. There is a very simple explanation for that. The Government introduced the new ways system on 1 January 2008, scrapping the previously discredited hidden waiting lists system in which patients could be left without a guarantee for many years. When we took office, 30,000 patients languished forgotten on those hidden waiting lists, with no hope of quick treatment. Audit Scotland recognised that in its 2010 audit, in which it welcomed the introduction of the new system as being more open, transparent and fairer to patients and said that the NHS had “done well” to implement the changes. Since 2008, boards have been gradually switching over to the new system, hence the rise in recorded periods of social unavailability. I would hope that members would recognise that the system was designed to be helpful for patients. It gave patients some choice and control over when they should come to hospital and allowed them to come at a time and on a date convenient for them. One of the by-products of the significant reduction in waiting times is that some patients might need to delay routine attendances at hospital to accommodate their own personal preferences and social circumstances. Audit Scotland also recognised that social unavailability started to reduce in most boards in late 2011. That was partly a consequence of NHS Lothian switching how it recorded its patients. The reduction reflects the previous cabinet secretary’s instruction to NHS Lothian to immediately remove patients from the unavailability list and put them back on the treatment list. Boards quality assuring their lists as part of the data migration to new systems as well as additional capacity being increased by boards locally, such as in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, were other reasons for the reduction in social unavailability levels. We should also recognise that, in 2011-12, boards were preparing for the introduction of the new treatment time guarantee. The report identifies that there was “not enough scrutiny” of the reasons for the increasing numbers of patients with periods of unavailability by the Scottish Government and boards. As part of the legislation relating to the 12-week in-patient and day-case legal treatment time guarantee, there is a requirement that periods of unavailability must be recorded and monitored. The legislation covers in-patients and day cases, and we have made it clear that that approach also applies to out-patients. Over the past six years, waiting times have fallen dramatically and, according to our patient surveys, we have the highest level of satisfaction in the United Kingdom and the highest levels ever recorded in Scotland, with 88 per cent of patients being satisfied or very satisfied with their waiting time position. We need to ensure that patients’ individual needs are met and that information is clear, consistent and readily understandable. That continues to be a high priority for the national health service in Scotland, and that is why I am pleased to announce that I am introducing a patient advice line to ensure that, if patients need help and support in relation to their waiting time rights, they will get it. There is one additional point of clarification that I would like to make to members on the findings of the Audit Scotland report. NHS Tayside has now completed its detailed internal investigation into allegations of manipulation of waiting lists. I am pleased to advise members about the outcome of that investigation. NHS Tayside said: “there was no evidence presented throughout the investigation to substantiate this allegation, no evidence found that managers sought to deliberately manipulate waiting times, nor any evidence that they sought to bully or coerce members of staff to inappropriately code waiting times data”. Audit Scotland acknowledged the outcome of that investigation in its report. In my previous statement to Parliament on waiting lists, I advised that we would swiftly follow up all the internal audit recommendations. That will also apply to the nine recommendations from the Auditor General. I am pleased to say that, as of today, more than 91 per cent of the recommendations from the internal audits and many of the recommendations from Audit Scotland have already been implemented. A small number of actions have an implementation period beyond March. The extended timescale reflects the complexity of some of the recommendations—for example, on upgrading and introducing new information technology systems, which in some cases requires recontracting. We are continuing to hold chief executives and chairs of NHS Scotland to account for that timetable. I say again that boards will undertake a follow-up audit on the management of waiting times within the next 16 months to ensure that the planned improvements that have been requested have been made, and that they are working effectively. I hope that that will finally put to rest some Opposition members’ accusations that NHS staff are involved in widespread dishonest and deliberate manipulation of patients’ records. I stand by the integrity and basic honesty of our 155,000 staff, and I expect members to support that position.

Since this situation became public, Jackie Baillie has been quoted many times accusing people in the NHS all over Scotland of fiddling figures à la Lothian. Even members of her own party privately say to me that they are embarrassed by her continual attacks on the integrity and honesty of NHS staff in Scotland. Under the Administration of which Jackie Baillie was a part, a total of 104,000 people were on waiting lists in Scotland, including the 35,000 on the hidden waiting list. The number of people on the waiting list in Scotland is now down to 65,000, including those designated as socially and medically unavailable. That represents a 40 per cent reduction in the waiting list since Nicola Sturgeon became health secretary. As for Jackie Baillie’s accusation that we have hidden waiting lists, I will make two points. First, how can they be hidden when the information is public knowledge and is published and updated regularly on the Information Services Division Scotland website, which is open to everyone? If everyone else is so unsmart, why was Jackie Baillie herself not smart enough to find out that there was a problem when she looked at the website? Secondly, the 35,000 people on the previous Administration’s hidden waiting list lost their guarantee. No one on our list has lost their treatment guarantee. All day Jackie Baillie has been quoting the figure of 23 per cent as part of some kind of attack on the numbers in relation to unavailability. I point out that a third of those people told us that they were medically unavailable. As a result, it is dishonest to make hay with that figure—that is extremely worrying in an Opposition party. Finally—again, this information is in the public domain, so Jackie Baillie can go and check it out—if we look at the second quarter of 2011, which ended in June and is therefore relevant to this discussion, and include the people with unavailability, we can see that 94.3 per cent of patients under this Government and under Nicola Sturgeon met the 18-week guarantee. If we exclude those with unavailability, the figure was 97.3 per cent. At no time in the eight years from 1999 to 2007 did the Labour-Liberal Administration get anywhere near that kind of performance.

I thank Jackson Carlaw for the tone of his question, which was much more reasonable and realistic than the tone that we heard from the Labour Party. Jackson Carlaw’s suggestion of doing that audit quicker, within 12 months, is a very good one, and I am happy to accept it. I hope that that partly answers the part of his question about public confidence in the system. More than 70 per cent of the population in Scotland are living in health board areas covered by TrakCare or an enhanced version of TrakCare, which is a very robust system and has been recognised as such by Audit Scotland. By the end of this year, more than 90 per cent of the population will be covered by that system. I am confident that, once all the systems are in place, we can have absolutely total confidence about the integrity and robustness of data collection in every health board in Scotland.

Bob Doris is absolutely right in what he says, but I point out that, as a result of the reforms that were introduced last year by my predecessor, Nicola Sturgeon, as of 1 October last year we no longer have a category called social unavailability—it is simply called patient unavailability. If a patient advises the NHS board that, for whatever reason, they are unable to attend on a certain date, that is fully recorded and agreed with the patient. The options that are open to the patient are then explained to them and a way forward is agreed. To ensure that there is no dubiety about that, either now or in future, the TrakCare system records all that information, including the reasons. Furthermore, the board is then required to send out a letter to the patient to confirm the conversation and the way forward for the patient’s care.

I will quote from Audit Scotland in relation to our introduction of the new system—Richard Simpson will accept this as gospel, as his whole argument is based on what Audit Scotland says. In “Managing NHS waiting lists: A review of new arrangements”, which was published in 2010, Audit Scotland said: “The NHS has done well to implement the new arrangements”, and people no longer “remain on the waiting list indefinitely.” In 2011, another report relating to the new system was published, “Measuring NHS waiting lists: Twelve-month summary impact report”. Let me quote exactly what Audit Scotland—not me or my predecessor—said: “This audit provided assurance that the new arrangements are generally working well. The Scottish Government has developed further guidance about the areas where we raised concerns such as the treatment of patients who do not or cannot attend their appointments. ISD Scotland is continuing to work with NHS boards to improve the quality of New Ways data. There should not be any need to conduct a follow up study in the foreseeable future.” Audit Scotland had full faith in the new system. Clearly, as a result, the allegations that have been made by the Labour Party are nonsensical. Having reviewed half a million files and more than a quarter of million transactions, and having interviewed 400 staff, although Audit Scotland did not bring itself to say so, it found no evidence of Lothian-style fiddling. It is totally unacceptable for the Labour Party to infer that there is that evidence.

Substantial progress has been made. As I said, 70 per cent of the population is now covered by TrakCare or an enhanced version of it, and by the end of the year more than 90 per cent of the population will be covered by that system. In relation to Glasgow, Aileen McLeod is absolutely right. We inherited 11 different systems. There are now three systems, and that number is going down to one system—TrakCare. However, even though the old systems that we inherited from the previous Administration were not robust enough for interrogation by Audit Scotland to get the answers to its questions, when it did a manual check it found that there was no manipulation and no concern about the robustness of the information. We should bear it in mind that the manual check proved that there had been no Lothian-style fiddling in Glasgow.

Not only am I not going to apologise, but I am going to say that I am proud of the fact that we have an 88 per cent satisfaction rate on waiting times from patients in NHS Scotland. Had there been any major problem with waiting times and waiting lists, Nicola Sturgeon’s surgery, my surgery and everybody else’s surgery would have been absolutely full of people complaining about the time that they had to wait. Quite frankly, if the Labour Party had anything like half the 88 per cent satisfaction rating that the NHS has had, it would have made a decent Opposition.

A comprehensive programme has been implemented by the newly appointed chief executive, Tim Davison, and we already see a substantial improvement in waiting times and the number of people waiting for various procedures in NHS Lothian. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the tremendous work that Tim Davison has undertaken since his appointment as chief executive of NHS Lothian. I think that it will soon be back to its rightful position, in these terms, as one of the best performing health boards in Scotland.

I hope that Jim Hume is never called to do jury duty because, if he looked at the evidence, he would see that nobody outside of Lothian is guilty of manipulation or any other kind of fiddling of waiting lists in NHS Scotland. [Interruption.]

Instead of trying to manufacture suspicions and innuendo against NHS staff, Mr Hume should accept that the situation is a historical one—the period that is covered by the Auditor General’s report ended in December 2011. We have accepted that there was a lack of sufficient robustness in the IT systems and are putting that right. When the problems at NHS Lothian were uncovered, my predecessor dealt with them effectively. The result is that we now have extremely robust systems. It is fair to say that we probably now have, in most of our health board areas, some of the most robust IT systems in the whole of the UK.

That is part of our interpretation of how to implement the original internal audit recommendations and Audit Scotland’s recommendations. I have also requested a monthly report from each of the 15 boards that are involved in the exercise so that I can check the progress of the implementation of the recommendations. Further, as I said to Jackson Carlaw, I will commission a comprehensive evaluation after about 12 months in order to ensure that the new systems are working properly throughout the national health service in Scotland.

Every health board in Scotland is audited every year. Half of them are actually audited by Audit Scotland. Not one audit brought to our attention any of those problems. Auditors are employed to audit the systems as well as the books. [Interruption.]

They are pretty hysterical this afternoon, Presiding Officer. It is because they cannot get a story out of this.

The reality is that all the normal auditing procedures were carried out and the moment that the issues came to light, my predecessor acted decisively and swiftly.

I have already announced that, on 1 April, I will introduce a whistleblowing system throughout the NHS in Scotland. I hope to announce the details of that shortly.

We have achieved and exceeded the targets. Nevertheless, the underlying point that my friend Margo MacDonald made was that we should never forget that this is about patients. That is why we set the targets. Under the previous Administration the waiting time was six months. We reduced that to 12 weeks. I think that patients will benefit enormously from that huge reduction.

This is a difficult and very sensitive subject. I think that we all recognise that making decisions about which medicines to provide for national health service patients in Scotland—or, indeed, anywhere else—is highly complex and sensitive. That is particularly the case when decisions are made about medicines to treat chronic or life-limiting conditions. Therefore, it is vital that such decisions are taken by people who have the necessary knowledge, skills and experience to do so—in other words, by clinicians, not politicians.

I will deal with some of those points later in my speech. Thousands of medicines in various doses and formulations are available to clinicians in the UK. In Scotland, around 15,000 medicines can be prescribed by our doctors for various conditions. The Scottish Medicines Consortium appraises around 60 new medicines each year and publishes advice for NHS boards on their clinical effectiveness and their cost effectiveness. A significant number of those medicines are described as “me too” medicines, which means that they are one of many that are available to treat a particular condition. The SMC was given the important task of providing national advice for NHS boards in Scotland on which medicines offer the clinical outcomes that clinicians require and represent value for money. In providing such advice, the SMC recognises that when a new medicine is one of many that are available to treat a particular condition, local clinicians are best placed to decide whether that newly launched medicine should be added to the formulary list of medicines that are available for routine prescription for the patient population, or whether there is a preference for prescribing those medicines that they have experience of using, and for which the safety profile is known and trusted. When an NHS board chooses not to add a new SMC-accepted medicine to its formulary, clinicians may still seek NHS board agreement to prescribe it for individual patients through an extremely straightforward non-formulary request. When the SMC does not recommend a new medicine, NHS boards are not expected to routinely prescribe it, but NHS clinicians can pursue access to such medicines on a case-by-case basis for individual patients when they believe that they can provide a robust clinical case to support it. Those are local clinical decisions, which are based on the clinical circumstances of each patient. I have listened to concerns that some clinicians and patient groups have raised about differences between the availability of medicines—cancer medicines in particular since the Department of Health launched the cancer drugs fund in England—in Scotland and their availability in England. Although I can fully understand those concerns, it is important to note that comparisons between the medicines that are available in England and those that are available in Scotland are not always valid. Indeed, there are some medicines that have been approved for use in Scotland that have not been approved in England. Lists of medicines do not tell the whole story about available treatment for cancer or improvements in cancer care. Some improvements are the result of earlier diagnosis or developments in technologies other than medicines. The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, which is the equivalent down south of the SMC, looks at a limited list of new medicines, but the SMC looks at all new medicines. That means that there are SMC-approved medicines available in Scotland that are not available in England. For example, imatinib, which is used for the treatment of certain gastrointestinal tumours, has been accepted for restricted use by the SMC in Scotland but has not been recommended by NICE. Another example is mercaptopurine, which is used for the treatment of certain leukaemias. Although it has been accepted by the SMC, there is no NICE advice for it. That can lead to significant variation in the use of the medicine in the NHS in England, never mind between Scotland and England. The appraisal of new medicines is dynamic, with new and updated advice published every month north and south of the border. Scotland’s decision not to introduce a cancer drugs fund reflects our policy position that ring fencing funding for a single disease area effectively diverts resources away from other conditions, including those that are severe or life limiting. For the record, I point out that the fact that it was proposed by a Tory Government had nothing to do with our policy decision in Scotland. In providing advice to the Public Petitions Committee in the Scottish Parliament just over a year ago—and well after the introduction of the cancer drugs fund in England—key cancer charities including Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Macmillan Cancer Support Scotland and Myeloma UK recognised that a cancer drugs fund was not a necessary policy measure in Scotland. The view is also shared by the Welsh Government. That said, I remain committed to considering any way in which we can genuinely improve access to clinically and cost effective medicines that might improve outcomes for patients in Scotland. That is why I have asked Professors Routledge and Scott to oversee a review of how new medicines are introduced in the NHS in Scotland from national appraisal by the SMC through to local NHS board decision making, including IPTRs. I recognise the concerns that have been expressed about how the IPTR process is working and the review—and, no doubt, the review by the Health and Sport Committee—will want to address them. Finally, the substantial amount of money that is needed to create a separate cancer drugs fund will have to come from elsewhere in the health budget, and those making this proposal must tell us where that money will come from and how much they want to put into the fund so that we know what the policy choices are. It is a difficult decision that politicians are going to have to face up to, but I hope that across the chamber we can at least recognise that, although we might express different points of view on this subject, we should do so in a tone that is appropriate for the patients who are looking on. I move amendment S4M-05654.2, to leave out from “potentially” to end and insert: “for all aspects of access to new medicines are subject to an ongoing review; welcomes the introduction of the £21 million Rare Conditions Medicines Fund as an interim measure in response to advice by Professor Charles Swainson, who is undertaking the review of individual patient treatment request processes; accepts that routine approval of individual drugs is rightly a matter for the SMC and that, should the review highlight areas where these processes can be improved, these should be enacted quickly, and believes that the actual benefit to the patient and their quality of life must be the key consideration in determining the use of any new treatment or medicine and that the voices of patients and clinical experts must be heard in the assessment process.”

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Let me use this opportunity to clear up a number of points that have been raised during the debate. First, on the point about consistency and the need to ensure that we do not have a postcode lottery of differing access to drugs in different areas, I have made it absolutely clear from the day and hour when I set up the Routledge inquiry that a key aim is to make recommendations to ensure that there is absolute consistency in the approach across Scotland so that there is no postcode lottery for access to drugs. Secondly, I will make a factual point about the rare conditions fund that we set up—the £22 million. I think that it was Jackson Carlaw who said that people with cancer do not have access to the fund. That is not the case; clearly, some cancers are rare conditions, so in those circumstances people would, in principle, have access to the fund’s resources. Thirdly, Jackie Baillie quoted the Daily Record on the costs of the fund for cystic fibrosis. Just for the record, I make it clear that we have identified 51 children in Scotland with the Celtic gene who have cystic fibrosis, who would benefit from the drug Kalydeco. The total cost of that is not £14.5 million, but £9 million. I also point out that the £22 million fund is for 13 months only—not for two or three years. Therefore, if every single penny of that £9 million was spent, there would still be a substantial amount of money left to deal with other situations. I hope that it is useful for Parliament to be made aware of those facts. Fourthly, to deal with Richard Simpson’s final point I make it clear that the report by Professor Routledge should be with me by the end of this calendar month—by the end of February. I do not intend to make final decisions on his recommendations until two things have happened. First, I want to see the Health and Sport Committee’s recommendations and so take account of what it has to say on the subject and, secondly, I want to consult on recommendations that are made in the report. I will consult the other parties in Parliament as well as the stakeholder groups. It is extremely important that we get the decision on the recommendations right. If we rush into a decision and we do not make the right one, we will be back here in a year debating the subject all over again. If the report recommends urgent measures, clearly I would in those circumstances implement them, but I would still do a quick consultation of the appropriate stakeholders and the other parties in Parliament. It is important that Parliament speaks with one voice. I will stress two other points to do with why we have a difficulty with there being a specific fund for cancer. First, why would we have a fund only to deal with cancer but not with other terminal conditions such as motor neurone disease, MS or muscular dystrophy? We cannot play God and decide that someone who has terminal cancer should be favoured over someone who has terminal muscular dystrophy, MS or motor neurone disease. That is one genuine reason why I am concerned not to repeat the example from down south. Secondly, medicines are not, in the modern world, always the only or the most effective way to deal with cancer; cancer treatment consists of much more than medicines. For example, over the past three years, the Scottish cancer task force has made available more than £3 million to develop the introduction of new technologies and to drive forward improvement to meet the ambitions of the quality strategy. NHS Scotland is in a strong position and is able to provide patients with new treatments, including intensity modulated radiation therapy. Access to such therapies is as important as access to medicines. This is not just about drugs; it is about other treatments, as well. On the cancer drugs fund down south, the “Cancer Drugs Fund Bulletin—August 2012”, which is the most recent one, shows that in use of the fund there are inconsistent approaches to funding for many medicines in England, and that many patients receive refusals. That situation is similar to that which we are discussing in relation to the IPTRs. A study, based on a survey across the United Kingdom, by the centre for health economics and medicines evaluation at Bangor University that was published last year, suggests that the principle of the cancer drugs fund is not supported by the public. The report also found that more than 65 per cent of people did not support paying more for cancer medicines than for other medicines for equally serious health problems. I share that sentiment; that is genuinely—it is nothing to do with party politics—why we have resisted having a cancer drugs fund in Scotland.

In response to changing demands for paediatric services, the Scottish Government and NHS Scotland have invested significantly in the NHS workforce, resulting in increased numbers of consultants, trainees and advanced nurse practitioners in paediatric services. The Scottish Government submitted evidence to the Migration Advisory Committee that all grades of paediatric doctors should remain on the shortage occupation list, to ensure that all avenues remain open when recruiting. We are working with NHS Education for Scotland to develop a sustainable training programme that will increase the number of advanced nurse practitioners in paediatric services in the NHS in Scotland.

There is an international shortage of paediatric consultants. Despite that, we have increased the number of paediatric consultants operating in Scotland by 34 per cent since we came to power in 2007. As well as increasing the number of consultant paediatricians, we have expanded other relevant occupations. The whole-time-equivalent number of advanced nurse practitioners has expanded from 27.4 in 2009 to 44.7 in September 2012. I do not accept that we have been anything other than active, as I said in my reply to the member’s initial question.

Mr Hume has a cheek, given that he represents a party that in government is cutting the budget in Scotland by 8 per cent for revenue and 26 per cent for capital. Far from waiting for headlines, as he clearly did before he was motivated to ask the question, we have been involved in a host of action items to deal with the problem, not since last week but over the past few years, because of the mess that we inherited from the previous, Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration.

First, I did not say that there is no problem; I said that there is a shortage of paediatric consultants in Scotland. There is a shortage of paediatric consultants in England. There is a shortage of paediatric consultants in Wales. There is a shortage of paediatric consultants internationally. There is an international problem, which is made worse by the fact that the Labour Government followed a right-wing agenda on immigration and cut off opportunities to recruit people from outside the European Union. I therefore do not think Dr Simpson is in a very good position to criticise. As has been evident from the action that I have taken to keep St John’s paediatric services going 24/7, I am absolutely committed to maintaining the quality and quantity of paediatric services throughout Scotland.

At the moment, there are 223.8 whole-time-equivalent paediatric consultants in Scotland, compared with 167.2 in September 2006. That unprecedented 34 per cent increase in the number of paediatric consultants in Scotland is something that we are very proud of.

National health service boards are expected to take full account of Scottish Government guidance when dealing with individual patient treatment requests for medicines that have not been accepted for routine use in the NHS in Scotland. The guidance provides NHS boards with a framework to support consideration of IPTRs, to achieve a consistent approach. It makes clear that, as a matter of good practice, NHS boards should ensure that IPTR decisions are communicated to the patient or their representative by the clinician who is responsible for the patient’s care. The guidance clarifies that the decision should be accompanied by a letter from the chair of the IPTR panel, to provide a summary of the rationale for the decision and to set out the circumstances under which an appeal can be considered. If a patient has concerns about fairness or transparency in relation to their IPTR, their concerns should be discussed with the requesting clinician. The Scottish Government guidance includes a section that describes the circumstances under which an IPTR appeal can be considered. The recently announced new medicines review includes a strand of work to examine the current IPTR arrangements and advise on whether changes are needed to them.

If the member sends me details of where the guidance has not been adhered to, I will have the matter investigated and a timeous response sent to him.

The prescribing workstream of NHS Scotland’s efficiency and productivity programme is addressing medicines waste in a number of key areas. Scottish Government guidance, “Appropriate Prescribing for Patients and Polypharmacy Guidance for Review of Quality, Safe and Effective Use of Long-Term Medication”, which was issued in November 2012, provides guidance and recommendations on how to manage patients who are taking multiple drugs. It promotes the idea that, by further optimising the therapeutic benefit of complex treatment, there will be a resultant reduction in medicines waste. The process includes stopping drugs that are of reducing benefit and increasing risk, particularly with the frail elderly. Repeat medicines are also being addressed by a project that promotes a more in-depth review of repeat medicine lists. Careful management of repeat medicine lists will reduce the potential for the overordering of medicines that are not required by the patient. All other areas of the prescribing workstream, including the 12 national therapeutic indicators, promote quality and cost-effective prescribing, a key aim of which is to reduce medicines waste. The Scottish Government is promoting compliance with NHS boards’ local joint formularies as a key means of reducing the use of drugs that are considered less suitable for prescribing as identified in the Audit Scotland report “Prescribing in general practice in Scotland”, which was published last month.

We are taking forward the issues in the report. The Auditor General made a number of recommendations that are designed to increase the quality and cost effectiveness of prescribing. We intend to implement those proposals throughout the entire country.

I think that the total estimated savings are £26 million a year.

As I said in my first answer, under the efficiency framework we are constantly reviewing prescription practices and analysing where there is waste in the system. Steps have already been taken to reduce waste and save a substantial amount of money every year. We will now take forward the recommendations in the Auditor General’s latest report, which, if fully implemented, it is estimated can save another £26 million a year through the prevention of wastage resulting from overprescribing. We will do that.

Both ministers and Government officials regularly meet national health service boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to discuss a range of matters of importance to local people.

I am advised that Glasgow City Council does not operate a quota for care home placements although, like most local authorities, it allocates and operates a budget for all forms of care. That said, there are no patients delayed in hospital awaiting funding. In addition, the delayed discharge situation has improved considerably in Glasgow in the past year. I am happy to raise the issue, but I want to ensure that that progress continues.

We received the report within the past few days and we will be publishing it in full fairly soon. We will then consult on the recommendations in the report with a view to implementing those that enjoy a consensus in the chamber as well as in the medical community, I hope.

I am happy to take that up. If Jackson Carlaw can provide me with more details, ideally this afternoon, I will ensure that that situation is urgently investigated and dealt with accordingly.

The NHS Scotland national resource allocation committee formula has been phased in from 2009-10. The NRAC formula was introduced to ensure that NHS board funding was better aligned to local characteristics such as deprivation, population, age profile and rurality. It is right that it was phased in gradually to minimise disruption to board finances. It has been made clear that any adjustments to the 14 territorial health boards’ funding will be phased in over a number of years, as has been the practice under both the previous Scottish health authorities revenue equalisation and Arbuthnott formulae—under previous Administrations—and that no board would receive a cut in funding. As a result of that phased process, we have ensured that no board has lost out financially and we have “levelled up” funding to support that. As NHS Lothian is below its target share of resources, the board receives additional NRAC funding each year to support movement towards the target.

We are addressing the issue; in fact, the board is getting an additional £12.3 million uplift annually as a result of NRAC. On top of that, every territorial board will get a rise in excess of inflation this coming year and next year. The combination of those factors and proper management of its resources should allow NHS Lothian to deliver as required.

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for that final comment about the new chief executive—I will pass on his congratulations to Tim Davison. I remind Malcolm Chisholm that the NRAC formula is not just about population growth; it is also about the other factors that I mentioned in my reply to the initial question on resource allocation. One of the major problems in the NHS Lothian area has been that there is undercapacity in the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh because when the hospital was planned—many years ago, before this Government came to office—there was a 20 per cent underestimation of population growth in the Edinburgh area. We are tackling that issue with the additional resources and the additional capacity that we have put in place. I am aware of the challenges that NHS Lothian faces, but substantial progress—very substantial—has been made in the past few months, under Tim Davison’s leadership, in tackling the backlog of problems that he inherited.

Since 2011, the prescribing workstream of NHS Scotland’s efficiency and productivity programme has worked with all NHS boards to promote best practice and improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of prescribing through national guidance, support tools and compliance with 12 national therapeutic indicators. In addition, the national prescribing workstream is supporting NHS boards in making better use of their prescribing advisers network, which meets regularly to share information and good practice and to inform the Scottish Government about local prescribing issues that might require national action.

When I became the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, I was told that the national health service is very good at testing but not as good at spreading. I am absolutely determined that, as a priority, we become as good at spreading good practice as we are at testing and piloting it. Improved and more cost-effective prescribing is one of the aspects on which we intend to roll out good practice across the country, on the basis of Glasgow’s tremendous performance.

Throughout the review to improve health services on Cumbrae, there has been comprehensive engagement with people on Cumbrae, including the Cumbrae public reference group. The Scottish Government continues to take a keen interest in the progress of those discussions. Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board assumed responsibility for providing out-of-hours cover on Cumbrae from February 2012. From April 2013, new interim arrangements will be in place to maintain in-hours and out-of-hours general practitioner cover until the new model of working, which fully meets the requirements of the people of Cumbrae, can be fully introduced.

I confirm that the Cumbrae GP practice vacancy has been advertised—the closing date for applications is 8 March 2013. Following that date, the board will apply its normal process to appoint a new GP contractor. In the meantime, from 5 April—when the current GPs will retire—the board will run the practice directly with locum GPs who have already been secured. The board will continue to do that until a new contractor is appointed. I stress that NHS Ayrshire and Arran sees the review as an opportunity to ensure that safe, sustainable, high-quality and cost-effective services are provided for Cumbrae. It continues to progress the review openly and inclusively with all stakeholders, and particularly with the public reference group, which represents the people of Cumbrae.

Ministers, including me, and Scottish Government officials regularly meet senior management from national health service boards, including NHS Lanarkshire.

As I have made clear in the chamber many times, responsibility for any ministerial discussions and decisions on the matter rest with my colleague Michael Matheson, because I have taken myself out of the discussion to ensure that there is no potential or actual conflict of interests between my role as the member of the Scottish Parliament for Airdrie and Shotts and the surrounding villages and my role as the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing.

When I met the chief executive of NHS Lanarkshire, a range of issues were discussed. My officials are working with colleagues in NHS boards to support them in the implementation of Scottish Government policies, including increasing the provision of single-room in-patient accommodation.

Sorry—I have my notes in the wrong order. My apologies. Healthcare Improvement Scotland has inspected care of older people in 12 of the 23 acute general hospitals in the inspection programme, across seven NHS boards. The inspections have highlighted areas of good practice and areas where improvements must be made. Following inspections, boards have developed action plans to address all areas for improvement, and Healthcare Improvement Scotland is closely monitoring boards’ progress in implementing agreed improvement measures. That is exactly why we asked for the inspections to be carried out, and it reassures me that they are driving up the standards of care for older people in hospitals across Scotland.

Absolutely. There should be feedback to carers, families and friends as well as to patients themselves. Healthcare Improvement Scotland has made that absolutely clear. Indeed, if there are any urgent issues during inspections, they are reported immediately to the appropriate member of the senior management team in the hospital for immediate action. A whole list of actions are taking place to improve the dignity of people in hospital. Yesterday, for example, I had the pleasure of opening the new Royal Victoria building as part of the Western general hospital in Edinburgh. Each of the five wards has 26 single-room units, with patients having their own toilet and en-suite facilities. When I spoke to the patients, even those who had been sceptical about the benefits of single rooms before they went into them told me that they are of huge benefit. Those people are real converts. One of the main advantages of a single room is that the person is not wakened during the night by other people snoring.

On the latter point, my understanding is that this particular inspection is not the reason why the inspectors resigned. Secondly, as Healthcare Improvement Scotland has explained publicly, it decided not to publish the report at the time because it did not believe that the process had met its very robust quality assurance standards. That is why it made a second unannounced inspection, the results of which were published last week. Having read an interview that she gave last week, Ms Marra seems to have changed her mind from accusing the health board of a whitewash to admitting that no whitewash took place.

During 2012, the Scottish Government invested approximately £12 million in encouraging general practices to improve access for patients, and we have introduced an enhanced service arrangement that extends opening hours beyond core hours and offers patients early morning and evening appointments. The Scottish Government has also successfully reached a negotiated settlement with GPs for next year. As a result of those measures, more patients in Scotland will benefit from evidence-based care, including control of blood pressure and cholesterol and influenza immunisation, which will help to reduce the risk of complications and admissions to hospital. As part of the agreement, we have the Scottish general practitioners committee’s commitment to work with the Scottish Government on reviewing access arrangements.

The member raises a very valid point. Our view is that an online repeat prescriptions facility should be available from every general practice within a reasonable time period. In fact, it should be a basic requirement in 2013 and we are working with GPs and health boards across the country to ensure that such a service is available. We are also working with GPs and the British Medical Association’s GP committee to look beyond this year at how we can reduce some of what they would describe as the red-tape requirements in the contract and free them up to spend more time on providing direct services to their patients. Of course, the member will be glad to hear that unlike south of the border, where the Government, led by his colleagues in the Conservative Party, imposed an agreement on GPs against their will, we in Scotland negotiated an agreement with GPs.

I am very keen to look at how in particular we can extend the role of deep-end practices, which service deprived and poorer areas. Scotland now has more than 100 such practices, many of which are concentrated in the greater Glasgow area. They have clearly been very successful and I am proactively looking at how we can increase the number and improve the range of services provided by those practices in Scotland’s poor and deprived parts.

I remember some time ago, when Andy Kerr—that long-forgotten name—was the health minister, he tried to privatise GP services in Harthill, which is now part of my constituency. We put an end to Labour’s privatisation agenda in Harthill, and we will certainly not follow the Tory-Liberal Democrat privatisation agenda north of the border.

The Scottish Ambulance Service currently operates the only integrated and publicly funded air ambulance service in the United Kingdom. In 2011-12, it flew 3,382 missions. Under the current arrangements, cover is provided by two purpose-built fixed-wing King Air aircraft, which are based in Aberdeen and Glasgow, and two EC135 helicopters, which were also built as dedicated air ambulances and which are based in Inverness and Glasgow. Those aircraft are backed up by Ministry of Defence and coastguard aircraft in the case of time-critical emergency evacuations when weather conditions prevent the deployment of the contracted aircraft. In June 2012, following an extensive reprocurement process, the Scottish Ambulance Service announced that the current service providers, Gama Aviation and Bond Air Services, had been awarded a new seven-year £120 million contract, which will commence from 1 April this year. In addition to sustaining the current levels of provision across Scotland in the coming years, the new contract includes the new generation of EC helicopter—the EC145—which will be introduced during 2014. The greater capacity, speed and range of those helicopters will enhance the current service.

Absolutely. We are keeping the situation closely under review. For example, I have had discussions with some of our parliamentary colleagues who cover the northern isles to ensure that the coverage is improved, particularly during periods of bad weather. The additional capacity that is provided by the new service that the member mentions is very welcome indeed. Before I came to the chamber today, I had a meeting with one of the major funders of the new service, during which I congratulated him and his colleagues and thanked them for the tremendous generosity that they have shown. That service will make a significant improvement in air ambulance cover for many parts of mainland Scotland and particularly for the islands of Scotland.

Both ministers and Government officials regularly meet national health service boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to discuss a range of matters of importance to local people.

First, I thank Duncan McNeil for the way in which he has raised what is a very sensitive issue. It is important that post mortems should be carried out as quickly as possible to minimise any upset and distress to bereaved families. I have been assured by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde that there are no delays to the service provided by the national health service. Fiscal post mortems are the responsibility of the Crown Office. Therefore, I will refer this question and answer to the Lord Advocate to bring the matter to his attention. I understand that, within the health board area, fewer than 100 hospital post mortems are carried out annually. Pathology services for that activity are scheduled on a Tuesday and Thursday each week at the Southern general site. At a family’s request and to meet personal arrangements, such as a set day for a funeral, a post mortem will be rescheduled to meet a need. As I have already stated, I am not aware of any delays in the hospital-based post mortems in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. I recognise the point that Duncan McNeil makes, and I will refer the matter to the Lord Advocate.

Cancer treatments that are subsequent to the initial cancer control treatment are in general covered by good practice clinical guidelines rather than management targets. That allows clinicians to prioritise and make decisions based on clinical need and best practice. Those guidelines and recommendations are based on clinical evidence on delivering the best outcomes for patients rather than on arbitrary timelines. Over the past three years, the Scottish cancer task force has made more than £3 million available to facilitate the introduction of new technologies and to drive forward improvement to meet the ambitions of the quality strategy, including access to radiotherapy.

We are doing everything that we possibly can to recruit people in rural areas. There is a particular problem with the recruitment and retention of doctors, consultants and general practitioners in remote rural and island areas not just in Scotland but across the entire United Kingdom. We are concentrating on that issue to look at how we might do more to incentivise such professionals to come and work in rural areas. When I visited the Ardnamurchan peninsula last week, I witnessed proposals to establish a completely new way of delivering GP services on the peninsula, whereby the existing three small GP practices will be incorporated into one larger practice. We believe that that is one way in which we can recruit and retain GPs in rural areas. We also have a problem in filling consultancy posts. We recently filled a consultancy post in the Western Isles that had been vacant for almost a year. The upside is that the post was filled; the downside is that it was filled by somebody from another remote rural area hospital. The net contribution to solving the shortage in rural areas was therefore fairly neutral. Rhoda Grant raises a valid issue: there is a genuine problem in recruiting consultants and GPs in rural areas. We are very conscious of that and we are taking a lot of proactive action to deal with it. I apologise for the length of my reply.

Scottish Government ministers and officials communicate regularly with all health boards, including NHS Borders. I met national health service board chairs, including the chair of NHS Borders on 14 January. We discussed Scottish Government priorities for the national health service and matters concerning the health of the population.

The Scottish Government has been in regular contact with all boards in the south-east region—which, of course, includes the Borders area—about the delivery of their paediatric services. All boards have assured us that they are fully committed to maintaining 24/7 paediatric services. We have made clear to NHS Lothian, NHS Fife and NHS Borders that we expect them to engage fully with the public and other stakeholders to ensure that children and babies get the best services available in the south-east region. No final decisions have been made by the boards about the future configuration of paediatric services. We will support every effort to ensure that the best-quality paediatric services are maintained.

Absolutely. As I said in my answer to Christine Grahame, 24/7 cover is essential at all times. The Government and the boards are determined to ensure that that continues.

There is no specific guidance or protocol for residents of care homes who are assessed as ready for discharge from accident and emergency departments at night. Each case is treated according to the circumstances, such as the availability of family and carer support, as well as specialist patient transport. No vulnerable patient should be discharged without adequate arrangements for onward transport being in place.

I agree that it would be helpful to develop guidelines with and for all interested parties to ensure that vulnerable patients who are discharged from accident and emergency late at night are given safe passage to their place of residence, be that a care home or a private dwelling. We will be taking that agenda forward.

I understand that that is not the case. The member is referencing raw data that was released under freedom of information by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. In the release, the mortality rate was expressed as a percentage of the number of discharges. As there are fewer discharges at the weekend, the denominator is small, thus artificially inflating the proportion of deaths. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has undertaken a more robust analysis of the data between 2002 and 2012 and, as a result, has been able to assure me that there is no significant difference in the mortality rates at the Royal Alexandra hospital between weekdays and weekends. I am sure that the NHS board would be happy to write to the member with the details of its analysis.

It is always advisable for members to leave a degree of flexibility for their supplementary question in case the answer to their original question does not fit with what they wanted to hear. I will provide Mr Henry with the accurate figures, through the health board, and he will then be able to see that there has been no fiddling and no problem of the kind that he described.

Social unavailability has been replaced by a patient-led system in which the patient’s explicit agreement is needed if they want their treatment to be delayed for any reason. That came into effect on 1 October 2012. Guidance on the new system was issued to the service in August 2012 and I expect all boards to ensure that they are fully compliant. The new system of patient-advised unavailability ensures that the service is more tailored to patients’ needs and gives them greater control, as well as providing more detail on the reasons for unavailability. The new arrangement also means that, if an in-patient or day-case patient has advised that they will be unavailable, for example because of holiday or work commitments, the health board must send a letter to the patient to confirm their request and explain the impact on their waiting time.

There is no scandal in relation to NHS Grampian other than in the head of Jackie Baillie. The scans referred to have an annual throughput of about 3,500 patients. Because of a breakdown in a scanner there has been a backlog of 550 patients, but of the 3,500 patients who get these scans in Grampian every year, only about 100 come within the patient waiting time guarantee. The BBC and Jackie Baillie should check their facts before they make allegations about scandals that do not exist.

Jim Hume also needs to get up to date on the rules that govern social unavailability and the new rules that have been operating since 1 October. In the past 3 or 4 weeks, because of an increase in instances of norovirus and seasonal flu, there have undoubtedly been pressures throughout the NHS in Scotland. Those pressures come from the fact that there are many more patients. The number presenting at A and E across the board has increased by about only 2 or 3 per cent, but admission rates have risen by 15 per cent on average over that period. Inevitably that creates pressures on the system, but to say that there is some great crisis is absolutely absurd.

Pricing of medicines is currently a reserved matter, and negotiations on the value-based pricing scheme are on-going. The proposals are being taken forward by the Department of Health in England and the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry throughout the United Kingdom. We hope that agreement can be achieved on a pricing system that reflects the value of medicines in terms of clinical effectiveness. That should make a wider contribution to benefit society and help meet unmet needs. In the meantime, work is under way in Scotland to develop a fund to cover the costs of successful individual patient treatment requests for high-cost, low-volume orphan medicines that have not been recommended for routine use by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, such as Kalydeco. That approach is a response to interim advice from the independent expert, Professor Charles Swainson, who is leading the strand of work within the new medicines review to examine the current IPTR arrangements. The fund will cover the cost of orphan medicines for individual patients in relation to whom there are clear clinical grounds for their prescription through the IPTR arrangements. The fund of £21 million will be available from 1 March 2013 for a period of 13 months until the UK system of value-based pricing is established. The fund is in addition to the existing national health service board funding allocations and will not be applied retrospectively. Detailed operational arrangements will be developed and announced in due course.

I am concerned that any pharmaceutical company would offer its drugs at a more expensive rate here than it does south of the border. The SMC is independent and it published the detail of its decision on its website, which also includes reference to costs. Kalydeco’s manufacturer, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, has indicated that it will resubmit the drug to the SMC with a patient access scheme, as was the case in England. Clearly, it is for the SMC to carry out the reassessment of the drug once it has been submitted. I observe that specialised commission groups, who carried out the drug’s first assessment, were clear that without the patient access scheme discount the quality-adjusted life year ratio would be more than the range that the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence has set out for ultra-orphan drugs.

Scottish Government officials are in regular contact with the Department of Health, and I have written to Jeremy Hunt to seek a meeting to discuss value-based pricing and its impact on access to new medicines in Scotland. We support the principle of value-based pricing, but like many patient groups we are still seeking greater clarity and detail.

The fund will start from 1 March 2013. Yesterday, I wrote to all 14 territorial health boards to remind them of a similar circular that they received last year from the then health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, asking them to process and turn around individual patient treatment requests speedily and expeditiously. Clearly, time is of the essence, particularly for patients with conditions such as cystic fibrosis or cancer. Boards should take that into consideration to ensure that they deal with the applications timeously.

I spoke to Maisie’s mother, Tilda Black, yesterday afternoon to make her aware of the announcement that we had made. Maisie is obviously one of the people who could potentially benefit from the new fund. There are many others who could do so, not just those with cystic fibrosis but those with other conditions. Obviously, the fund relates to any rare drug and not just to the particular drug about which the SMC announced its decision yesterday. I stress that there is no change to the IPTR process itself—it must be a clinical decision as to whether an individual would benefit from a particular drug—but I want to ensure that money is not a constraint. In other words, if the clinicians agree that an individual should get a particular drug that is not generally available because of an SMC decision, the money should not be a constraint on ensuring that the patient gets access to the drug.

As the member will know, there is an on-going thorough review of the entire process, including the SMC process and the IPTR process. I hope to have the report with recommendations from Professor Routledge—along with recommendations from Professor Swainson, who is specifically looking at the IPTR process—by the end of February. If quick changes are required, I will be more than happy to make them once I see the recommendations.

The Scottish Government recognises that the determinants of health include more than access to health services. Housing and fuel poverty are two components of a complex picture that play a part in people’s poor health. Hence, the Scottish Government is committed to tackling fuel poverty, with £68 million allocated in the current year to tackling the issue, as part of around £0.25 billion that we are spending on fuel poverty and energy efficiency over the spending review period. Statistics from the 2011 Scottish house condition survey show continuing improvements in the energy efficiency of dwellings, with 65 per cent now rated as “good”, compared with 31 per cent 10 years ago. Fuel poverty statistics that were published in December show that 684,000 Scottish households were in fuel poverty in October 2011. Without improvements in the energy efficiency of dwellings, a further 35,000 households would have been pushed into fuel poverty.

I am pleased to say that such work is already on-going, as the Scottish Government’s energy assistance package includes a community liaison component. The purpose of that component is to work with trusted intermediaries, including health professionals and poverty and advisory groups. Local community liaison officers who are based with the five energy saving Scotland advice centres develop links and work with local organisations to encourage vulnerable households to access support under the package, and to facilitate that work. The community liaison officers have delivered more than 3,500 events, meetings and workshops since the programme began and have established more than 900 contacts within trusted intermediary organisations.

I last met all Scotland’s NHS chief executives yesterday, when we discussed the priorities for Scotland’s national health service and matters concerning the health of the population.

I have asked all the health boards and all the board chief executives to take the audit reports very seriously. While we had no repeat of the exact situation that we had in Lothian, it is clear that there were a number of issues that every health board—including Lanarkshire—will have to address to ensure that we get timeous and accurate reporting of waiting times. I am very determined to ensure that that happens. I am happy to write to the member to give him a detailed breakdown of the reasons why there has been such substantial progress on figures relating to social unavailability in Lanarkshire—and elsewhere—as confirmed by the PricewaterhouseCoopers report on Lanarkshire.

Following the reports in this morning’s newspapers, I asked one of my senior officers to contact NHS Lothian and make absolutely clear to it—this should already have been made clear—that every element of transparency has to be fulfilled and that there is nothing to hide. It is very important that every health board is open, transparent and totally accountable both to the Parliament and to their local populations. My strong view is that, outwith the restriction of taking into account any commercial or patient confidentiality, every health board should be totally transparent in all its activities.

The Scottish Government meets representatives of NHS Fife regularly to discuss issues of importance to the people of Fife.

Obviously, this is a very serious matter. I do not accept the premise of Helen Eadie’s question—that the death was due to a shortage of nurses. Appropriate procedures and reviews are going on to identify the proper cause of death and any lessons that need to be learned. I think that it would be more in tune with that if I write to Helen Eadie with the outcome of any review undertaken by NHS Fife into the matter.

This has been a very good debate indeed and, like everyone else, I pay tribute to Malcolm Chisholm for securing the debate and for his lifelong commitment to this mission. Many members who have spoken tonight from all sides of the chamber are also committed to the subject and have spoken about it on numerous occasions in Parliament. I also take the opportunity to say something about Zero Tolerance and congratulate that organisation on its anniversary. Members have already recalled the days when Zero Tolerance was formed. As Malcolm Chisholm said, many of the founder members and people who did so much work 20 years ago to get that organisation up and running, and to begin to change attitudes, which was more important than the organisation itself, are no longer with us. They should be remembered for their contribution, particularly Franki Raffles who, as Malcolm Chisholm said, died in 1994. I am pleased to note that Scotland leads the rest of the UK and countries further afield in many aspects of the zero tolerance campaign and related issues. In my first ministerial appointment a few years ago, I was happy to introduce legislation to outlaw forced marriage in Scotland. Graeme Pearson and Annabel Goldie mentioned technology. Graeme Pearson talked about how technology is being used to abuse young girls and women, as well as older women. Annabel Goldie talked about the possibility of developing an app for children who are under threat of domestic violence or living in a situation in which there is domestic violence or abuse. As chair of the Scottish Government’s group on domestic abuse and violence, I can say that we are already looking at working with the police and others to develop an app so that women who are under threat can quickly get the assistance that they require. I will also take up Annabel Goldie’s suggestion about developing an app specifically for children. That kind of technology could be very helpful in preventing particular situations and ensuring that the relevant services can get to a situation much more quickly than would be the case otherwise. We will take up Graeme Pearson’s point about how technology can be used to abuse and see what we can do on that front, because such abuse is clearly unacceptable. It is important for us to stay ahead of developments, including technological developments, to prevent domestic abuse and violence while, at the same time, using technology to intercept those who are trying to use texts or other types of technology to spread their evil ways by abusing women or young girls. The zero tolerance campaign that was started 20 years ago has informed much of the work of my predecessors in this job, including Malcolm Chisholm, as well as the current Scottish Government’s domestic abuse and violence against women agenda and strategy. It is important to record the fact that, since we have started recording the incidence of domestic abuse in Scotland, with the exception of one year, the numbers have increased steadily. As has been said, almost 60,000 incidents were reported last year, about 47,000 of which were domestic abuse against women. One of the many reasons for last year’s 7 per cent increase and the previous increases is that, fortunately, more people are now prepared to come forward and report incidents of domestic abuse. I am not saying that that entirely accounts for the increase in numbers; clearly, it is difficult to determine why the numbers have increased. However, as a result of all the work that has been done and the campaigning by Zero Tolerance and others, people, particularly women of a certain age, are much more prepared to come forward than they would have been 20 or 30 years ago. The cultural changes that the campaigning and legislation have brought about mean that there is no longer the level of tolerance among abused women that there was 20, 30 or 40 years ago. They do not accept that that is their lot, as women did all those years ago. Fortunately, many more are prepared to come forward nowadays. I hear the point about funding. We have maintained the level of funding for the current spending period. It is one of the budgets that were protected because of the importance of continuing to give the loud and clear message that we are doing what we can and funding the organisations that we can fund with the money available to deal with domestic abuse and violence. I pay tribute to organisations such as Rape Crisis Scotland and the tremendous work that they do nationally and in their local areas to help women who have been the subject of rape or attempted rape. A welcome recent development, announced by the Lord Advocate a few months ago, is that the number of successful prosecutions for rape is increasing as a percentage. It is still not high enough, but we are making progress in that area. Although the Lord Advocate is not here this evening, I commend him and his predecessor for their commitment to taking the issue very seriously from a Crown Office point of view. Some success has been recorded in that respect. This is an area in which the Parliament is totally united. It is important not only that the Parliament sends a clear, loud and united message every time we have a debate about the issue but that we send that message more regularly, to demonstrate that we are committed to dealing with the issue. I look forward to the day when the incidence of domestic abuse begins seriously to drop. The police have introduced important initiatives. In particular, I commend the action that has been taken by Strathclyde Police around old firm games. The police visit the perpetrators of domestic abuse before and often after the game and warn them about their behaviour. A similar strategy was adopted during the recent festive period. In the time that the initiative has been running, there has been something like a 30 per cent decline in the incidence of domestic abuse before and after old firm games and during festive periods. There are areas in which we are making progress. It is not fast enough, though, and we need to do more. The Scottish Government, along with everyone else in the Parliament, is totally committed to ensuring that we rid ourselves of this terrible blight on our society. Meeting closed at 18:03.

Presiding Officer, I wish you, the chief executive and all your staff a happy new year for 2013. I also wish every other member of the Parliament a happy new year. NHS Scotland “Preparing for Winter” guidance was circulated to NHS board chief executives and partner organisations on 16 October 2012. The guidance was developed in consultation with NHS Scotland and focuses on helping NHS boards to make efficient use of capacity and to optimise patient flow from point of admission through to point of discharge. As part of their winter planning arrangements, NHS boards have also been asked to ensure that they have effective preparations and outbreak control measures in place for norovirus and seasonal flu, and to consider resilience and business continuity factors such as mutual aid arrangements relating to staff, vehicles, service support and other resources. NHS boards have been given an extra £3 million to help to manage winter pressures and to ensure that patients are not delayed in hospital, and they will use the extra money to make sure that people can be discharged from hospital as soon as they are ready. Those measures are over and above what NHS boards have already put in place.

As Dr Jason Long, who was quoted in that article, said, the Scottish Government is working and has been working with the College of Emergency Medicine to make sure that any problems are quickly addressed. There is no doubt that an upturn in seasonal flu and norovirus incidence has had various knock-on impacts in certain hospitals. For example, as it stands today, 14 wards are closed in eight hospitals across Scotland because of norovirus. Inevitably, that has some knock-on impact, but we are managing that effectively. In a number of health board areas additional bed capacity has been brought in to deal with the situation.

We should make a distinction between two issues: number 1 is the NHS’s on-going business; and second are the particular pressures that arise over the holiday period. Indeed, unusually, instances of the norovirus bug started in October this year, which is much earlier than normal. There is no doubt that in recent weeks the NHS has been dealing with a very challenging situation because of the combination of a huge incidence of norovirus and an increased incidence of seasonal flu. For example, the seasonal flu figure last year was something like nine people per 100,000. This year it is something like 37 people per 100,000, which is a quadrupling of the incidence of flu that the NHS is dealing with. We should not paint the kind of picture that Mr Hume is trying to paint. I certainly do not recognise the 62 per cent figure in relation to any health board or hospital in Scotland.

We are dealing very effectively with the 14 territorial health boards, and Health Protection Scotland and the directors of public health are, of course, heavily involved in looking at what we can do to prevent incidents from happening and ensuring that we are prepared in each area. We are also working with general practitioners throughout Scotland. Indeed, in recent days, we have been in touch with nearly 1,000 GPs throughout Scotland so that we have a clear handle on the incidence of norovirus in the community as well as the likely impact on the acute, secondary sector. As I have said, we are working very closely with the College of Emergency Medicine on the short-term and medium-term challenges that the national health service faces. I should point out that there are measures that people themselves can take. For example, a very high percentage of accident and emergency admissions are alcohol related. If people took more responsibility for their own behaviour, that would certainly reduce the pressure on A and E departments throughout the country.

I am absolutely delighted to join Dr Richard Simpson in paying tribute not only to the tremendous work that is done in accident and emergency departments, but to the work that is done by many other services throughout the national health service, particularly during the challenging period over the festive season. On 2 January, I visited NHS 24 in Glasgow and saw the tremendous work that it is doing and the huge increase in contacts that it has had, particularly as a result of the norovirus and the increase in the incidence of seasonal flu. On the capacity issues, I am working with the College of Emergency Medicine on an on-going basis. Indeed, we work jointly and have joint meetings on a regular basis precisely to deal with the point about ensuring that we meet the 98 per cent target in relation to people waiting for less than four hours for accident and emergency treatment throughout Scotland. We believe that we are putting in place the necessary measures to ensure that that is achievable. That is in addition to all the other work that is going on—for example, with the Royal College of Physicians on developing a strategy to eliminate boarding in the national health service, which was announced just before Christmas. A great deal of work is therefore going on with the medical profession and others, including allied health workers, nurses and midwives, to ensure that we achieve the targets in 2013.

Until the recent surge, there was a sign of an overall reduction in A and E admissions, and particularly in board areas. However, Malcolm Chisholm raises a fair and valid point. My view is that tackling unscheduled admissions, which make up 70 per cent of all admissions into hospitals in Scotland, must be a high priority. Some of those admissions are preventable. As I have already mentioned, those that involve alcohol are certainly preventable if people behave responsibly. Malcolm Chisholm is absolutely right. We need to do much more to prevent unnecessary admissions to accident and emergency departments or other forms of unscheduled care in the acute sector.

This statement relates to the internal audits that the Scottish Government requested health boards to undertake following the external review by PricewaterhouseCoopers of NHS Lothian’s waiting times. As members will recall, that report detailed practices that were completely unacceptable. Since 2007, when the Government took power, we have abolished hidden waiting lists, on which there were a total of 30,000 patients; slashed waiting times for routine operations to no more than 12 weeks—that is now a legal right; and delivered a referral-to-treatment journey of no more than 18 weeks for 90 per cent of patients. It is in that context that I wish to advise members of the results of the 15 audits into waiting times practices. The investigation is the largest into waiting times management practices that has ever been carried out in NHS Scotland. Every single episode relating to every patient who was on a waiting list between January and June this year was analysed by specialists to identify specific trends or patterns that required further investigation. That involved around 2.5 million transactions for the six-month period that the internal auditors investigated. Earlier this afternoon, all the boards published their internal audits on their websites. That meets our commitment to ensure that all the reports would be in the public domain. The reports will be scrutinised at public board meetings in the new year. I will set out the findings of the internal audits. First, the reports provide no evidence of dishonest or wide-scale manipulation of waiting times across the national health service in Scotland. Secondly, overall, the waiting times that are published by boards are reliable and accurate. Thirdly, the principal shortcomings relate mostly to the capability to record on some information technology systems, the consistent interpretation of guidance, and staff training. Finally, there are specific, localised issues in board areas that need to be addressed. The reports identify a number of areas for improvement in the management of waiting times. Some of the improvements have already been implemented. First, we have, as of 1 October, already replaced “social unavailability” with “patient-advised unavailability”. Previously, boards themselves could interpret the patient’s unavailability, but it is now up to patients to agree to a period of unavailability. That should ensure that the service is tailored to patients and should give them control over their availability for appointments and treatment. Secondly, as of August 2012, we have tightened the monitoring and recording of waiting times. The reasons for unavailability have to be recorded as part of the treatment time guarantee. Thirdly, the implementation of the legal 12-week treatment time guarantee came into effect on 1 October 2012. If a patient wishes to go to a specific location or goes on holiday, they must, having requested unavailability, receive a letter from the health board that confirms their request and explains any impact on their treatment time guarantee. That ensures complete transparency between patients and the health service. I am pleased to report that a number of the other audit proposals have already been implemented or will be by the end of this month, and I expect boards to have implemented all the proposals by 31 March 2013. Any extension beyond that date will require approval by my officials and me, and will relate only to external factors—for example, where systems developments are required. The audit reports show that more still needs to be done to improve the consistency of recording and the quality of waiting times information. Therefore, I am implementing an action plan on waiting times that relates, first, to recording, systems, procedures and training, and, secondly, to reporting and governance. Seventy per cent of the auditors’ recommendations relate to the first category: recording, systems, procedures and training. Unavailability provides positive flexibility for patients in most instances. However, it should never be used without the patient’s knowledge to avoid a breach of targets, as was the case in Lothian. That was one of the principal reasons why we asked for a national audit into all national health service boards’ practices. We needed to know whether there was any other evidence of deliberate manipulation. The key recommendations in respect of recording and systems from the reports are: review of the recording of the reasons for the use of unavailability codes; recording of details of offers of appointments made by telephone in local systems; review and monitoring of user access; strengthening of systems controls; and implementation of standard operating procedures, consistent with national guidance and supported by adequately trained staff. The main recommendations for reporting and governance are: improvements in reporting of waiting times information to provide greater clarity; clarity of governance arrangements and escalation processes; and review of team structures in some boards in relation to waiting times teams and management. All those recommendations will be fully implemented. I will refer in more detail to three boards in particular, starting with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. The key quote from the report on that board says: “our sample testing did not identify any evidence of inappropriate amendments or contraventions of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s waiting times policy.” On Tayside, with regard to the two members of staff who were suspended, I can confirm that NHS Tayside has issued a statement today, saying: “On the matter of the media reports surrounding the suspension of two members of NHS Tayside staff, we can confirm that, following a full investigation, those precautionary suspensions, which were non-disciplinary acts from the outset, were lifted on 19 December 2012 and the members of staff have returned to work. Our investigation found there was no evidence of any deliberate instructions being given to any member of staff regarding the inappropriate use of waiting times codes in the sample which was looked at in the audit.” Since the NHS Lothian report, there has been substantial progress on reducing the backlog and on the level of unavailability. NHS Lothian has a number of recommendations to implement from its internal audit, and I expect them to be fully implemented on time. As part of my action plan, accountable officers and the chief executives will, of course, be held personally responsible for maintaining sound internal control systems in relation to waiting times. I expect a letter of assurance from the chair of each board’s audit committee to be sent to the Scottish Government health and wellbeing audit and risk committee by the end of April 2013. Those letters will provide assurance that all their action plans have been completed. I am also insisting that boards undertake a follow-up audit on the management of waiting times within the next 18 months, to ensure that the planned improvements have been made and are working effectively. I remind the Parliament that Audit Scotland is currently undertaking a separate investigation into waiting times across the NHS in Scotland. I look forward to receiving its report, and will take appropriate action as a result of any recommendations that arise from it. Although all waiting times guidance has been updated and reissued to take account of the treatment time guarantee, we will further review our guidance and make any required amendments in the light of the publication of the 15 audit reports. With thousands of staff, hundreds of locations and millions of transactions, this is an area of massive complexity. In taking forward the action plan, I want to ensure that we adopt a philosophy that pursues service excellence. Indeed, the Scottish in-patient survey that was published this year indicated that 88 per cent of patients were happy with their waiting time. I want to ensure that that level of satisfaction is maintained and improved upon. To help me to manage and monitor the waiting times action plan, I am setting up a parallel stream of work to ensure consistency, quality and robustness in waiting times reporting and management. The professor of six sigma and process excellence at the University of Strathclyde, Professor Jiju Antony, will also provide additional strategic-level oversight as part of that work, with regular reporting to me. Our staff are acting with integrity and in the best interests of patients. It is to our 155,000 staff working together that we owe a debt of gratitude for reducing our waiting times to the current all-time low. However, as the audits have shown, boards need to give their staff a system that is easy to work with and which has rules that are clearly understood and are transparent to patients and their carers. That is why the audit recommendations will be followed up and fully implemented swiftly. I will hold the chief executives and chairs of boards to account for that timetable and will challenge them to show the necessary leadership in pursuit of better services for patients.

I have never heard such an hysterical and outrageous attack on the national health service of Scotland. If Jackie Baillie thinks that it is becoming to launch such an unfounded attack, she is not fit to be a spokesperson, never mind a minister. I remind members of what Jackie Baillie said on 27 September in The Herald: “This is astonishing and shows the scandal of waiting time fiddling in Lothian wasn’t a one off.” PricewaterhouseCoopers and all the other auditors have shown that it was a one-off. Will she not have the grace to admit that her scaremongering was totally unfounded and that her allegations are totally without foundation? The attack that we have just heard—in effect, an attack on NHS staff—was totally outrageous. Jackie Baillie’s representation of the position in NHS Tayside is wholly inaccurate and misleading. Let me say a word or two about Glasgow. Under “Overall Statement”, the PricewaterhouseCoopers report on Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board says: “On the basis of the work performed we found that overall, the waiting times processes and procedures within NHS GGC were operating in a controlled manner with no material deficiencies identified.”

I am reading from the report right now. “In addition, our sample testing did not identify any evidence of inappropriate amendments or contraventions of NHS GGC Waiting Times Policy.” That is the conclusion of the independent auditor. I know that that does not fit the script that Jackie Baillie obviously wrote before she read the reports, but nothing that she said is reflected in them.

I thank Jackson Carlaw for his objective and fair comments on the reports. Clearly, unlike Jackie Baillie, Jackson Carlaw has read them. I accept that, as Jackson Carlaw says, it is the responsibility of the boards to manage waiting times just it is their responsibility to manage all aspects of the running of the board. However, the boards must be held to account, particularly through the chairs and the non-executive directors. That is why, starting with Ayrshire and Arran on Monday, as part of the annual review process I have instituted a particular and separate meeting with the non-executive directors on each board to encourage them to question, to probe and to play their role—as would non-executive directors in any company—in ensuring that the executive is held to account within the board. I have also encouraged the non-executive directors not just to take as read the information that they are given but to check it for themselves by going to the front line, talking to staff and finding out what is actually going on in their board area. Having been a very successful businessman, Jackson Carlaw will no doubt understand the importance of the critical role that non-executive directors must play on any board and the importance of being aware of and knowledgeable about what happens on the front line.

I totally agree with the sentiment that Aileen McLeod has expressed. In fact, I can confirm that I have announced today to the staff of the entire health service, as a gesture of good will and as a measure of thanks in difficult times, that I have agreed that the national health service will pay the £59 fee for the protecting vulnerable groups disclosure arrangements that all staff are required to register under. That gesture, which will go to every member of NHS staff who is covered by the PVG requirements, is a clear indication of the thanks not just of the Government but, I hope, of the entire Parliament. It is a gesture, at this time of year, to thank all staff for their tremendous efforts in the national health service.

I have two things to say. First, to start now questioning the professionalism of the auditors is beyond belief. The Labour Party’s message is: “If you don’t like the message, shoot the messenger.” Secondly, the fact is that in every case independent auditors of world-class standing have said that there is no fiddling. The only people left in Scotland who believe that there is any fiddling outside Lothian are Jackie Baillie and Richard Simpson.

When the Government took over in 2007, there were 11 different IT systems operating in Glasgow. By the end of next year, there will be one IT system that manages waiting times. The difference between this Government and the previous Administration is that the previous Administration ran a shambles that ended up in waiting times of six months. We are putting that situation into order, which is why our patients have record low waiting times.

Sarah Boyack is slightly behind the times. NHS Lothian has announced that it has recruited new staff. According to the chief executive, it has the money required to sort the problem. In relation to Sarah Boyack’s earlier question to the First Minister, the underlying reason why there has been a short-term bed problem in Lothian for a couple of days is because the Edinburgh royal infirmary was designed to be under capacity to the tune of 20 per cent. There are 20 per cent fewer beds than are needed because the Labour Party got it wrong and messed it up. It is to blame, not us.

In the interests of brevity, and to let more back benchers in, I say that I totally agree with that statement.

The member must make a distinction between allegations and what has been found to be true or not true. I have made it absolutely clear that our policy is—I repeat it—one of zero tolerance towards bullying of any member of staff. I have made it abundantly clear to chairs and chief executives that I expect appropriate disciplinary action to be taken if any member of staff is found guilty of bullying another member of staff in the national health service. To try to blame such a situation on the Scottish National Party Government and ministers is a total absurdity. It is an operational matter for the boards.

I totally agree. If Jackie Baillie had any grace at all, she would now apologise for and retract her unwarranted and unfounded allegations in relation to Tayside and the wider national health service in Scotland.

I will read the conclusion resulting from that part of the report: “Whilst our testing of the process within South Glasgow did identify a number of issues and areas for improvement, the testing did not identify any evidence of inappropriate amendments or contraventions of … Waiting Times Policy.” The Labour Party reminds me of a Victorian undertaker looking for a hard winter and a full churchyard.

Absolutely. The reports clearly show major areas for improvement, as I said. However, there is a big difference between saying that there are areas for improvement and saying that there is dishonesty and that deliberate manipulation and fiddling are going on. Every report undertaken by the independent, world-renowned auditors makes it absolutely clear that, outside Lothian, there is no fiddling in the national health service in Scotland.

Presiding Officer, I am happy to answer.

It will be one sentence. We have already reopened the Royal Victoria hospital to take account of the necessary capacity requirement.

NHS Ayrshire and Arran has achieved significant reductions in the two key healthcare-associated infections for which routine surveillance is undertaken. The latest statistics for NHS Ayrshire and Arran published by Health Protection Scotland covering the period from April to June 2012 show that, compared with the period from January to March 2007, the number of Clostridium difficile cases among the over-65s fell by 71 per cent and the number of cases of MRSA and MSSA fell by 69 per cent.

Since the period from October to December 2007, the hospital standardised mortality ratio has fallen by 12.9 per cent for Ayr hospital and by 30.7 per cent for Crosshouse hospital. That compares with a national fall of 11.4 per cent, demonstrating that NHS Ayrshire and Arran has made significant progress in reducing hospital mortality and improving patient care and clinical outcomes. Across Scotland, our efforts to reduce hospital mortality will continue and I expect every hospital and every NHS board to drive improvement, drawing in all the support and expertise that are available from the Scottish patient safety programme and Healthcare Improvement Scotland.

I had the pleasure last week of announcing additional funding of £1.8 million to help tackle the problem and to undertake necessary research so that we get on top of the problem and build on the substantial progress that has been made in recent times.

The NHS (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 2009, as amended, set out the provisions and arrangements by which applications to open a pharmacy are made. Those rightly leave decisions on applications in the hands of individual NHS boards. As my colleague Shona Robison, then Minister for Public Health and Sport, said in her letter to Tavish Scott of 26 September 2010 in relation to the regulations: “While there is no requirement within the Regulations for NHS Boards to consider applications sequentially, I understand it is established practice for them to do so.” I can confirm that that position has not changed. We have, therefore, no plans at present to amend the regulations in that regard.

My mind is never closed to change. If Tavish Scott would like to arrange a meeting with me to discuss those issues, I would be happy to discuss them. Obviously, I will need to be persuaded of the case and there needs to be evidence to justify any amendment.

Scottish ministers and officials meet regularly with representatives of all national health service boards, including NHS Lanarkshire, to discuss matters of importance to local people.

In my previous answer to Siobhan McMahon on that issue, I made it clear that I decided early on in my tenure to give responsibility for that matter to my deputy Michael Matheson, as I did not want any perception of any potential conflict of interest between my role as the MSP for Airdrie and Shotts—where Monklands hospital resides—and my role as cabinet secretary. Therefore, I am happy to ask Mr Matheson to write to Ms McMahon again with the detail that she seeks.

We have made available £3 million for all health boards in Scotland, including NHS Lanarkshire, to deal with the additional pressures of winter. I am happy to write to Clare Adamson with additional detail on that if she requires it.

There were quite a lot of requests for detailed information in that question. Generally speaking, I can say that it is no secret that the national health service in Scotland, like the NHS south of the border, faces some shortages in the availability of very specialist services, some of which were mentioned by Richard Simpson. I have recently spoken to Sir David Carter, who is chair of the Scottish academic board that deals with such matters, and we are reviewing all those aspects. The problem affects not just particular specialties, but rural areas. I am looking at the matter seriously and am considering whether any additional measures are required to deal with any of the specialist shortages. Clearly, if there is a specialist shortage, there is the potential for a gap in service provision, which is not what we desire.

I thought that the board’s annual review was a challenging but largely positive meeting. As the member knows, I wanted to hear from the board on the areas that have been unsatisfactory in the past year, such as the local adverse events process, the management of information, including freedom of information compliance, and the systems in place for out-patient appointments. The board has made some progress in those areas, but the Government will keep matters under close review. I want to recognise that there is a lot of positive work going on in NHS Ayrshire and Arran for the benefit of local people. That is testament to the dedication and professionalism of local NHS staff, and I once again thank them for that. Change for the better will not be delivered overnight but, following Monday’s review, I believe that we can look forward with some optimism under the new leadership in NHS Ayrshire and Arran. As I said, the member can be assured that we will keep these matters under close review.

Adam Ingram raises a number of pertinent and fair points. I will give a specific answer on Ayrshire and Arran and then a general answer on accountability. On Monday, as the chair of the annual review of NHS Ayrshire and Arran, I made it absolutely clear, publicly, that I expect the highest standards of accountability and transparency, not just from Ayrshire and Arran, but from every health board in Scotland. After the annual review, I had a special meeting with the non-executive directors of the health board, which is a practice that I intend to be repeated every time that I do an annual review of any health board, or when Mr Matheson does one. I made it clear to those non-executive directors, and I make it clear to every non-executive director throughout the NHS in Scotland, that part of their job is to hold the executive to account, to question and to probe and indeed to visit the front line regularly so that they can see what is happening there, which should help to inform their decisions on the future of the health service in their area.

Perhaps I should declare my interest as a resident of Ayr. Obviously, when those proposals come to us, we will give them due consideration, as we would do with any such proposals from any health board in Scotland. Even in this festive period, I cannot help but comment to John Scott that, had his Government not imposed a 26 per cent real-terms cut in our capital budget, I would be able to approve many more such projects than I can because of that cut.

Mr Swinney will make an announcement on that extra funding following portfolio question time today. Our priority for additional investment is to address backlog maintenance, and NHS Grampian will share in any additional capital resources that are made available to NHS Scotland. Although the budget consequentials are welcome, they are significantly less than the total value of the shovel-ready projects in the list that the Scottish Government published on 2 December 2012. The Scottish Government’s capital budget will still have been reduced by 26 per cent in real terms in 2014-15, compared to 2010-11.

Under the normal due processes, I will make any announcement on that subject at the appropriate time.

Healthcare provision is a devolved responsibility. I reiterate our continued commitment to a publicly funded and publicly delivered national health service in Scotland. We have categorically ruled out the reforms that are under way in England and have reaffirmed the commitment to continuing to provide world-leading, high-quality and sustainable healthcare for the people of Scotland that reflects the values of the national health service.

It will come as no surprise to members that I agree absolutely with that point of view. I am extremely concerned; like many members, I can tell from my constituency surgery caseload that the impact of many of the reforms is extremely serious and worrying, particularly for the disabled community. I am genuinely concerned about the impact of those benefits reforms on the living standards and quality of life of disabled people in the future.

Scottish Government officials meet regularly throughout the year with community pharmacy representatives to talk about the current and future funding of national health service pharmaceutical care and services. In October 2011, my colleague Nicola Sturgeon, the then Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, announced a review of NHS pharmaceutical care of patients in the community, to be led by Dr Hamish Wilson and supported by Professor Nick Barber of the Health Foundation and University College London. As part of the review process, Dr Wilson and Professor Barber took oral and written evidence from a wide range of stakeholders, including patients, the NHS and pharmacy representative bodies, such as the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, the professional body for pharmacists in Scotland, and Community Pharmacy Scotland, which represents pharmacy owners. We are currently considering Dr Wilson’s report alongside other national policy initiatives and reports to help inform the Scottish Government’s vision for NHS pharmaceutical care in Scotland.

In due course, the Scottish Government will engage with all relevant stakeholders in implementing the outputs from the Wilson report and other key national policy initiatives. A large number of stakeholders, including the bodies that I mentioned, were consulted during the review process, and the review leads considered all oral and written evidence that was submitted to them. I hope that is a satisfactory response for Mr Eadie.

The health directorate regularly meets with all boards, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, to discuss all aspects of waiting times, including data.

At the request of Ms Jackie Baillie and the Labour Party, I have given two commitments, the first of which is that I will publish all 15 of the reports prior to the recess. Secondly, I have responded positively to the request for a ministerial statement, which will be made tomorrow. I undertake to publish the reports and place them in the Scottish Parliament information centre in plenty of time for members to have a chance to read them prior to my statement.

It would be wrong of me to comment on bits of a report without giving members the opportunity to read the whole thing and to see the report in its total context. As I said, I will publish the whole report. I do not intend to get into the habit of commenting on leaked reports or parts of leaked reports until the full reports are published and people see that the conclusion reached with regard to Greater Glasgow and Clyde is very positive indeed.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that patients in Scotland receive medicines that are of established cost effectiveness and therapeutic value. All newly licensed medicines are appraised for clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which publishes advice for national health service boards. NHS boards and clinicians are expected to take full account of SMC advice in the planning and provision of NHS services. The NHS provides dedicated services to patients with cystic fibrosis. The medicines that are used are a matter for the professional judgment of a patient’s clinician.

James Kelly will know that I have set up a review of the introduction of and access to new medicines, which Professor Philip Routledge from Cardiff University is undertaking. I expect him to report early in the new year. He will address exactly the kind of issue that the member raises. Once we get his report, we will look at how we can take matters forward. I empathise fully with anyone who is in the position that Mr Kelly’s constituent is in. As the health secretary, I want to ensure that the process for the approval and introduction of and access to new medicines is as robust as possible.

The majority of monitoring and reviewing of the cost to the NHS of prescriptions that GP surgeries issue is done at NHS board level by specialist teams of pharmacists, accountants and GPs. The prescribing information system for Scotland—commonly known as PRISMS—is available to those in the NHS who have appropriate confidentiality clearance. It provides detailed data on all medicines that have been dispensed in Scotland. Data is available from the Scotland-wide level down to the individual prescriber level. Many variables can be monitored, and each board has a system that is based on the needs of the local patient population. In addition, the Information Services Division in NHS Scotland maintains a detailed database of information on NHS prescriptions that are dispensed in the community. It provides regular reports—annual reports with monthly updates—to NHS boards and the Scottish Government to assist the monitoring of the overall spend in Scotland.

Mr Coffey raises a valid and fair point. With the head of the Scottish Government’s pharmaceuticals section, Professor Bill Scott, we are looking at improving how we ensure the cost effectiveness and therapeutic value of medicines that are dispensed in order to maximise both value for money for patients and patient care. We have made substantial progress in a number of areas, and substantial moneys have already been saved by measures taken in recent months on drugs policy and prescribing policy, but we will continue to take appropriate measures to ensure that we get the maximum value for the money that the NHS spends on prescription drugs.

I welcome the opportunity yet again to put on record my gratitude for the dedication and commitment of NHS staff throughout Scotland and, indeed, my gratitude to the many people who work in general practitioner and dental surgeries and in many other parts of primary care who are not direct employees of the national health service. In the three months or so that I have been the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, I have undertaken a series of visits, which have included three unannounced visits to front-line services so far. The dedication and professionalism of the people whom I have met is second to none. The national health service in Scotland directly employs more than 150,000 people. It has a total budget of nearly £11.5 billion every year, and around 6.3 million consultations with hospital doctors take place every year in it. It is therefore inevitable that things will go wrong from time to time. However, let me make it absolutely clear, as I have done in the past, that if things go wrong we should find out about them and be told about them, and I will make it my job, with Michael Matheson, to sort them.

I do not have much time, so I do not have time for interruptions, unfortunately. Let me make it absolutely clear that individual cases that need to be investigated will be investigated and that solutions or apologies, if they are appropriate, will be delivered. If there are systemic problems, we should tackle them. There has been a systemic problem with waiting lists in Lothian, which we are tackling. If there is a problem in any other board—there appears to be one in Tayside—we will deal with that, as well. I want to deal with particular issues that Jackie Baillie’s motion raises. First, on finances, it should be made absolutely clear that we have kept to our manifesto commitment to pass on the Barnett consequentials to the health budget in Scotland. That ensures that more than £1.1 billion of additional money will be invested over the United Kingdom comprehensive spending review period 2011-12 to 2014-15 to protect front-line services. If Labour had won the election, that figure would not have been £1.1 billion; it would have been zero, because, as Iain Gray made clear on 8 September 2010, Labour would not have ring fenced the health service budget. The uplift for 2012-13 to the territorial boards, which provide the front-line services, was 2.9 per cent, which is above the rate of inflation of 2.7 per cent. Next year, we will provide an increase to the territorial boards of 13.3 per cent, which is above the rate of inflation of 2.5 per cent.

I do not have time, unfortunately. I say to Jackie Baillie and other Labour members that, if we did not have to pay out £184 million for private finance initiative charges year on year, much of that money would be available for reinvestment in the national health service.

I have so many errors to correct and so much to say that the truth is that seven minutes is not nearly enough time. Let us deal with Audit Scotland. In the Auditor General’s report, she says: “For the fourth year running, all NHS boards met the two financial targets of breaking even against their revenue and capital budgets at the end of the financial year ... The relatively small surpluses achieved by boards at the year end highlights the careful management of the financial position”. Let us therefore get things in context: the reality is that, according to the Auditor General, financial management in the health boards has been sound. Let me deal with waiting lists: 90.8 per cent of patients were seen and treated within 18 weeks from the initial referral during September 2012—the period of the latest statistics—against a target of 90 per cent. The target was therefore exceeded. We have 14 audits taking place in relation to the issue of the alleged fiddling of the figures. I made it clear yesterday in the chamber that every one of those reports will be published by the end of the financial year, and where there is fiddling we will deal with it by taking appropriate action. Where the Auditor General recommends any action in her report, we will act on that as well.

I have only just over a minute left. Unlike Labour, we do not have hidden waiting lists. We will not hide behind anyone. If there are problems to be solved, we will tackle them and solve them. The most recent statistics show that 97.1 per cent of patients waited less than the 12-week standard for a first out-patient consultation, which compares with waits of six months in March 2007. The statistics also show that 97.1 per cent of patients waited less than 12 weeks for in-patient and day-care treatment, which compares with the waits of eight months that we inherited five years ago. On cancer drugs, I have initiated a review that is being undertaken by Professor Rutledge. I emphasised to him in a meeting this morning that I want him to look at the cancer drugs issue. When he reports early in 2013, I will take on board his observations and recommendations on that issue. Any issue like that will be dealt with. Presiding Officer, my time is up, and I have so much more to say. However, no doubt I will get a second chance when I wind up for the Government in an hour’s time. I move amendment S4M-05088.1, to leave out from “that the NHS” to end and insert: “the remarkable work of NHS Scotland staff in caring for the nation; welcomes the recognition from Audit Scotland that the NHS’s finances have been carefully managed and that, for the fourth year running, all NHS boards have met their financial targets on revenue and capital; further welcomes that the Scottish Government has instructed the most comprehensive audit ever to be conducted into waiting times to ensure openness and transparency, and commends the decision of the Scottish Government to provide above real-terms resource funding to the territorial NHS boards to protect frontline services.”

First, I say to Jackson Carlaw that I am happy to look at the issues around health visiting and initiatives such as the family nurse partnerships. The relationship between such a service and the health visitor service is very important. I also say to Jackson Carlaw that, inspired by a point that he made in the previous debate, I paid a back-to-the-floor visit to the Victoria hospital the other night and spoke to staff, none of whom—which was a deliberate choice on my part—were of a higher grade than staff nurse. I spoke to auxiliaries from the accident and emergency department, and to people from the medical and surgery departments. In all the visits that I have made, there is one thing on which I am clear; we must empower the people on the front line much more to take key decisions, because that is one of the ways in which we can improve the quality of the health service. My other two visits were to the accident and emergency units at Edinburgh royal infirmary and Glasgow royal infirmary. I recommend that members make such visits, because I learned more by spending one and a half hours talking to front-line staff than six months of written briefings or reading Jackie Baillie’s speeches could ever tell me. Duncan McNeil is right: there are three big challenges facing the national health service in the future. The first is our ageing population, which has an associated challenge in the form of multiple morbidities for older people. Secondly, there are two financial challenges: the cuts that have emanated, particularly in the capital budget, and the fact that inflation in the health service is twice the level of inflation generally. The third big challenge—which is by no means the least—relates to the inequalities in healthcare, and the consequences of inequality and poverty generally and their impacts and demands on the NHS. I say to Jackson Carlaw in particular that the impact of the benefits reforms that are being implemented from London will, unfortunately, add to the pressure that arises from increased poverty and deprivation. I hope that he will think again about some of the proposals. I will address some points that were raised in the debate. Sarah Boyack made a fair point about the 85 per cent occupancy rate, but the report by the Dr Foster unit to which she referred dealt with the health service in England. Just for the record, I tell members that the bed occupancy rate for Scotland in 2006-07 was 82.3 per cent, which is well below the 85 per cent trigger point. In 2011-12, the latest year for which figures are available, the bed occupancy rate was 82.2 per cent, which is very similar and within the safety level of the 85 per cent rate that the report recommended. I accept the 85 per cent figure as an indication of the right level of utilisation of bed capacity to maintain patient safety and I repeat—for the record—that we are well within that.

The real root of the problem in the Edinburgh royal infirmary is that the plans for the hospital grossly underestimated by 20 per cent the number of beds that would be required. I am not making a party-political point, but this Administration was not responsible for that. The reason why we have to use the Royal Victoria in Edinburgh is because the Edinburgh royal infirmary should have been bigger by at least 20 per cent. On the financial reports from the health boards, I can advise Sarah Boyack that NHS Lothian has confirmed that it forecasts that it will break even this year. Indeed, all boards are indicating that they are on track to deliver their financial targets in 2012-13. For the record, I can also confirm that the increase to the territorial boards will be 2.9 per cent, 3.3 per cent and 3.1 per cent respectively for the three financial years from 2012 to 2015.

We need to get the context of the debate correct. The vast bulk of things that are happening in the national health service, such as the patient safety programme, the quality programme and the family nurse partnership programme—to pick just three examples—are internationally leading edge and are recognised as such. Indeed, a recent international survey of patient safety by America’s Commonwealth Fund showed that 3 per cent of patients in Scotland felt unsafe in hospital, compared to 9 per cent in the rest of the UK. By any comparison, there is a great deal going right in our national health service. As Jackson Carlaw and others have said, of course we must recognise that, in such a big organisation, there are things that we will have got wrong. Where we have got it wrong, we will sort it. Where there are individual cases, such as those to which Jackie Baillie referred in her speech, if members write to me about them, I will investigate them and come back with answers.

Basically, the national health service is something that we should be proud of. That is not about complacency but about ensuring that we do not throw the baby out with the bathwater.

To ensure that all NHS boards are fully complying with waiting time guidance, earlier this year the Scottish Government instructed all NHS boards to undertake an extensive internal audit of their waiting time practices. We expect those audits to be completed and published by the end of the year.

To date, only two of the 14 boards have identified problems, namely NHS Lothian and NHS Tayside. I will wait until I receive all 14 audit reports from the 14 health boards before rushing to judgment. For obvious reasons, I cannot comment in detail on the two suspensions in NHS Tayside, which Mr Fraser mentioned. Apart from anything else, I am not the employer. The health board is the employer.

I will be happy to report back to the Parliament once all the facts are clear, and they will be available when the audit reports are published by the end of the year. I emphasise that they are going to be published. Everything will be in the public domain, so if there are problems in any other health boards apart from NHS Lothian and possibly NHS Tayside, they will come to light with the publication of the audit reports. We are being totally transparent on the issue. The time to make a judgment will be once people have the facts, and not beforehand.

No, not at all. We have made it absolutely clear that we are making substantial progress on the waiting time targets in a whole range of areas. Unlike the previous Administration, we actually measure these things and we do not have an institutional fiddle like the hidden waiting times that were prominent when Jackie Baillie’s Administration was in charge of the national health service. Unlike the previous Administration, we have nothing to hide. We will publish all the audit reports, and then a judgment can indeed be made about whether there is a scandal beyond Lothian or possibly Tayside. In relation to Grampian, there are merely allegations that have appeared in one newspaper that I have read, and so far they have not been substantiated.

I think that the member got some of the figures mixed up there. However, where we are not achieving particular targets, action plans are in place to ensure that we achieve them. We have very ambitious targets for waiting times. Clearly, given that there are 5 million hospital consultations in Scotland every year, it is inevitable that, from time to time, something may well go wrong. Where there are any systemic problems, we will deal with them along with our health boards. We are achieving far, far more than was achieved under the previous Labour and Liberal Administration, and we are certainly achieving far, far more than the Tory and Liberal coalition in London.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to be as disciplined as everybody else. I join other members in congratulating Jamie Hepburn on securing this debate, and I also congratulate White Ribbon Scotland on its tremendous efforts, including in the Parliament today. I welcome to the gallery members of Scottish Women’s Aid and other organisations. Violence against women is an issue on which we are totally united as a Parliament, not just in abhorring it, but in our underlying analysis that it is a gender-based problem and that fundamental to understanding it are the basic inequalities between men and women in our society. I have been a member of the Parliament for 13 years and, over that period, a number of members who have spoken in the debate have dedicated a lot of time and effort to the campaign, including the Presiding Officer. We are working together as a Parliament on the issue—it is not a Government-versus-Parliament issue—but we must also work with our key partners in the voluntary sector, the local authorities and the police. Our objective should be not just to reduce violence against women, but to eliminate it, although, as Rhoda Grant rightly said, we have a long way to go before we can achieve that objective. The Government is tackling the issue in four ways. First, it is educating our young people, in particular, to develop healthy relationships and to equip themselves with the skills that they need to challenge inappropriate behaviour when it occurs. Drew Smith is absolutely right that we should challenge inappropriate behaviour at all times in all settings. Secondly, the Government is funding the violence reduction unit to deliver the mentors in violence prevention pilots, which encourage young people to take a stand against harassment, abuse and violence. We are providing £20,000 to help with the roll-out of the project in 2012 and again in 2013. Thirdly, the Government is implementing legislation that provides protection for victims, such as the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2011, which came into force in July 2011, and the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011, which I had the pleasure—if it was a pleasure—of piloting through the Parliament; we should not need such legislation in the 21st century, but we do. The Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011 provides protection for women who are at risk of forced marriage and the violence that is often associated with it. As Jackie Baillie rightly pointed out, we are tackling the issue through orders under that act. Finally, we are supporting the continued work of organisations that promote awareness of the issue and which campaign for an end to violence against women. I am referring to organisations such as Scottish Women’s Aid, which Malcolm Chisholm and Gil Paterson mentioned, and local aid groups and rape crisis centres, which play a vital role. At a time when we are having to make cuts, I have been doing my best—like my predecessor Nicola Sturgeon—to protect the budget for tackling violence against women, which is a fairly modest budget to begin with. I hope that all the local authorities in Scotland, regardless of their political persuasion, will not see it as an easy area in which to reduce funding, because such work is essential. In many ways, to reduce such funding is to cut off one’s nose to spite one’s face, because reducing funding for, say, Women’s Aid groups results in far bigger bills having to be paid from other budgets. Therefore, spending on up-front measures to protect women should not be cut. I turn to the 16 days of activism against gender violence campaign, which provides an appropriate opportunity to recognise the fact that violence against women is a violation of women’s human rights. That message lies at the heart of the white ribbon campaign. The Government fully supports the campaign, which, as Jamie Hepburn said, has grown from its roots in Canada to be an international education and awareness-raising initiative that engages men in a positive way to take action on an issue that has traditionally been seen as a woman’s concern. White ribbons are worn proudly, including by me today. We have provided funding of £180,000 for the period 2012 to 2015, specifically for White Ribbon Scotland. I am proud of the fact that we are doing that. More generally, funding for work to address violence against women has been maintained at £34.5 million, which represents a 62 per cent increase on funding in previous times. That is not a party-political point; it simply represents a commitment by the Parliament that is totally supported by all the parties to continue to fund such essential services in this time of austerity. At the end of the day, the issue is not about money, primarily. It is about attitude and culture. It is about men behaving well towards women. There is absolutely no excuse for any violence against any woman by any man anywhere. We are united and determined in sending out that message from the Parliament of Scotland to the people of Scotland, which is what this evening’s debate has done. Meeting closed at 17:59.

The Scottish Government is committed to improving child safety throughout Scotland through leadership, improved partnership working, awareness raising and targeted funding. Our commitment is set out in a range of frameworks, strategies and initiatives, including the curriculum for excellence, the national parenting strategy, don’t give fire a home and good places, better health. We fund the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents to undertake home safety training and awareness raising. We also fund child safety week in Scotland each year to raise awareness of childhood accidents and how to prevent them. We fund discrete pieces of work such as ROSPA’s blind cord safety campaign across Scotland. That is in addition to on-going funding for fire safety work.

I can think of nothing worse than having to watch one’s child go through that kind of experience. I support the campaign 100 per cent and would be delighted to lend my voice and support to the petition. Although the number of deaths and injuries from accidents among children is falling and the number of accidents is falling, any incident of the kind that Christina McKelvie described, which could have been much more serious, must be avoided. Action must be taken to ensure that that happens. The work that ROSPA is doing and the awareness-raising campaign to which I referred are absolutely essential, and I am happy to support the campaign and the petition.

The safety, efficacy and quality of medicines is currently a reserved matter, with the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency being the United Kingdom-wide authority responsible for such issues. I understand that there are no current plans to amend beta blocker prescribing recommendations as a result of the study.

I understand from the MHRA that the safety and efficacy of beta blockers and their licence indications, including use following heart attack, have been clearly demonstrated through randomised clinical trials. Clinical guidance in the UK has a strong evidence base and provides clear recommendations on the place of beta blockers in the treatment of hypertension and on the most clinically effective use of beta blockers following a heart attack. The United States study has a number of methodological implications that can influence findings and, furthermore, it does not reflect how beta blockers are used routinely in UK clinical practice. Therefore, the study’s findings are not considered to have significant implications for the use of beta blockers in the UK, and it is unlikely that beta blocker prescribing recommendations will need to be altered in the light of them.

This is not a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The Scottish Government, working in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, is currently developing a national delivery plan for telehealth and telecare. I would be delighted to make that plan available to Gil Paterson when it is published next month.

The document “eHealth Strategy 2011-17” sets out the key e-health deliverables that NHS boards will take forward over the lifetime of the strategy. The strategy has six strategic aims, four of which are concerned with different clinical benefits and one of which deals specifically with realising efficiencies and savings. The Scottish Government currently provides funding of £17 million per annum to deliver those strategic aims. Activity on e-health is integrated with each health board’s planning and delivery cycle, and all local and national e-health investment is subject to regular monitoring.

Yes—and I am happy to answer it, Presiding Officer. The Grampian area is probably the furthest ahead in telehealth in the national health service in Scotland. We are very keen on—and working towards—building the type of connectivity between GPs and their patients to which Nanette Milne refers. I do not see this as a purely rural issue. The person who lives at the top of a multistorey in Glasgow might find that tool as useful as would someone who lives on a remote croft in the Highlands. The strategy is national and it covers every aspect of the health service, including primary care, acute care and allied services.

Interviews for the chair appointment to NHS Lanarkshire are due to take place on 19 November 2012. It is hoped that the successful applicant will take up their appointment some time in early December 2012.

I will not say that Mr Lyle and I see eye to eye on this. The chief executive post is a key post for every NHS board and I understand that NHS Lanarkshire intends to complete the selection process for the post during 6 and 7 December. Clearly, I want the new chairperson to be involved in that appointment before it is confirmed. The board remuneration committee will conduct the interviews with the director general for health and social care acting as the external member. If the selection process identifies a suitable candidate for appointment, it is to be hoped that that person will be in position as soon as possible thereafter.

There is an issue about the future of mental health services at Monklands hospital. Because it lies in my constituency, that matter is being dealt with by my ministerial colleague, Michael Matheson.

As Ms Goldie will be aware, the Scottish Medicines Consortium independently appraises newly licensed medicines to treat all conditions including cancer, and provides advice to NHS boards on their clinical and cost-effectiveness. The Scottish Medicines Consortium is globally respected. It has robust appraisal arrangements, and the fastest and most efficient medicine review process anywhere in the United Kingdom. I want to ensure that Scotland remains at the forefront of that, so I have asked Professor Philip Routledge, the professor of clinical pharmacology at Cardiff University, to review the current drug appraisal practices of the Scottish Medicines Consortium to consider whether there is scope for further improvement. Parallel to that, I have asked Professor Bill Scott, the Scottish Government’s chief pharmacist, to assess how the Scottish Medicines Consortium’s decisions are implemented by NHS boards to ensure that there is a consistent and effective approach to prescribing policies across the country, including through individual patient treatment requests.

We could go through a list of drugs for a range of conditions, some of which are available in England but not in Scotland and some of which are available in Scotland but not in England. The important point is that we should have a robust procedure that is independent of politicians—who are not qualified to decide either on the medical effectiveness or cost effectiveness of any drug. I believe that our system is very robust, although it is right for us to look at how we can improve it further. I am keen to move away from having 14 sets of criteria—one for each board—for prescribing drugs that the SMC has approved and to have one protocol instead of 14 for individual patient treatment requests. Professor Routledge and Professor Scott will examine such issues on my behalf and will produce recommendations in early 2013.

I do not want to discuss in the chamber the merits or demerits of an individual case. Christine Grahame has written to me and I will give due consideration to the points that she raises.

If Dr Simpson sends me details of where what he described has happened, I will be happy to investigate and to consider the matter.

I have a detailed response to give, because I anticipated Mr Findlay’s question. However, as the question was slightly out of order, I am happy to write to him with a detailed explanation of the current status.

Mr Eadie has raised a valid point, and Michael Matheson and I have included in the review’s remit the specific point that he made. When they are considered only on a narrow accountancy basis, some drugs look as though they are very expensive. However, if they result in much more substantial savings, particularly on hospitalisation, the overall saving to the national health service would make them worth prescribing. We want to ensure that, in the future, a broad view is taken of a new drug’s costs and benefits, rather than a narrow view based on its cost effectiveness and on an accountancy basis.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with the Scottish Ambulance Service on a range of issues, including the emergency response cover that is provided to our island communities. As my predecessor conveyed to Liam McArthur back in May, the Government is actively supporting the development of service models to support those communities, through dedicated project management support this year. I believe that people who live in the remotest areas of Scotland have the same right as the rest of us to high-quality health services, but the way in which they can be delivered will differ from what happens in areas of urban Scotland or, indeed, on mainland Scotland. I expect the Scottish Ambulance Service to continue to work with national health service boards, local authorities and other partners to develop innovative service models that best support patients. That must, of course, be within a framework that assures clinical governance and patient safety.

I am more than happy to use what influence I have. It is extremely important that island communities—particularly remote island communities, but island communities in general—and rural communities have equal access to all aspects of the national health service. Meetings are taking place, as Liam McArthur mentioned, and I hope that they will lead to a satisfactory conclusion. If they do not, and if the member wants to raise with me any future issues on the matter, I will take them seriously and will proactively pursue a resolution.

Four transcatheter aortic valve implantation—or TAVI—procedures have been performed in Scotland to date. “TAVI” is a lot easier to say.

The treatments have only just begun, so it is early days. I anticipate that the numbers will increase fairly quickly in the immediate period ahead. However, I make it absolutely clear that I am closely monitoring the numbers, because if they rise—for example, in line with our hypothetical analysis of the numbers if the position south of the border is extrapolated into Scotland—there might well be a need fairly soon to make TAVI available elsewhere other than, and in addition to, in Edinburgh.

I will meet NHS Lanarkshire in a ministerial capacity on 14 January 2013, at the next meeting of NHS chairs, when we will discuss matters of importance to the people of Lanarkshire.

I will monitor that situation closely. I want to do two things in particular. First, I want to be absolutely sure that the contract does not in any way damage the reputation of the national health service in Scotland. Secondly, I want to ensure that no resources of the national health service are diverted into that activity. In relation to the contract, I am advised by NHS Lanarkshire that it is not normal practice for full contracts to be circulated to NHS board members. However, any board member can request a copy of the full contract. What is important is that board members are in receipt of the pertinent facts so that they can come to an informed decision. I am beginning a round of bilateral meetings with the non-executive directors of all health boards. When I meet the non-executive directors of the Lanarkshire health board, I will want to assure myself that any contractual procedures within that health board are sufficiently robust. The same applies to all the other health boards.

It has been standard practice. Indeed, if the NHS board had seen the terms of the private finance initiative contracts that were signed in Lanarkshire, I would hope that they would have never been signed because there are now costing NHS Lanarkshire £45 million a year.

I think that it is only fair that Jackson Carlaw perhaps declares an interest in the question, given the age range being discussed. However, I am more than happy to double-check the situation and write to Mr Carlaw as quickly as possible to put his mind at rest.

We are in constant contact with NHS Lanarkshire on that point, and we are working with it to ensure that the targets are met in future. I have been reassured both by NHS Lanarkshire and by my department, which has looked at the situation, that any problem with meeting the target is not related in any way to staff shortages. However, I should point out that, had the plans of the then Scottish Executive—under Labour and the Liberal Democrats—to close the accident and emergency department in Monklands gone ahead, the situation would have been much worse than it is at the present time.

Ministers and Scottish Government officials regularly discuss matters of local importance such as patient care with all NHS boards, including NHS Ayrshire and Arran.

One of the first meetings that I requested when I was appointed to the post of cabinet secretary was with the chief executive of NHS Ayrshire and Arran to discuss most of the issues that Mr Scott has raised in a very reasonable fashion. I have made it absolutely clear to the chief executive—and I will repeat this when I take part in the NHS Ayrshire and Arran board review in early December—that I expect a reasonable resolution to all those issues. I have of course received additional representations, and I believe that some of those matters may feature in a forthcoming “Panorama” programme. If any new information comes forward, I will want to ensure that all the matters are properly addressed not only to my satisfaction but, more importantly, to the satisfaction of the patients and populace of Ayrshire and Arran.

Absolutely. Where there are problems, we should always put them into the context of the excellent work that is going on. I presented the awards at the Scottish health awards ceremony this year. I was delighted to do so and to celebrate the tremendous work that is going on, not just throughout the Ayrshire and Arran area but throughout the national health service in Scotland. This morning, I visited the new laboratory at the Southern general hospital in Glasgow, which will be another exemplar of excellence—not just in the national health service in Scotland, as it is one of the leading-edge laboratories in Europe.

National health service boards have a statutory obligation to provide, and are accountable for, the services that they consider necessary to meet all reasonable requirements for their areas. I am particularly aware of the issues concerning the remote and rural areas of Scotland, and my officials are in regular contact with members of the Dewar committee, among others. That is why I have recently endorsed the proposal for a specific programme of work to be taken forward by NHS Highland to develop and test a model or models for the delivery of care in the remote areas of Scotland.

I hope that much of that is being done already in every area but, where it is not being done and if members want to draw it to my attention, I will certainly exert what influence I have to ensure that it is done. In parts of rural Scotland, there is undoubtedly a major problem with recruiting GPs and consultants in the acute sector. I am actively considering how we can do more to ensure that the vacancies are filled, and filled timeously.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, and congratulations on your appointment to the Privy Council. I am sure that everybody in the chamber wishes to echo those congratulations. [Applause.] The debate centres on the universal services and benefits that support the health and wellbeing of the people of Scotland. That includes the progress that has been made by parties from across the chamber under devolution, including the delivery of free personal and nursing care for our older people, the abolition of prescription charges for all, the entitlement to free eye examinations for all and the national concessionary travel scheme for older and disabled people. There is also, of course, the unswerving commitment to having a national health service in Scotland that is free at the point of need and kept in public hands, unlike down south. Those policies form the bedrock of supporting Scots to lead healthy and independent lives and until recently I thought that nearly everyone in the chamber shared that view. It cannot be right to tax ill health by charging for prescriptions—an approach that could force some in our society to sacrifice their health as they look to balance their weekly budgets. Securing the visual health of Scotland means keeping eye examinations free for all—examinations that have long since moved beyond a simple eye test and that enable an assessment of a patient’s entire visual health. I am convinced of the benefits of eye examinations and the role that they have in supporting the people of Scotland to manage their wider health and wellbeing.

The simple answer to that question is no, we did not take a hammering. For the older generation, I am convinced that helping people to be independent and to live at home for as long as is appropriate is an important part of helping older people to continue to live active and fulfilling lives.

I will come to that point later. However, free personal care is something that Labour and the Liberal Democrats introduced and I am surprised that they are thinking about scrapping it. It must also be right, through the concessionary travel scheme, to continue to help our older people and those with disabilities, including disabled veterans, to get about using bus services and—for residents in our northern and western isles—ferries to and from the mainland. Supporting active and healthy lives by allowing people throughout Scotland to access services, meet friends and families and enjoy fuller participation in society without being constrained by financial cost is the right thing to do.

If the member means that somebody such as Fred Goodwin might get a bus pass—although I doubt that he would use it—my argument is that we should let Fred Goodwin get the bus pass as long as he pays for it through much higher taxation, which would help to pay for everybody. The fact that Fred Goodwin gets a bus pass is no reason to scrap it for those who need it, which is what the Tory philosophy would be.

I will take another intervention. I am glad that I am so popular.

The Labour Party supported the council tax freeze. It tried to outbid us with the council tax freeze; now, as Arthur “Bleak” Midwinter has said, everything is on the table. I wonder whether, under Labour’s scenario, people would have to pay to visit their general practitioner, if nothing is off the table. Let us look at the facts on free personal care, which was introduced by Henry McLeish when he was First Minister. That policy provided a valuable and hugely beneficial service to more than 30,000 older people in care homes last year and, over the past couple of years, to around 46,000 older people in their own homes. The free personal and nursing care policy has often—rightly—been held up as a real success of this Parliament and one of the distinctive policies of devolution, supported on all sides of the chamber. It provides valuable support to thousands of older people in their own homes and in care homes.

Absolutely. I was going to make the point myself. The DWP has retained around £300 million. It was Alistair Darling who robbed this Parliament of that money when he was Secretary of State for Social Security by removing some older people’s eligibility for attendance allowance. We have heard from experts such as Professor David Bell. In an article in The Economist of August 2010, he wrote: “Since free personal care was introduced in 2002-03, the number of long-stay geriatric beds in Scottish hospitals has fallen from about 2,700 to 1,700,” which he believed represents “a bigger saving to the NHS than the extra cost of personal care.” In other words, it makes not only humanitarian sense and healthcare sense, but economic sense to have free personal care for our older population.

It is a pay freeze that Ed Balls supports. It is no longer clear that Labour members all support free personal care—that is the whole point. It appears that Labour no longer supports free personal care. In 2006, partly as a result of the work of the Parliament, the previous NHS eye test was replaced by a comprehensive eye examination. That extended service delivered 1.9 million eye examinations last year alone, which represents an increase of almost 1 million on the number of NHS eye tests that were carried out in 2005-06. I think that we should be proud of the fact that we have enabled such a significant increase in the number of examinations while extending sustainably the content and value of the service. The rationale behind the policy has long been the recognition that eye examinations will diagnose conditions that may previously have gone untreated and that, by early diagnosis, more complex or long-term problems can be avoided fully or in part.

My colleague’s point is very well made.

That is a very good question. Far from being better together, we would be a lot poorer together if we voted no in the referendum. I will certainly not take any lessons from a Liberal Democrat who supports a Tory-led Government, with all the cuts that it is imposing and the destruction of the NHS that it is engaged in south of the border. The funding of the general ophthalmic service to run the free eye examination programme currently amounts to around £70 million a year. That funding covers the previous NHS eye test programme and the extension of the new programme. As I have said, the benefit of eye examinations can be substantial. Research by the Association of Optometrists that was published this year indicated that the increase in eye examinations could realise an initial annual benefit of around £400 million—that is for a spend of £70 million. As Mr Robertson said, that is preventative spending. The report also suggested that the initial annual benefit accrued by those people who were previously not eligible for a free eye test could be worth around £40 million. Therefore, I believe that those who oppose free eye tests are getting not just the health argument, but the economic argument, wrong. Jackie Baillie (Dumbarton) (Lab) rose— I have not let Jackie Baillie in so far, and I could not go through my speech without getting what will no doubt be a constructive intervention from her.

It is rather rich of Jackie Baillie to complain about that when she is thinking of getting rid of eye tests. It is clear that that is on Arthur Midwinter’s agenda. He said: “nothing is off the table.” That means that the abolition of free eye tests is on the table. I turn to free concessionary travel, which is not only a transport policy, but a health policy. In 2006, the national concessionary travel scheme for older and disabled people was introduced. It now provides concessionary travel to 1.2 million older and disabled people across Scotland, including disabled veterans.

I cannot take any more interventions. Many of those people would face significant obstacles in their day-to-day lives if—as some propose—the service were removed. That would impact on their broader quality of life and their opportunity to access other services, including—we should not forget—important health services, which have a positive impact on health and wellbeing. The idea that we would deny older people the use of concessionary fares to travel and to see their friends and family is beyond belief in a civilised society. Similarly, the cost of offsetting the prescription charges that this Government abolished was £57 million last year, which is under 5 per cent of the total budget spent on prescribing and less than 0.5 per cent of the entire health budget. If prescriptions had been charged for, which was the previous approach, an estimated 600,000 adults in households with an annual income of less than £16,000 a year would have been liable to pay for their prescriptions. Many people would have had to take a real and difficult decision about how they funded their medicines and their spending on basic provisions and services. The Labour First Minister for Wales, Carwyn Jones, put it well when questioned on free prescriptions last month. He said: “We believe it’s important that we have an NHS that’s free at the point of delivery. We are not going to change the policy on free prescriptions.” He is so committed to the policies of free prescriptions and concessionary travel that he stated that they will be in the Welsh Labour manifesto for the next National Assembly for Wales elections in 2016. Why can Johann Lamont not tell us today that she will make a similar commitment on behalf of the Labour Party in Scotland for 2016? Reference has been made to “something for nothing”. The older generation benefits from concessionary fares and from free personal and nursing care, and to say that that is “something for nothing” is absurd, not only because they have worked all their days and we have a moral duty to look after them in their twilight years, but because those people still pay taxes. Many of them still pay income tax, some may pay other taxes and every one of them will pay value added tax. If they contribute to our society, why should we not look after them and ensure that they are properly looked after? That is the mark of a civilised society. Sixty years ago Nye Bevan promoted and believed in such a society; so did John Smith, until his premature death. This is about ensuring that we maintain our social contract with the people. We will maintain universal free benefits for all our people in the years to come. I move, That the Parliament recognises and values that Scotland’s National Health Service is universally available and free at the point of need; further recognises that other universal benefits, including free eye examinations, concessionary travel, free prescriptions and free personal and nursing care are also vital to supporting many in Scotland to live full and healthy lives, and believes that the only way that these universal services and benefits can be protected and maintained is through independence for Scotland.

Every time the member speaks on this issue she calls for a debate, but she is still to tell us what her policy is. Is it her policy to keep free prescriptions—yes or no? Is it her policy to keep free eye tests and free personal care, or is it her policy to charge for those things? She should tell us what her policy is.

We have done that.

Will the member give way?

The member mentions the costs in terms of expenditure, but he has not looked at the other side of the balance sheet, which is how much is saved. As I have already said, the free eye tests cost £70 million but generate £400 million-worth of benefit. If we do not spend the £70 million, we do not get the £400 million.

Even if there is a widespread problem with carers not having enough time with the people whom they are caring for, surely the abolition of free personal care is not the way to solve it.

Will Willie Rennie give way?

I agree about the language of priorities. Does the member agree that spending money on our people in education, health and similar services is a much higher priority than wasting billions more on a Trident nuclear defence system that Labour supports along with the Tories?

Will the member take an intervention?

Murdo Fraser has got so many facts wrong that I do not know where to start. The central heating programme was not universally available, but was available only to certain people, so he was factually wrong about that. We extended the programme to many more people in the same way as we extended the free bus passes to disabled veterans. Are the Tories against that, too?

For the record, I say that the article was wrong in that respect.

In keeping with the recent Marmot review’s conclusion that the breast screening programme confers significant benefit and should continue, we have no plans to amend screening guidelines. The review also concluded that breast cancer screening extends lives through early detection and treatment, although it acknowledged that it can sometimes result in overdiagnosis. In light of that and in keeping with the review’s recommendations, we will ensure that women receive the highest-quality information about screening.

Breast screening saves lives; the Scottish Government fully supports the Scottish breast screening programme and its benefits and there will be no dilution whatever in the service. The Government receives expert advice on who should be screened from the breast and cervical screening national advisory group, all of whose recommendations are evidence-based. Current evidence supports screening for all women between 50 and 70.

We know that uptake of breast screening is lowest in women with learning disabilities and in areas of deprivation. Although national health service boards are responsible for ensuring local uptake, the Scottish Government supports the boards with high-quality information that has been tested with women from areas of deprivation in a number of languages, and we will continue our efforts to increase uptake overall and particularly in deprived communities.

We are in an on-going dialogue with NHS boards through the NHS health facilities Scotland advisory groups, which provide advice and support to NHS Scotland on energy efficiency matters. We have in place a number of initiatives to improve the energy efficiency of the NHS estate such as the HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target for carbon emissions reduction and continuing energy efficiencies; funding for eco-hospitals, which comprises an investment of £24 million over the next three years to make NHS hospitals and facilities more energy efficient; and the central energy efficiency fund, which is a revolving fund that was launched in 2005 with an initial capital budget of £4 million.

Through the project approval process, we will seek to ensure that the design for the new Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary is taken forward utilising appropriate technologies and materials to deliver a sustainable, low-carbon hospital facility.

Scottish Government ministers and officials meet all health boards on a regular basis to discuss a wide range of issues. However, arrangements for local patient transport provision are a matter for NHS Tayside to discuss with the appropriate local authorities and transport providers.

There are two points to make. First, my understanding is that some improvements have already been made in the 333 service and in other services that are relevant to that particular connectivity. However, I am happy to take the opportunity to try to ensure that transport arrangements between Perth royal infirmary and Ninewells are up to the required standard and frequency. Secondly, I draw Murdo Fraser’s attention to a national short-life working group that has been examining NHS transport issues throughout the country, and which is due to report fairly soon.

All those issues are covered by the remit of the short-life working group. I am keen to ensure that we provide adequate transport arrangements for patients, visitors and staff, because those are essential to the efficient working of the national health service in Scotland.

We are investing more than £12 million to increase the opening hours of GP practices across Scotland and ensure that patients get more flexible access to healthcare. The extended hours enhanced service was introduced in 2008, and we said in April that we wanted to increase the participation rate from 72 per cent. Following the steps that we took this year to relax some of the restrictions that were in place, our two largest health boards report that more than 80 per cent of their practices are now participating in the extended hours scheme. I am sure that the member will agree that that is a positive outcome that will ensure that patients continue to get more flexible access to healthcare.

I agree absolutely with Jim Eadie’s last point. People such as Nye Bevan would have been astounded to hear Johann Lamont sell out on the national health service’s basic principle. I expect all health boards to encourage and monitor the uptake of the extended hours initiative in their areas. Access is one of the priorities that we will consider with the Scottish general practitioners committee as we develop a more Scottish general medical services contract.

Excessive alcohol consumption is estimated to cost Scots £3.6 billion each year, which equates to £900 for every adult in Scotland. That estimate includes approximately £870 million in lost productivity, £730 million in crime costs and £270 million to the national health service. Alcohol misuse not only burdens our health service and police, but has a terrible knock-on effect on our economic potential and on the families that are devastated by death and illness caused by alcohol. As Colin Beattie will know, the modelling that the University of Sheffield carried out shows substantial benefits after one year of the policy, and even more after 10 years. The sooner minimum pricing is implemented, the sooner we will start to see those benefits in the form of a reduction in poor health, crime and social harms.

I agree that minimum pricing is only one measure—albeit a key measure—in tackling alcohol abuse in Scotland. We have a framework with more than 40 measures that seek to reduce consumption, support families and communities, encourage more positive attitudes and positive choices, and improve treatment and support services.

As Richard Simpson should know, the ban on discounting was intended to work along with minimum pricing, and by definition we will not get the benefits that he has highlighted until we get minimum pricing. I am sure that he already knows that.

The European Commission submitted a detailed opinion on minimum unit pricing for alcohol on 26 September. We are required to respond to the issues that are raised in the opinion, which are confidential, by 27 December. We are confident that we can demonstrate that minimum pricing is justified on the basis of public health and social grounds, and we will continue to press the case for it in the strongest possible terms.

We have always been clear that, in order to comply with EU law, we need to demonstrate that minimum pricing is justified on public health grounds and that it is the most proportionate means by which to deliver our policy objectives. I firmly believe that Scotland’s record of alcohol-related harm means that the introduction of minimum unit pricing is fully justified on public health grounds. Further, I am clear that minimum unit pricing is the least intrusive mechanism through which to reduce the disproportionate level of alcohol-related harm that is attributable to high-strength, low-cost alcoholic products. For those reasons, the Scottish Government remains firmly of the view that minimum unit pricing complies with EU law.

I whole-heartedly welcome the support from EU-level charities and organisations that work in this field. The cross-Europe support from public health professionals mirrors the support that we have received at home from our healthcare groups and professionals, our doctors, our nurses, our police and our public health experts—those who work daily with the terrible effects of alcohol misuse. That is one reason among many why we remain firm in the belief that a minimum price per unit of alcohol is the most effective and efficient way to tackle alcohol misuse in Scotland.

The Scottish Government has always made it clear that minimum unit pricing is part of a wider package of dealing with this significant problem. We will, of course, consider any proposals that are put forward, including those of Professor Simpson. I am always glad to meet any member of this Parliament, from any side of the chamber, to discuss their ideas and proposals.

The clear indications from Lord Wallace and others are that we have the moral and active support of the UK Government in dealing with this matter at a European level. I would like to put on record my gratitude to the UK Government for that support—obviously, what happens north of the border will impact on its proposals for south of the border. Therefore, if we can speak with one voice and ensure that we win this battle in Europe, that will be good for people not only in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom.

It is a matter for national health service boards to plan and provide such services to meet the assessed needs of their resident populations.

I have not received any proposals for any reduction in services at Perth royal infirmary. I am acutely aware of the particular needs of all our rural areas in respect of all aspects of the health service.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I actually read the question in the Business Bulletin this morning. We made a commitment in the national dementia strategy to reduce inappropriate prescribing of psychoactive medication to people with dementia. As part of that work, we commissioned research into prescribing, which has shown that, since 2009, there has been a decline in the initiation of new antipsychotics and, overall, a decreasing trend in antipsychotic use. The number of older people with dementia who were prescribed an antipsychotic in the first quarter of 2011 was the lowest number in the entire 2001 to 2011 study period. The review of national health service pharmaceutical care of patients in the community in Scotland is considering evidence on the specific pharmaceutical care service needs of residents in care homes and how they can best be met, with a particular emphasis on the clinical role of pharmacists. That external review involves a wide range of stakeholders, including patients and patient groups, clinicians, the NHS, social care and voluntary organisations. The review will report to the Scottish Government in November and we will decide then what action to take.

All those recommendations will be considered as part of the review that I mentioned in my answer to the first question.

I am always willing to listen to constructive suggestions, whichever part of the chamber they come from. I will certainly take that matter into consideration in deciding policy for the future.

Margo MacDonald has made another valid suggestion that I am prepared to take back and consider.

Both this Government and NHS Lanarkshire remain totally committed to the maintenance and development of Monklands hospital. NHS Lanarkshire is progressing an initial agreement to develop options for what will be very complex work—with a construction and capital value of £400 million—to upgrade the hospital to meet current standards. The £15 million that has made available in the board’s capital plan for expenditure on Monklands over the three-year period from 2010-11 to 2012-13 is being spent on projects that prioritise backlog maintenance and statutory compliance to ensure not only that the building remains safe and functional but that investment is aligned to the site’s clinical requirements.

First of all, I thank Dick Lyle for welcoming me to my new job—it is much appreciated. NHS Lanarkshire is looking at the future of mental health services throughout Lanarkshire and I believe that it is revising its original proposal for the mental health unit at Monklands with a view to retaining an acute mental health facility at the hospital.

I am very much aware of the towers and, indeed, other physical problems at Monklands hospital, which, of course, was opened in the late 1970s. The £400 million capital spend that I have just mentioned will include modernisation—although I make it clear that I am not familiar with the final plans as they have not been finally decided. They might well involve the towers’ removal, but that is still to be confirmed.

The detect cancer early programme, which was launched in February with an initial focus on breast, lung and colorectal cancers, aims to improve cancer survival rates for people in Scotland to become among the best in Europe. The social marketing priming campaign ran through February and March, with the aim of tackling fear and negative attitudes towards cancer, and the first of the tumour-specific campaigns was launched on 4 September to increase awareness of breast cancer symptoms. Early recognition and detection of cancer symptoms are key to the programme’s success. To support that work, Healthcare Improvement Scotland is leading a review of the Scottish primary care cancer guidelines, commencing with those on breast, lung and colorectal cancer. We are working with NHS boards on modelling potential increases in demand to ensure adequate provision of diagnostic, screening and treatment capacity.

Every GP in Scotland has received supporting breast campaign literature and specific information on the current Scottish referral guidelines for breast cancer that will raise awareness of the campaign and the symptoms and signs of breast cancer on which they should act. We are working in partnership with the Scottish cancer coalition and the Scottish primary care cancer group to develop a GP education programme. A parallel programme of work involves GPs in the review of the referral guidelines for breast cancer. Once that has been completed, there will be an opportunity for further awareness raising with GPs based on the new guidance.

I am examining in particular how quick the patient’s journey is from the point at which there is a suspicion of bowel cancer to establishing whether cancer is present and how quickly it can be treated. The bowel cancer screening programme has been enormously successful, although in some areas the rate of response—particularly from men of a certain age—could be improved. That would improve the programme’s success even more.

As Nanette Milne will be aware, we already have a range of programmes to make all women aware of the possibility of breast cancer. However, I take the point that she makes about women over 70. We are considering what additional work can be done to make that group particularly aware of breast cancer.

The Scottish Government continues to view the four-hour accident and emergency standard as an important measure of the quality of care provided to patients. It is the only Government in the United Kingdom that maintains a commitment to delivering and sustaining the challenging standard that 98 per cent of patients should be admitted, discharged or transferred within four hours of their arrival at an accident and emergency department. The latest official figures show that, in June, 95.1 per cent of patients throughout Scotland were admitted, discharged or transferred within four hours. We continue to work with health boards to make progress to improve the quality of care provided to patients through that standard.

Even although those figures have not been officially released, I believe that they have appeared in a local newspaper. Therefore, I feel free to comment on them and to congratulate Fife NHS Board on that excellent performance.

Although the numbers and percentage in that category are—to put the matter in context—extremely small, we are taking action across the board to ensure that it does not happen in future.

We have undertaken a detailed analysis in every case in which the situation arises. I have been advised that staffing shortages are not the reason for the delays and that there are other reasons. I am happy to write to the member to give some more details of our analysis. In all fairness, had Labour’s plans to close the accident and emergency units at Monklands hospital and Ayr hospital gone ahead, waiting times at accident and emergency units in Lanarkshire and Ayrshire would have been far higher than they are now.

Providing high-quality care and support for older people is a fundamental principle of social justice and an important hallmark of a caring and compassionate society. Supporting and caring for older people is not only a health or social work responsibility; we all have a role to play: families; neighbours; communities; providers of services such as housing, transport, leisure and community safety; and others. Health boards are required to ensure that care provided to older people by general practitioners is consistent with their contractual requirements and the General Medical Council’s “Good Medical Practice”. Under the quality and outcomes framework or enhanced services elements of the GP contract, health boards may also have identified specific pathways that detail care of the elderly. Any such pathways would be monitored as part of the contract review process.

I expect NHS boards to work with the Scottish Ambulance Service and a range of local private, public and voluntary transport providers to ensure that all patients have the support and information that they need to access transport. The Scottish Ambulance Service is taking forward an extensive patient transport improvement programme, which includes a redesign of the service so that patients, regardless of their age, undertake a patient needs assessment. That direct engagement between the patient and the Ambulance Service ensures that ambulance transport is consistently available to those patients who require assistance or medical support to get to and from their appointments. Such engagement also ensures that the most appropriate method of transport and level of care can be provided.

The cost to NHS Ayrshire and Arran of dispensing prescriptions in the community in 2011-12 was approximately £74.4 million. The cost of secondary and tertiary prescriptions in the same year was approximately £28.6 million.

We are already tackling the issue under our improving efficiency programmes. Our estimate is that, if every health board in the country adopts the best practice of the best health board in relation to prescriptions, there is the potential to save at least £30 million a year from the drugs bill. Repeat prescriptions are a significant element of that potential saving. I assure the member that I will drive health boards the length and breadth of Scotland to get into the upper quartile of performance and to save that £30 million, so that it can be redeployed and redirected in the national health service to provide additional or better services in other areas.

NHS Lothian is probably the most proficient health board in its ability to dispense drugs efficiently. I would like NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and all the other health boards to follow that example and to use Lothian as the benchmark. If we do that, we can make the savings that I described and ensure that everybody gets the drugs that they require while minimising wastage and freeing up resource for investment elsewhere.

NHS boards are expected to maintain an overview of the effectiveness of their local arrangements for the introduction of new medicines, including NHS board management of IPTRs. NHS boards were reminded of their responsibilities on that in additional guidance that was published on 13 February this year under the cover of SGHD/CMO(2012)1, which recognised the benefits of NHS boards meeting at least annually to share good practice on IPTR management. The guidance reflects recommendations that emanated from a clinically led short-life working group to consider the safe and effective use of new medicines in the national health service in Scotland. The Scottish Government will monitor progress on implementing its chief executive letter guidance on the introduction of new medicines, which took effect on 1 April 2011.

We are looking at the issues. Once the Scottish Medicines Consortium has approved a drug for use, each health board has three months to submit its strategy in terms of the criteria for using that medicine. It is the case that a number of health boards have not submitted and agreed their strategies within those three months. I do not accept all the specific points that the member made, but I agree with him in general terms that we need to improve performance in the area to ensure that every health board meets the three-month target for every new drug that is introduced and that we have greater consistency across Scotland. I am addressing the issue as one of my priorities in the new position that I hold.

First, I will take into consideration reports from the Health and Sport Committee not just on this subject but on every subject that it reports on that impacts on my portfolio. Secondly, I look forward to receiving more detailed observations from Jackson Carlaw, which I will take seriously. Thirdly, if there are areas of health policy in Scotland in which we can get greater consensus across the chamber, I am more than willing to work with other parties to ensure that that happens. The national health service is one of the great treasures that we have in this country, and it is important that we all work together to improve the health service as best we can. If we can move forward on a consensual basis, I will be the first to sign up to that consensus.

There are 22 health boards in Scotland, plus many other bodies such as the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland, the Scottish health council and others. Given the scarcity of resources that we all face because of the budget cuts, which will continue for a number of years yet, plus the increasing demands that the health service faces, we should find opportunities where we can to streamline the organisation of the health service to release resources that could be better spent on the front line. That is an area on which I will focus some attention in my time as the new health secretary, however short or long that may be.

A representative of the Scottish Government met Dr Shekhar Saxena, director, mental health and substance abuse, and Dr Matt Muijen, programme manager, mental health, of the World Health Organization, from 3 to 5 September 2012. That meeting was part of the WHO consultation on the European mental health strategy and the global mental health action plan. The Scottish Government has provided expert support to the development of the European mental health strategy.

Right across Government, whether in the transport function, in climate change or in health, we measure all the emissions because we must reach our climate change targets. We will and do take into consideration all the primary and secondary research that is produced by the World Health Organization, which is a first-class international body. The points that Graeme Dey raises are extremely important; however, I place the following caveat on those comments. At the moment, regrettably, the measures required to deal directly with that problem touch on reserved matters rather than devolved responsibilities. Obviously, I hope that, in the next four years, we will rectify that deficiency by not having reserved matters.

I will make two points: first, my understanding is that the discussions with the WHO officials were wide ranging across a range of issues; secondly, I recognise that particular problem of the relatively higher rate of deaths. We believe that a major contributing factor to that higher rate is the very high level of drug abuse relatively speaking a number of years ago—a generation ago. People who abused drugs then are now getting to an age when their bodies can no longer tolerate any further abuse, or indeed sometimes the challenges of modern living. As a result, we are seeing that spike in the number of drug-related deaths. We think that that is a major contributing factor and, because of its historical nature, it is difficult to see how any intervention from us, above and beyond what we are doing, could dramatically influence the figures. Obviously, where we can do something we will—I appreciate that it is a problem—but it is not necessarily a problem with an easy solution because of the historical context.

The national infertility group’s report, with recommendations on eligibility criteria, is expected to be with ministers by the end of December 2012. My preference would have been for all health boards to consider the implications of the report before making any announcements.

I confirm that the national infertility group will make recommendations in the report on smoking, obesity and the rules on the number of IVF treatment cycles. I look forward to receiving the group’s report at the end of December.

It should be recognised that NHS Fife has invested an additional £100,000 in reducing its waiting list. Other boards have considered restrictions but, as I say, I would much prefer that we moved together once the report is available in December and the expert group has made its recommendations.

I expect the report that I receive at the end of December to deal with all those issues. I am glad that Jackie Baillie welcomes the additional £12 million that Mr Matheson, the Minister for Public Health, announced at the weekend is to be invested in reducing waiting across Scotland. Before we are critical of waiting times, we must look at and take account of the increased throughput figures, too, although I accept that NHS Fife’s three-year waiting time is far too long.

The increase in home drinking in recent years has been driven by the availability of cheap alcohol that is sold in the off-trade—mainly in supermarkets. The introduction of minimum pricing will raise the price of the cheapest alcohol. Our proposed 50p per unit minimum price will have a significant impact on the alcohol that is sold in the off-trade. We have already taken action that contributes to reducing binge drinking. That includes reducing the opening hours of licensed premises, providing powers for licensing boards to consider the overprovision of licensed premises in their areas and introducing a ban on quantity discounts in the off-trade.

The member raises a valid point. We have worked with housing associations and councils, in their role as landlords, to try to tackle the situation. Some communities have a particular problem in the private rented sector. Social landlords feel a social responsibility, but some landlords in the private rented sector do not feel such a great responsibility. The Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Act 2011, which will come into force this year, will give local authorities new powers to ensure that landlords in the private rented sector are forced to take a much more robust approach to dealing with any tenants who engage in antisocial behaviour.

The latter point is primarily a matter for my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. However, I agree with the general drift of the member’s questions. Many areas have overprovision, which contributes to the problems that are associated with alcohol. As the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, I emphasise the impact on the health service and particularly on our accident and emergency services, in which a high proportion of admissions relate to drink and the abuse of alcohol. I will take forward that issue, on top of the initiatives that my predecessor took.

As this is my first speech in my new role, I thank all those who have sent cards of congratulations and best wishes. They are much appreciated. Obviously, I have a hard act to follow, but I intend to do everything I can to rise to the task in front of me. Every member has said this today, but it is not just lip service to pay tribute to everyone who works in the national health service, and, indeed, to the many people who are not employed by the health service but whose services are essential to its success. The NHS in Scotland is facing four major challenges in the years ahead. The first and most obvious is the budget. The fact of life is that, despite our ring fencing of the NHS budget, resources are not going up as fast as the demands on the health service. We must face the reality that with fewer resources, relatively speaking, we have to meet greater demand across the country. That is a central challenge for every one of us. The second challenge—the ageing of the population—has also been referred to many times. The challenge is not just the overall ageing of the population but the fact that we want to be healthy and fit as we live the extra years that we might have. The third major challenge is the costs of new technologies and medicines. Clearly, those costs are rising quickly, but we need those new technologies and medicines in order to achieve our vision and everything that we want to do for our people. The final big challenge, which is fairly concentrated but nevertheless must not be underestimated, is presented by the levels of poverty and deprivation that we have in Scotland. If I may say so, legislation emanating from south of the border, particularly if benefits are frozen, will add to that challenge and make it even greater. If benefits are frozen, that will drive more people into poverty and create even more demands not just on the national health service but on a range of our public services in Scotland. My attitude to the job will be to have an open door. With a £12 billion budget and a total staff of more than 150,000 people plus all the people who are, in effect, indirectly employed by the health service, I am under no illusion that we will not have areas of pressure and difficulty. Of course we will. If people come to me, as they have done, I will behave in the same way as my predecessor did. I will listen to what people say and, if there is a problem that needs sorted, I will work with the relevant people in the health service to sort that problem.

I do not have much time and I want to finish what I have to say. In my area, I have identified a number of issues that need to be tackled. By no means every issue is a result of a shortage of resources. Sometimes, issues are due to other factors that are not directly under the control of the NHS. One thing that I intend to do is to make some unannounced visits, not just to go to the health boards and meet the chief executives and the chairs but to talk to practitioners such as the nurses, the doctors and the porters—people who are on the factory floor in the health service—to find out their opinions and their views on how we can do things better, with better quality and in greater quantity. There are areas for improvement—of course there are—and my priority will be to look at them. Top of that list, I believe, is the need to integrate adult health and social care services to get more of a continuum and better-quality services for that category of people.

I do not have time, I am afraid. I want to cover this. As everyone knows, we are totally committed to the national health service. We will face up to areas where there are particular challenges and we will do what we can to rise to those challenges and find solutions to the problems. I say this, though, and particularly to Jackie Baillie: when a member comes across a difficulty in an area, they should not generalise from the particular and exaggerate, using phraseology such as, “The NHS is crumbling.” That is a total insult to everybody who is committed to the NHS. I say to the Labour Party, “Be responsible and be grown-up.” The fact of life is that a great deal of good is happening in the health service. One of those good things is the record spending. Despite the financial pressures, we are spending a record amount in the health service. Let me comment on some of the particular issues that have been raised. Duncan McNeil, fairly, raised the issue of dementia. We are one of the world leaders in the treatment of dementia. Our work in Scotland is internationally recognised, and with Alzheimer’s Scotland we are jointly funding a nurse consultant for general hospitals in every health board area. There is a total of 300 dementia champions to work in general hospitals, and more will be appointed as the years go by.

When it comes to waiting times in accident and emergency departments, had Labour’s plans to close A and Es been implemented, those waiting times would be far longer than they are today. We should recognise Labour’s failures. South of the border, it cut the health budget by £20 billion. It has no entitlement to lecture anyone about the future of the health service. Presiding Officer, let me tell you this—the NHS is safe in our hands and only in our hands.

Since 2010-11, 16 hospitals have reported a reduction in the number of people arriving at accident and emergency units who were not admitted, discharged or transferred within eight hours. Twenty-two hospitals reported an increase in that number. Most of the increase has been concentrated in a small number of hospitals, with one hospital accounting for nearly half the increase. The Scottish Government has been providing tailored performance support to those hospitals to identify the root causes of delays and to implement effective strategies to address the issues.

I thank the member for her congratulations. So far, the work that has been undertaken with those hospitals indicates that none of the reasons that the member has outlined is a major contributing factor to that increase. It would have been much worse if the Labour Government’s proposals to close the accident and emergency units at the Monklands and Ayr hospitals had gone ahead. That would have made the problem much worse.

I thank Jackie Baillie for her non-congratulations. She has a cheek talking about cuts when Alistair Darling was the one who implemented the cuts, which were deeper and tougher than those that took place under Margaret Thatcher. I also say to Jackie Baillie that she should at least deal in the facts. Over the past few years since we came to power, there has been a net increase of 2,500 in the total manpower in the NHS in Scotland. We are delivering a more effective service, with higher throughput and better outcomes for our people.

The Scottish Government is committed to creating a lasting and positive legacy for the whole of Scotland from Glasgow hosting the 2014 Commonwealth games. The Scottish Government’s legacy plan, “On your marks … Get set … Go: A games Legacy for Scotland”, sets out a variety of opportunities that aim to create a flourishing economy, healthy individuals and an enhanced international reputation. We continue to work closely with our national and local delivery partners to fulfil our collective ambitions to ensure that individuals, communities and businesses across Scotland get every possible benefit from the games and other major events over the coming years.

One of the major areas of preparation is not only concessionary travel but ensuring that the whole transport infrastructure can accommodate the Commonwealth games. Indeed, one of the major reasons why we gave the go-ahead to the completion of the M74 after 50 years was to ensure that the transport infrastructure in and around Glasgow was fit for the games in 2014. I share Hanzala Malik’s ambition to ensure that the games are an international event and that not only the participants but those who are with them—the international media and all those who attend the games in Glasgow in 2014—go back home with a positive and upbeat image of Scotland, knowing that, by that time, we will be within a few months of voting for independence.

A range of initiatives involving Scottish companies and Young Scot in youth employment, volunteering and a range of other activities is going on throughout Scotland, including in the south-west. I will highlight one specific way in which we can do more in the south-west. If the current experiment in reducing the cost of train fares between Stranraer and Glasgow by a substantial amount—from £43 return to £15 return—works, one of the most effective ways in which we can ensure that people from the south-west and, indeed, people who use the port at Cairnryan can benefit from the Commonwealth games will be by providing a cheap, fast rail service between Stranraer and Glasgow.

The bidding guidance and associated documents will be available to potential hosts in December 2012, as set out in the letter of 30 August from the chair of the national performance centre steering group. I reiterate that the whole process will be fair, open and transparent.

I welcome Ms Marra’s welcome.

Will the member give way?

Let me confuse the member with some facts: 75 per cent of all the contracts that are let through the Scottish Government’s portal go to small and medium-sized enterprises.

The Scottish Government has not received any new tax increment financing applications since Aberdeen City Council rejected the business plan incorporating the city garden project.

We have not received any detailed information regarding Aberdeen City Council’s updated proposals for the city centre, but the invitation to the council was to submit a business case for a scheme incorporating the city garden project, which would lever in a substantial level of private sector funding—not just for any project in Aberdeen. It is simply not possible to transfer that invitation to a completely different project. In the future, the Scottish Government will consider rolling out TIF beyond the initial pilot projects, which included the original Union Terrace gardens. Any further TIF proposals would need to be considered if and when such a new round took place.

I totally agree with the member. The decision by the Labour group in Aberdeen is anti-investment, anti-progress and anti-democratic.

I have made it absolutely clear that the essential element in the TIF application was the Union Terrace gardens project. If that is not included in any business case submitted by Aberdeen City Council, it cannot be considered.

When we announced which councils had been invited to prepare full TIF business cases for ministers’ consideration last year, we said that Aberdeen City Council’s plan to use TIF for the Union Terrace gardens project would be progressed if public support for the project could be demonstrated. That support was demonstrated in the referendum that took place, in which 45,301 votes were cast in favour of the project and 41,175 opposed the plans. The invitation to submit a business case was for that specific project—read my lips: it was for that specific project—for which public support was demonstrated, and not just for any project in Aberdeen. I repeat: there is no possibility of approving an amended TIF that does not include the central feature of the original proposal.

The people who are punishing Aberdeen are the Labour people who are running Aberdeen. Not only are they punishing Aberdeen, but they are taking this decision in defiance of the democratic wish of the people of Aberdeen, so I will not take any lessons from anyone on the Labour benches. This is far from being sour grapes, and I suggest that the member stops whistling in the wind.

The Labour Party has made a laughing stock of itself and it will be punished appropriately at the ballot box by the people of Aberdeen.

When people get up to make a public speech, they very often start by saying, “That’s a hard act to follow.” I can honestly say that Hugh Henry’s speech does not come into that category. Although he no doubt regards it as a cheery and participative effort, I do not think that the rest of us could do so. To be fair, although we are only halfway through the debate—the other half will be tomorrow—very good speeches have been made across the chamber. John Park’s and Margaret McCulloch’s speeches, for example, were very thoughtful, and those by Annabelle Ewing, Chic Brodie, Stuart McMillan and other members were equally very good. However, one of the worst speeches was made by the leader of the Labour Party, Johann Lamont. I have never heard a speech made by a leader of any party in the chamber that was as full of factual inaccuracies as hers. Indeed, it was so full of factual inaccuracies that it became very clear that Richard Baker had done the research for it. That in itself was depressing enough, but it was obvious when we heard from Ruth Davidson and Willie Rennie that he had done the research for their speeches as well. This is a very serious debate about the future of Scotland. Basically we are debating two underlying issues, the first of which is the best way to deal with the economic challenges that our nation and other nations face. Do we want to follow the UK Tory-Liberal example and go down the road of austerity, or do we want to follow Barack Obama and the US and go down the road of growth? The difference is that the US has had quarter after quarter of growth in output and jobs and reductions in unemployment. It still faces major challenges, but it has not had the double-dip recession this year that we have had, with the possibility of a triple-dip recession.

I will in a minute, as I am sure that Murdo Fraser will make a better contribution to the debate than his leader did.

It will not be. The second underlying issue is the future of Scotland. Should we continue as a devolved Scotland with limited power or as an independent country? I will bring in Murdo Fraser, who is, I think, privately very close to independence.

Actually, Mr Obama does have the euro zone to contend with, as it is one of the largest markets for the US. I am sorry, but Murdo Fraser is as factually incorrect as his leader was in most of her contribution. The two issues are fundamentally linked, because what we want as a Government and as a nation is the ability for us to choose. If the Parliament, the Government or indeed a Government led by Ms Lamont had the power, I am absolutely sure that it would not want to follow the austerity policies of the UK Tory and Liberal Government. We would want to follow a policy of growth and investment for very good reasons. During the summer, I read about a speech that Gordon Brown had made in which he defended the union and attacked even fiscal autonomy, let alone independence. He referred to the United Kingdom as one of the most successful unions in history. What is successful about a double-dip recession throughout the United Kingdom, never mind just in Scotland? What is successful about a high level of unemployment? What is successful about dire levels of poverty and child poverty? What is successful about spending many billions of pounds on nuclear weapons when so many of our people need that money to be spent on public services and basic human conditions? The fact is that, even with the very limited powers that we have, we have demonstrated, by making the maximum use of those powers, that we can make a difference to the Scottish economy. That is why the level of employment in Scotland is higher than it is south of the border. It is why, generally, our unemployment is lower than it is south of the border, although it is still too high. It is why, despite the 30 per cent real-terms cut in the capital budget from London, we will be able to use our innovative approach—which involves the Scottish Futures Trust, the non-profit-distributing model programme and the reallocation of resources from the current budget to the capital budget—to either directly or indirectly leverage a total of nearly £12 billion in capital investment in Scotland over the next three or four years. Had matters been left to the previous Administration—or to London, with no Scottish Parliament—the level of capital investment would have been around £2.5 million a year over the next three years, which is a substantially smaller figure. Ruth Davidson clearly knows nothing about housing or housing expenditure. We have used our resources in housing to maximise investment. The figure that matters is the total investment in housing. For every £7 that the previous Administration put in, it got £3 from elsewhere. We have reversed that. For every £3 that we put in, we get £7 from elsewhere—either the private sector, local authorities or other organisations. That is the difference. We are ensuring not only that we are building a record number of houses, but that we are using the money that is available to us wisely. That is why this year, next year and every year in this session of Parliament, we will complete more than 6,000 social houses—a record that is far better than the previous Administration’s average of under 5,000. Hugh Henry said that the constitution does not matter. In that case, why were Labour members devolutionists? Donald Dewar used to argue for a Parliament so that there could be Scottish solutions to Scottish problems in the health service, education, transport and social work. If the argument applies to all those areas of policy, it is surely even more important to have Scottish solutions to Scottish problems in the economy, taxation, welfare and the range of responsibilities that are reserved to Westminster. The reality is that, if the people of Scotland vote yes, they face a prosperous future. If they vote no, those under 25 will lose their housing benefit and child poverty will go through the roof. The loud and clear message is that, if we want Scotland to have a decent future and we want our people and our children to be able to live and work in their own country, yes is the only way to vote in 2014.

“Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan” was published on 31 January 2012 and makes it clear that public sector intervention in next generation broadband infrastructure will be targeted solely in the areas where the market is not delivering or will not deliver next generation broadband. Those are defined by the European Union as “white areas”.

I appreciate that point. East Kilbride is a large town and one would expect the private sector to provide superfast broadband in a town that size. I am happy to take up that issue with providers and to meet Linda Fabiani to discuss how we can develop the situation and ensure that East Kilbride has access to superfast broadband.

I realise that many people are in a similar position in that regard, including in the two communities to which Elaine Smith referred. We will announce later this year the detail of the roll-out of our superfast broadband investment. East Kilbride is under South Lanarkshire Council and the two communities to which Elaine Smith referred are under North Lanarkshire Council. It would be helpful if both those councils could produce their proposals for the roll-out of superfast broadband in their areas.

The Scottish Government recognises that vibrant town centres and high streets are vital to the wellbeing of communities and the local economy. We are committed to supporting town centres and high streets, and I will announce details of our town centre review in the summer, which will bring together representatives from the public, private and third sectors who have an appetite to get involved. However, local authorities are responsible for local economic development and therefore for ensuring the viability of the towns within their areas, taking account of local circumstances and the aspirations of their communities.

I would be delighted to reinstate such a fund if I had the money to do so. Of course I do not have the money to do so, because the capital budget of the Scottish Government was cut by 40 per cent by Alasdair Darling and is still being cut by 30 per cent by the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. If they reverse their cuts, I will set up a new town centre regeneration fund.

Members may have heard some of this already. The infrastructure action plan that I referred to in my answer to the previous question on broadband sets out the Scottish Government commitment to—and the steps that it will take to deliver—a step change in broadband speeds by 2015. That will pave the way for the delivery of world-class and future-proofed infrastructure across the whole of Scotland by 2020. Through our step change 2015 programme, we will invest in infrastructure that will have the capacity to deliver broadband at a speed of 40 to 80 megabits per second to 85 to 90 per cent of premises by 2015. In John Wilson’s constituency, that commitment will be delivered through our rest of Scotland broadband project, which aims to enter procurement in September. As we progress through delivery of that programme, we will work collaboratively with the local authorities in central Scotland to ensure that we take account of local plans and priorities in the region.

Slow-spots and not-spots are our top priorities in rolling out broadband. However, as we have said, we will follow the priorities that are decided locally. That is why I am anxious that North Lanarkshire Council, South Lanarkshire Council and Falkirk Council—which cover the area that is represented by the regional member—all submit their plans and proposals. As I have made clear twice in two documents in the past three or four months, areas that submit their plans will be given priority. We are not going to hold up the rest of Scotland because some people are falling behind in submitting their plans for broadband.

I am beginning to feel like a broadband. In my response to the previous question, I referred to the step change 2015 programme, in which the Scottish Government has committed to investing in infrastructure that will have the capacity to deliver broadband at a speed of 40 to 80 megabits per second to 85 to 90 per cent of premises by 2015. In total, the Scottish Government’s central funding pot for broadband delivery across Scotland is now £244.5 million. In addition, about £40 million to date has been secured in local authority contributions—that includes the intention of Aberdeenshire Council to provide up to £18 million. That significant contribution to the procurement exercise that is due to begin in September will enable even more businesses and people in Aberdeenshire to benefit from next-generation broadband. Over the summer, we will continue our dialogue with the local authorities in Angus and Aberdeenshire to ensure that we take account of local plans and priorities in the respective regions.

I hope that Mr Don’s seat is not a not-spot for broadband, as it seems to be for the microphone. He should not assume that because an area is quite far away from the cabinet or exchange, it will automatically be in the last 10 or 15 per cent of areas to be dealt with. I have made it absolutely clear that I am determined that remote rural areas and island communities will not be at the tail end of the process. The whole point of the money that we are investing is to get, in the shortest time, to the areas where need is greatest. During the summer, I will announce various other initiatives that will be designed specifically to deal with the kind of situation in which Mr Don’s constituents find themselves.

That is superfast nonsense. Mr Baker, as is his wont, picks out one statistic from a battery of statistics. For example, he does not take into account take-up of mobile broadband, particularly among young people, which in some areas is of the order of 85 to 90 per cent. Rather than give us the doom and gloom, why does he not join us and recognise, as the rest of the UK now does, that Scotland has caught up and will move ahead of everybody else to ensure that our country has superfast broadband as and when it requires it.

I thank Drew Smith for not asking about broadband. I met the chair and chief executive of Scottish Water on Monday 25 June 2012, when I opened the new Dunoon waste water improvement scheme, which is a most impressive facility that is delivering significant benefits to the community of Dunoon.

I draw Drew Smith’s attention to the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, which was published today along with a policy memorandum and explanatory notes in which we make it abundantly clear that Scottish Water will remain in public ownership while we remain in government. Unlike the Labour Party, we will not follow the Tory agenda of privatisation.

As part of our drive to achieve sustainable economic growth, the Government has greatly enhanced ease of access to public sector contracts, especially through the introduction of the public contracts Scotland service, which provides suppliers with free access to thousands of Scottish contracting opportunities. Since the website’s launch in 2008, more than 15,000 public contract opportunities have been advertised on it. The service currently has more than 60,000 supplier registrations, in excess of 80 per cent of which are small and medium-sized enterprises. The website consistently achieves more than 1 million page views every month.

I raised that point yesterday in Brussels with Commissioner Barnier, who is in overall charge of public procurement reform in Brussels. The European Commission and the Scottish Government will take forward work on that. As for some of the nonsense that has been put around about the ability of small to medium-sized enterprises in Scotland to win work, I can tell Graeme Dey that, according to figures for the Forth replacement crossing, 87 per cent of the supply orders and 60 per cent of the subcontract work have gone to Scottish companies. Those figures make an absolute nonsense of the misinformation and disinformation that the Labour Party is putting about.

The rules on the adoption of private drains and sewers have been agreed by the Government and the Water Industry Commission for Scotland. Those rules are laid out clearly in information leaflets on Scottish Water’s website. In connecting new customers, Scottish Water must ensure that drains and sewers meet a required level of performance and do not create liabilities that it would fall to existing customers to fund.

As always, I would be more than happy to meet the member to discuss any particular problems that he has in his constituency and to invite the senior management of Scottish Water to such a meeting to try to resolve any issues that need to be addressed.

I am already aware of the problem and investigating the specifics of it. Once I have concluded my investigations, I will write to the member, after which I am more than happy to meet her, along with senior management from Scottish Water, to try to resolve any outstanding issues.

Consultation is mandatory if the matter is included in the title deeds. When the deeds do not make provision for the process of appointing a factor, the tenement management scheme in the Tenements (Scotland) Act 2004 may apply. The scheme makes provision for majority decisions at meetings or, failing that, following consultation.

The answer is more complex than a straight yes or no because it depends on the status of the title deeds and various other factors. I suggest that Ms Murray writes to me with the specifics and we will do our best to give her a definitive reply on what applies in the circumstances.

The member has written to Keith Brown, the Minister for Housing and Transport, on that point and will receive a detailed reply in the next few days. We are looking at any unintended consequences of the legislation with a view to making any necessary amendments in the housing bill that is planned for introduction next year.

Our plans for junction improvements at the Sheriffhall roundabout on the A720 Edinburgh city bypass are outlined in intervention 22 of the strategic transport projects review, commonly referred to as the STPR. We continue to engage with the relevant authorities regarding their proposals for future development around Sheriffhall to help to inform the further detailed design and development work required to determine the nature of those junction improvements.

We recognise the importance of upgrading Sheriffhall roundabout, which is why it is included in the STPR. The timetable for the junction improvements will be set in the context of overall affordability and our commitments to other STPR proposals. Inevitably, the 30 per cent reduction in our capital budget that Westminster has imposed is delaying programmes such as that one because, if we had the money, we would have been able to carry out many such projects far sooner than we will now be able to.

That was a welcome intervention on intervention 22. I am absolutely sure that every intervention in the STPR is there primarily with the Borders in mind and will help Christine Grahame. We are absolutely determined to improve transport in the Borders, as we are throughout Scotland.

Our current focus is on finalising the Scottish ferries plan, which will define the main features of the future procurement of the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. An announcement on the timescale for the tendering of those services will be made in due course.

I am aware of the concerns. Within the procurement legislation and the framework of the European Union, we will do what we can to ensure that there is a level playing field in ferries procurement, as we do throughout the Government procurement process. Like David Stewart, I am very impressed by the work that CalMac has undertaken, but of course I cannot allow that to dictate the outcome of any particular contract award.

The long-term nature of the hub programme facilitates the creation of new employment and training opportunities, and supports the development of long-term sustainable businesses. Central to being appointed as a hub territory partner is making a pledge to create employment opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises and the third sector and supporting and engaging with local communities and training programmes. To date, more than 80 per cent of the value of hub construction work has been locally procured among SME companies. The hub programme is also delivering high-quality public buildings for joint occupation by health, education, social work and other community staff, and the co-location of services is supporting the on-going drive to improve public services for communities right across Scotland.

The Drumbrae library hub is the first project to be completed by hub South East Scotland Ltd, and the first hub project to be completed in Scotland. I am delighted that it has received an enthusiastic welcome from local residents. The hub programme that the Scottish Futures Trust is taking forward will deliver £1.4 billion of community infrastructure across Scotland over the next 10 years. It is an innovative approach, and central to its success is collaborative working among local authorities, health boards, blue-light services and private sector development partners. I look forward to many more projects like the Drumbrae library hub being delivered, bringing benefits to local communities throughout the country. That would not have happened if we had listened to the Labour Opposition and its opposition to the creation of the Scottish Futures Trust.

I am totally satisfied that the procurement arrangements are perfectly in order in relation to both EU legislation and our own requirements. The reason for the delay in the specific project to which Mr Chisholm referred is to get agreement on some of the details among all the constituent partners, but my understanding is that substantial progress is now being made.

I do not think that any member of the Labour Party is in a good position on this, given the huge disaster that private finance initiatives have left both north and south of the border. Let us take a Labour Party PFI project such as the one at Hairmyres hospital, where we will end up spending three to four times the original cost of the project. Labour opposed the SFT, but the SFT is delivering for the people of Scotland. Labour imposed cuts and the Conservatives endorsed them, and if it had not been for the SFT, we would not be getting new colleges in Inverness, Kilmarnock and Glasgow, we would not be making progress with the sick children’s hospital in Edinburgh, and we would not be doing all the other things that the Government is doing that Labour failed to deliver over eight years.

The significant increases to air passenger duty implemented by the United Kingdom Government since 2007 have been damaging for Scotland’s aviation sector, our tourism industry, our wider economy and of course passengers. They have also been prejudicial to the efforts of the Scottish Government and Scotland’s airports to attract new direct international air services to Scotland. In our engagement with airports and airlines, we are frequently told that the level of air passenger duty is a barrier to the introduction of those services. We will continue to make the strong case for the devolution of air passenger duty now.

A number of factors affect investment decisions by airport operators and airlines, but APD at its current level—it will increase again next year—has a major bearing and is taken into consideration in whether investment goes ahead and in the timing of any investment. There is no doubt that it is very damaging to the Scottish economy.

I had a meeting this morning with Tom Wilson, managing director of Prestwick airport, and we agreed an action plan to assist Prestwick airport. I find it strange to hear a member of the Tory party admitting that APD is detrimental to Prestwick and the Scottish economy. If the member votes for independence, we can sort it.

I assume that the figures to which the member refers featured in the Ofcom “Communications Market Report” of August 2011. More recent Ofcom data, published in its United Kingdom “Communications Infrastructure Report 2011” in November, indicate that 2G mobile coverage is at 94.5 per cent of Scottish premises, with only 0.2 per cent of Scottish premises being in complete mobile not-spots. The Scottish Government is clear on the vital importance of further improving mobile coverage, including 2G voice coverage, in Scotland. To that end, I have made representations to Jeremy Hunt, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture, Media, Olympics and Sport to ensure that the UK Government’s mobile infrastructure project, the aim of which is to increase 2G coverage to 99 per cent throughout the UK through the procurement of additional masts, has maximum possible impact in Scotland for both voice and data coverage.

We are totally committed to meeting our 2015 targets throughout all Scotland, including the beautiful village of Barr. As part of our on-going engagement with local authorities and of our implementation plan, we will be in dialogue with South Ayrshire Council to identify local priorities over the summer. We will hold a series of workshops with local government to progress that, and South Ayrshire Council will be invited to participate.

Information on the total number of public sector contracts in Scotland is not held centrally, so it is not possible to calculate the percentage of contracts that is published on the public contracts Scotland portal. Information available from the portal shows that almost 4,700 contract notices were published on the website during 2011, which is an increase of 20 per cent on the previous year. A further 4,493 requests for quotations were issued during the same period.

We are in the process of carrying out a substantial reform programme in relation to procurement, including assembling more accurate statistics on an on-going basis. I am always delighted to provide more information to help Mr Brown to improve his argument.

Thank you for allowing me to update Parliament on the review, which I commissioned last October, of the fuel poverty strategy. In the light of rising energy prices, I wanted an independent body to take another look at how we are tackling the issue and to bring forward ideas. The review—led by the Scottish fuel poverty forum, which I re-established—was published today. The forum represents a wide range of stakeholders, from energy companies to campaigning groups, so gaining consensus is difficult. However, it has produced an excellent interim report, which is backed by all its members. I thank the forum very much for its valuable contribution to the debate about how we can tackle the problem of fuel poverty. That problem is a disgrace in an energy-rich nation. I have met the chair of the forum—Professor David Sigsworth—to discuss the forum’s main recommendations, and am happy to inform members that I support all of them. Our building regulations for housing have the most demanding energy standards in the United Kingdom, and are comparable with the best in Europe. Despite that, we still have a major legacy problem in respect of poor-condition stock and fuel poverty in our existing stock. Around 80 per cent of homes across Scotland will still be in use when our final emissions targets are to be met in 2050. We must focus on the existing housing stock in order to tackle fuel poverty and to achieve the housing milestones that we need to reach in order to meet our emissions targets. That is why I will introduce a national retrofit programme, which will initially focus on areas of fuel poverty and related deprivation. In the spending review, the Scottish Government showed its determination to tackle fuel poverty head-on. In contrast with the UK Government, we are not cutting our fuel poverty budget to ribbons, but are providing around £0.25 billion for fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes. We need to identify solutions that will supplement that budget so that we can spend at least the £200 million annually that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee called for in its excellent report on fuel poverty. I believe that we can deliver those sums by designing schemes that lever in obligations to be placed on energy companies. The forum will work with us and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in designing a national retrofit programme to work alongside energy company obligations, and to produce schemes that provide the biggest bang for everyone’s buck. The programme will prioritise fuel poor areas and will cover the whole of Scotland in around 10 years: it will finish the job that was started by our area-based insulation schemes and build on the successes of our current fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes. Some 122,000 households have already received physical measures through those schemes, and a further 382,000 households have received other assistance. It is estimated that, over the lifetime of the measures that will be installed under the schemes, there will be a net gain in household income of around £700 million and a saving of 3 million tonnes of CO2. We are working with COSLA to give local authorities a wider role in delivery of the new programme and in promotion of benefits to the community, because they have a great deal of knowledge about the areas that need to be tackled and there is a level of trust of them in their communities that allows them to make it over the doorstep and to assist householders to undertake essential work. I also asked the forum to look at the definition of fuel poverty and to confirm whether it is still valid. By and large, the forum believes that it is still valid and has asked that further research be done in order to provide greater insight on the causes of fuel poverty. I welcome that approach because the problem cannot be defined away by using a different way of counting. We need to understand more about why fuel poverty is so prevalent, and where investment in the fabric of our housing stock can improve health and wellbeing. The problem touches all parts of Scotland, but is most acute in rural and remote communities that simply do not have access to mains gas and in which the housing is not always suitable for loft and cavity-wall insulation. In our 2011 manifesto, we highlighted how we would, in order to establish a Scottish futures fund, use savings that were made by the Scottish Futures Trust and Transport Scotland in the deal that was reached to construct the Forth replacement crossing. That fund will enable us to take action to create opportunities and tackle injustice across our society. We have committed to investing £50 million in our warm homes fund in this session from the £250 million that will be saved, in order to deliver renewable energy and energy efficient homes in the communities that are worst affected by fuel poverty. I will make a further announcement shortly about when we expect to launch the fund. Extension of the gas grid, where it makes economic sense to do so, is an extremely effective way to reduce fuel poverty. We have taken that suggestion from the forum and made available £5 million in loan funding to provide connections. From 1 September, that fund will be open for business and will provide an opportunity for approximately 10,000 fuel-poor households in communities across the country to benefit. However, energy efficiency can never be a total solution to fuel poverty. If we raised the entire housing stock in Scotland to a minimum of 10 on the national home-energy rating, we would still have a level of fuel poverty of around 14 per cent. However, as members know, we do not have full control over other causes of fuel poverty—yet. Pricing has the biggest impact on fuel poverty, and I urge all energy companies to do their utmost to shelter the most vulnerable people from price increases. We must tackle energy prices and increase incomes if we are to eradicate fuel poverty. We do not have the powers now, but we want to change that, so we will give the Scottish people the chance to rectify the situation in 2015. In the meantime, we will do all that we possibly can with the powers that we have to maximise incomes and to assist households to access lower tariffs and reduce their energy bills. We are continuing to work with energy companies. At the summit that we hosted with the big six last November, the energy suppliers agreed to work in partnership to maximise the carbon emissions reduction target scheme and the community energy saving programme in their final year; to implement concerted action to contact vulnerable customers and to offer support to help them to transfer to the most efficient tariff; to achieve clarity, transparency, simplicity and fair choice for consumers; to offer support to the voluntary sector to engage with hard-to-reach groups; and to provide more detail on help through trust funds and so on. Since then, we have worked with trusted intermediary organisations and the energy suppliers to deliver the actions that were set out in the communiqué. We have made good progress. Energy companies have already taken action to publish their best tariffs and best energy efficiency offerings in a common format; to signpost customers to the home energy Scotland hotline; to introduce greater incentives to encourage take-up of free insulation; to provide full information on and to proactively promote their trust funds; to reduce prices and/or undertake annual and tariff reviews; and to work with intermediaries to maximise uptake of the CERT scheme. We are engaging with the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets to consider how the retail market review will provide further progress on that, and to ensure that vulnerable customers can gain the benefits from the market that internet-savvy consumers who are regular switchers already enjoy. All those measures are essential to tackling fuel poverty in Scotland. In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank Professor Sigsworth and the forum for the interim report, and to confirm once again the Government’s commitment to tackling fuel poverty and to implementing the forum’s recommendations.

Housing associations already have access to the relatively cheap electricity tariffs that are available through the national public sector contract for electricity. Along with other intermediary organisations, we are taking measures to increase take-up by housing associations of that opportunity, which could make a substantial difference to the tariffs that are paid by tenants of housing association properties. Local authorities are, of course, already part of that deal, and we are keen to extend it as far as possible across the social rented sector. Secondly, as far as budgets are concerned, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report called for a total of £200 million to be spent on tackling fuel poverty every year. It is my intention that, between what the Scottish Government puts in and what we can expect as our share of the energy company obligation commitments under the new arrangements that are being introduced under the Energy Act 2011, we will meet the commitment to spend £200 million a year. About £120 million will come from the energy companies. The amount that we provide through the warm homes fund will go up to about £18 million in 2014-15. With existing funding, that will add about another £66 million or £67 million. Together, those funds will help to fund the national retrofit programme.

Given the utter mess that George Osborne made of oil taxation, I do not think that any Tory is in a good position to criticise us. Alex Johnstone asked two substantive questions. First, I give an absolute guarantee that isolated rural communities will not be at the tail end of the programme. Indeed, it could be argued that many of those communities should be at the front end of the programme, because many of them are in the most dire need when it comes to fuel poverty. The range of options that is open to people who live in towns and cities is just not available to people in such communities—access to the gas grid is a classic example of that. Therefore, they are pretty restricted in how they can tackle fuel supply and fuel poverty. It is incumbent on us to prioritise those communities. The second question was about what the new fund for gas connections will achieve. To a large extent, that will depend on who applies for the funding and how big the villages are. For example, some villages that qualify for funding might be very small—more like hamlets of 30 or 40 houses—while others may be of 200 or 300 houses. The cost difference between them might not be that big because we are paying for the basic connection. It will be very difficult to give an accurate estimate. Undoubtedly, there is a huge pent-up demand for that kind of funding throughout Scotland so I anticipate that the take-up will be very high indeed.

The top priority is to ensure our share of ECO funding under the new arrangements in the new Energy Act 2011. We hope to have agreement on that with the UK Government and the energy companies within the next few months. We will then be able to make much more detailed plans for implementation of the national retrofit programme, which we intend to start at the beginning of the new financial year in 2013. From the index of multiple deprivation, we know down to postcode area where poverty is at its greatest. Those communities will be given priority in the implementation of the programme.

I am very keen to ensure that there are no technological restrictions on the programme so that, for example, cavity wall and loft insulation can be made available to everyone in Scotland and not restricted, as it is at the moment. Pre-1919 and hard-to-heat housing, which was built in the days when roofs and attics were not built to be particularly accessible, can be a problem but we have to compensate for that with other forms of insulation to ensure that every house in Scotland meets the necessary standard. I take Elaine Murray’s point that we should try to ensure that the choice that is available is wide enough to cater for all possibilities.

My officials have been in close dialogue with COSLA during and after the council elections. Once COSLA has appointed its new spokesperson, I will arrange an early meeting on fuel poverty. The previous spokesperson, Councillor Harry McGuigan, was very helpful under COSLA’s previous regime and I am sure that we will have a good working relationship with the COSLA representative. There is general agreement with COSLA that we have to move along with the national retrofit programme. I understand that there is a great deal of enthusiasm for the principle of the programme—in particular, for the idea that local authorities will be primarily responsible for delivering it.

That latter point is a very fair one. We will look at the issue, because we do not want to miss out anybody. However, I emphasise that the purpose of the programme is to cover the whole of Scotland, so although we are prioritising fuel-poor areas, we will move on to the non-fuel-poor areas because, in order that we can meet our fuel poverty and emissions targets, we will have to cover the existing homes stock to ensure that it is up to standard. I do not have funding in my budget for microrenewables, but I take Rhoda Grant’s point on that and I will raise it with my colleague Mr Swinney.

As John Mason will be aware, last year I extended the energy assistance programme to cover carers, who make a major contribution to looking after vulnerable members of our community. I anticipate—in fact, I am absolutely sure and determined—that carers will qualify for the national retrofit programme, just as they qualify today for the energy assistance programme.

My colleagues Mr Swinney and Mr Ewing are considering the role that district heating can play as it falls within their bailiwick, rather than mine. However, we are on the same page on the issue. Where we can use district heating systems to alleviate fuel poverty and reduce emissions, we should try to do so.

We have down the years run various campaigns to encourage uptake. It is an on-going battle to encourage more people, particularly pensioners, to take up the range of advice and support that is available, including access to lower tariffs and, in some cases, additional benefits. If members want to help their constituents, I suggest that they get them to phone the freephone number 0800 512012 to access advice on all aspects of the benefits to which they are entitled, and on how to improve their heating situation.

I will just correct Liam McArthur. We are not having a “referendum on separation”. We are having a referendum on independence. Separation is a 19th century concept. Now that I have corrected the member, I will make two points. First, we are working with local authorities individually and collectively and we will work with them on the design of the programme to ensure that island and remote and rural communities are all covered by the programme and get the requisite priority. Secondly—I know that this is a particular issue for Liam McArthur in Orkney—we intend that the programme will be delivered by local authorities, which I hope will have major spin-offs in local economies so that more local contractors and local jobs can be assisted by the associated spend. One of the lessons that we have learned is that, rather than arranging the delivery mechanism at national level, it is more effective to have the delivery mechanism arranged at local level—particularly at local authority level. We hope that the major spin-off benefits of that will be more jobs, more investment and more economic activity in each local authority area.

As I have already said to Richard Baker, we are already doing that through the national public sector electricity contract. Every tenant in every housing association in Scotland has, in principle, access to the tariffs under the public sector electricity contract.

We already have a district heating loan scheme that is funding schemes across the country. It has a budget of at least £5 million for the next three years and is currently open to applications. I agree with those who have said that that is not enough. We want to transform the scale of uptake of district heating in Scotland. As I said earlier, my colleagues Mr Swinney and Mr Ewing are working to that end and have set up an expert commission on district heating to identify the challenges and drive progress.

The fact of life is that we have run a number of successful fuel poverty programmes. The energy assistance package and both our insulation programmes have had a tremendous impact in terms of the number of people whom they have helped and the money that they have saved those people. The national retrofit programme is a natural progression from where we are today. I am sure that Patrick Harvie thinks, with hindsight, that his ideas are always the best. No doubt, we all think that. I hope that, in the spirit of consensus that has been shown around the chamber, he will accept that a national retrofit programme is the way ahead.

Will the member give way?

Public bodies in Scotland can procure goods and services from organisations with supported employment, either by reserving contracts under article 19 of the European public procurement directive or in open competition with other potential suppliers. The Scottish procurement directorate is in the process of establishing a national collaborative framework agreement for supported factories and businesses, which is expected to be in place by the autumn.

Since October 2010, through the public contracts Scotland mechanism, 13 contracts have been issued to supported businesses, which are valued at £14.6 million. In addition, Scottish public bodies have spent £24.1 million with Scotland-based supported businesses in the most recent financial year for which figures are available, which is 2010-11. We are in discussions with Remploy. I have made it clear to it that we are committed to trying to maximise the opportunities for Remploy and other supported businesses to get contracts from the Scottish Government, particularly under article 19 and similar mechanisms. I am also encouraging supported businesses, when appropriate, to tender for more general work, because they sometimes offer a more competitive tender than private companies can offer.

The task force is looking at all the consequences and implications of the UK Government’s regrettable decision to close the Remploy factories in Scotland. It is equally regrettable that factories south of the border are being closed. We have a number of objectives. First, we want to ensure that the people who are displaced as a result of the decisions have the best opportunity to find alternative employment. Secondly, as I said, we want to ensure that Remploy can maximise its opportunities for future procurement and work through public sector contracts. Thirdly, we are anxious to ensure that we assist those who depend on Remploy, either directly or indirectly, for employment and income. The task force is addressing all those issues. It meets fairly regularly with a view to putting together a plan to do the best that we can in Scotland to overcome the consequences of what I think is a fairly harsh and inhumane decision.

I have not met the British Geological Survey.

There have always been major golden nuggets around Patna, so I am sure that we would find a lot of productive resources there—some have left, of course. The Scottish Government has no plans to commit to full-scale geological surveys of the type indicated. The matter is for the British Geological Survey, but we are happy to discuss with it any opportunities that might arise for economic development and jobs in Scotland from the work that it has done and may do in the future, although that is primarily a matter for my colleague Fergus Ewing.

The Scottish Government is making excellent progress in implementing “Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan”. We will publish very soon our procurement plan, which sets out the Government’s approach and the action that we will take to deliver a step change in broadband speeds and reduce the digital divide by 2015. The plan has been developed in collaboration with local authorities and sets out our commitment to delivering the much-needed digital infrastructure across Scotland in partnership with them. Procurement in the Highlands and Islands is now at an advanced stage of negotiations, with contract award expected in August and the delivery of improvements expected early next year. Procurement covering the rest of Scotland will go to tender in September, with contract award in early 2013 and the delivery of improvements as soon as possible thereafter.

Members know that I am not one to criticise North Lanarkshire Council unfairly. I will state the factual position. North Lanarkshire Council is not known by the Scottish Government to have developed a local broadband plan. Although representatives of the council attended an early Scottish Government broadband workshop on local authority engagement in June 2011, the council is not known to have acted proactively with regard to broadband development since that time. However, as part of our on-going engagement with local authorities in connection with the implementation of programme 1, we will enter into dialogue with the council to identify its priorities over the summer. We will hold a series of workshops with local government to progress the matter and North Lanarkshire Council will be invited to participate.

No, it is not too late at all. We have said that, by 2015, 85 to 90 per cent of Scotland will be covered by superfast broadband, with speeds of between 40Mbps and 80Mbps in most cases. Over the past two years, in particular, substantial progress has been made in the Highlands and Islands, and a number of areas including Grampian, the south of Scotland and Fife are well advanced in their plans. I urge Mr Baker to encourage other local authorities, including North Lanarkshire Council, to follow the example of those councils that are well ahead of the game.

The Scottish Government is committed to community-led regeneration, which is at the heart of our approach as set out in “Achieving a Sustainable Future: Regeneration Strategy”. On 8 May, I launched the people and communities fund, which is designed specifically to support community-led regeneration across Scotland. Also, we will shortly launch our consultation on the community empowerment and renewal bill, which will support communities to achieve their own goals and aspirations. Local authorities are responsible for local regeneration and we expect them to deliver that alongside their other critical functions and place community-led regeneration at the heart of their regeneration plans.

Okay, Presiding Officer. I will be very succinct, as usual. I am very much aware of the challenges that face those two towns in the Borders in particular. I invite the member, along with representatives of Scottish Borders Council, to meet me to discuss how we can do more to help the council and others to regenerate the two towns.

We are committed to consulting on ways of further reforming the right to buy, and my officials have had discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Local Authority Chief Housing Officers about the content and timing of the forthcoming consultation.

We are doing two things in North Ayrshire, as we are throughout the country. Through a subsidy to councils, we are encouraging them to build council houses again. Between the council and housing associations, 245 new houses have been or are being built in North Ayrshire with our assistance. Our previous reforms to the right to buy mean that councils can build new houses knowing that they will not be asset stripped in future. It is a great pity that the new Conservative-Labour coalition in East Lothian has decided to reintroduce the right to buy, which makes nonsense of Labour’s position on that policy issue.

Scottish Water is required by the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 to have a consultation code. The code, which is available on Scottish Water’s website, sets out how it and its representatives will work in partnership to ensure that individuals, communities and stakeholders are engaged in discussion early in the life of projects and developments. The code does not prevent Scottish Water from taking appropriate operational decisions concerning a water supply.

In line with the code that I described and with planning legislation, Scottish Water undertook extensive consultation of relevant stakeholders and customers in the Aviemore area prior to submitting its planning application for the new works in September 2008. I have had reassurances from the Drinking Water Quality Regulator for Scotland that the supply comfortably meets the stringent legislative standards. The regulator is continuing to monitor the quality of the supply and Scottish Water’s response in addressing any consumer concerns.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, the Minister for Housing and Transport and I have pressed our counterparts in the UK Government on a number of occasions over the past 12 months to devolve air passenger duty in quick order, but the UK Government has continued to prevaricate. That not only stifles our ambition to reform APD to better suit Scottish circumstances, but goes against the wishes of our four biggest airports and other significant interests, such as the Scottish Chambers of Commerce. We will continue to make the strong case for devolution of air passenger duty now.

I absolutely agree with Derek Provan’s sentiments that air passenger duty in its current form is damaging for Scotland’s aviation sector, as well as for our tourism industry and wider economy and, of course, passengers. We have repeatedly urged the UK Government to consider the impact of APD rises in Scotland, but it has not listened. The only way to ensure that Scotland gets a fair deal is for APD to be devolved now. I welcome Derek Provan’s support for the devolution of APD and the support of his counterparts from airports elsewhere in Scotland.

We are working with the Scottish Futures Trust to explore how EU project bonds could be used to support infrastructure investment in Scotland.

Scotland’s digital ambition is fully aligned with the EU 2020 strategy, and the Scottish Government views the project bond initiative as an essential mechanism for securing potentially significant levels of finance, which will be essential for delivery of our world-class targets. The Scottish Government is already exploring how Scotland can act as an early pilot and accelerate the key broadband initiatives that are set out in our infrastructure investment plan.

European structural funds have for many years played a profound role in facilitating structural economic reform in our regions, supporting restructuring and development in key sectors and supporting opportunities and individuals in disadvantaged and vulnerable communities. As the minister responsible for structural funds, I am delighted at the positive impact that the substantial European funds have made and continue to make through the current programmes. I see the value that structural funds provide in my own constituency, for example in the routes into work project, which is part of North Lanarkshire’s working employability service. The project, which is funded by £1.1 million of structural funds, provides key workers who travel across North Lanarkshire with access to a wide range of education, training and employment opportunities. I was pleased that the importance of structural funds was recognised in the chamber recently with the debate that was initiated by the European and External Relations Committee, which does such fine work. Structural funds have been pivotal in supporting economic recovery following the global downturn; in supporting our ambitions for renewable energy; in providing training opportunities for young people; in providing access to finance for our hard-pressed businesses; and in supporting research and development. We have allocated over £650 million since 2007, supporting more than 14,000 businesses, creating nearly 20,000 jobs and providing advice and support to more than 240,000 individuals to enter employment or to progress in the workplace. We responded to the economic downturn by front-loading expenditure and taking a strategic approach to delivering projects that provide real added value. Given the Government’s commitment to youth employment, I am also keen to respond to the call that was made by President Barroso in response to the rising levels of youth unemployment across Europe. That plea was for us all to do more to support youth employment. In January, he called for member states to develop youth jobs plans; increase the number of apprenticeships and traineeships; guarantee a job or training within four months of leaving school; and redirect structural funds to give priority to youth unemployment. Scotland is already responding. With the Minister for Youth Employment, a draft youth employment strategy and our opportunities for all guarantee, we are ahead of the curve. We have made it clear that we will take an all-Government, all-Scotland approach to youth employment. That is why I will ask the structural funds programme committee in the lowlands and uplands area to prioritise youth employment with the structural funds that remain unallocated in the period up to 2014. That could provide up to £25 million support for a range of initiatives from training to business development and recruitment incentives which, along with match funding, would guarantee total investment of at least £50 million. We will work together with the public, private and third sectors. We want to break the cycle that too many of our young people find themselves unable to escape from. We all hear of young people who are unable to get a job because they have not had the experience of work, but who cannot get the experience of work because they do not have a job. We want to break that cycle. By incentivising recruitment and getting young people into real jobs, we can start to break it. Of course, the global financial downturn means that these are tough times for everyone, including our small and medium-sized enterprises. We understand that, as our support for SMEs demonstrates. We want to ensure that we can further support our SMEs to give chances to our young people, who will in turn be the people who build the SMEs of the future. We want our public sector partners and the business community to work with us on supporting young people into real jobs. That is why I want the focus of the funds to be incentivising the recruitment of young people into jobs. That will build on the £30 million that the Scottish Government has already committed to youth employment. That brings me neatly on to the future programmes for structural funds that will run from 2014 to 2020. Many of you will be aware that the European Commission published its legislative package in October 2011. The Commission proposes an innovative approach to encourage co-operative and partnership working at all levels. Given the team Scotland approach that we take in this Government, we very much welcome the Commission’s approach at all levels. At a strategic level, the Commission wants to see closer integration between structural funds, rural development funds and fisheries funds. It aims to achieve that through common regulations and programme arrangements and a common strategic framework that will apply to all the funds and ensure that funds are concentrated around key themes. The common regulations will support alignment and integration of those funds by focusing resources on 11 common thematic objectives that are linked to the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy. That should help to simplify the planning and implementation arrangements, focus the funds on results and reduce the administrative burden for all those who are involved in European funding. The 11 thematic objectives and the Europe 2020 strategy objectives fit well with the Scottish Government’s priorities as set out in our economic strategy, which are focusing on providing a supportive business environment; improving access to finance; supporting innovation and R and D; transitioning Scotland to a low-carbon economy; and ensuring that individuals have the skills and knowledge to compete in the labour market. Those ambitions—our ambitions for Scotland—are all reflected in the Commission’s thematic objectives. In the new programmes, co-operation at a strategic level will be articulated through the partnership agreement. That will be produced at a Scottish level and will feed into the overall United Kingdom-wide partnership agreement. The Scottish agreement will be built from the bottom up with our stakeholders and will set out how the funds will, separately and together, maximise their impact on Scotland by prioritising the objectives that matter most to us. We will work at local and regional levels to develop our plans for supporting local and regional development. The common arrangements identify a number of ways of supporting that approach. We have significant experience of such an approach, given our work with community planning partnerships and the strategic and effective role that they have played in delivering structural funds under the current arrangements. The approach also builds on the excellent work that has been done through LEADER and fisheries local action groups, which bring together local stakeholders from the public, private and third sectors to develop and deliver local solutions to local issues. With reducing budgets, we can and must make the best use of all available resources. By looking across the funds and working together, we can achieve synergies. As with all things, we can achieve more collectively than we can individually. That is why, in working with Richard Lochhead, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, we established a programme board to move forward the work on integration. The initial phase of that work has been completed and we are now committed to moving forward on developing the Scottish partnership agreement with our stakeholders over the coming months. We will work with partners to identify the opportunities for exploiting the integration of funds. For example, in supporting renewable energy, there is scope for us to fund large strategic projects through the European regional development fund, which could be complemented by smaller local developments that are funded through the rural development fund. There is the opportunity to provide joint support for research and development on renewable energy sources from the ERDF and the European agricultural fund for rural development. To support the competitiveness of SMEs and the agriculture and fisheries sectors, a key area for collaboration and integration across the funds must surely be our food and drink sector. We intend to work closely with partners over the coming months to develop and shape our future programmes. We will do that openly and collaboratively through informal consultation, for example through our future of the funds blog, and in more formal ways. I look forward to working constructively with all colleagues in the Parliament and MSPs from all corners on moving the process forward for Scotland’s benefit.

I thank the member for welcoming the statement and I will try to answer his questions. First, this money will be focused on trying to get young people into jobs. As the member knows, we are spending a great deal of money on apprenticeships and training, and on employability. What we want to do with this money is to focus on getting young people into employment, which I am sure the member welcomes. I accept that we still have a number of sectors to consult. However, this is an on-going process to try to influence decisions, particularly those taken in Brussels. As the member knows, the budget and the funds for the period beyond 2014 will not be the subject of a final decision for some considerable time. We want to ensure that we have a team Scotland approach, including in the chamber. Ideally, we want to speak with one voice, which would be more effective in Europe in ensuring that we get access to the funds that we need. I entirely agree with the member on the third sector’s efficiency and effectiveness in delivering programmes. That has been proved many times over, not just in relation to the delivery of European-funded programmes but through a range of different services that are provided throughout Scotland. I am keen to ensure that the third sector plays its full part in the delivery of our youth employment funding, as well as in the wider programmes that we are discussing.

I thank the member for his positive statements and positive approach. First, with this money, we can simultaneously help young, unemployed people to get into employment and help our SMEs. I expect that the recruitment will be heavily focused in the SME sector, particularly in some of the growth sectors in Scotland. One example is the information technology sector, particularly the software sector, in which many companies have been growing by 10, 20 and, in some cases, 30 per cent a year even when the rest of the economy is pretty flat. Matching young people with the opportunities in the IT sector with this money is one example of how we can match up the needs of the SMEs with young, unemployed people. Secondly, the tremendous work that is being done by the Minister for Youth Employment is very much focused on trying to get young people to exploit the opportunities, particularly where there are shortages of skills or people in any part of the economy. The member made a point about matching the opportunities for skilling, reskilling and jobs in areas where there is a shortage of people with the right skills with people who are unemployed or who need to go up the skills ladder. That is absolutely at the core of the work that the minister is doing.

Good progress is being made on the development of the Scottish smart specialisation strategy. We believe that it will provide opportunities for us to share with others Scotland’s particular strengths and expertise while enabling us to learn from other successful regions in Europe. For those who are unfamiliar with the programme, I explain that the purpose of smart specialisation is to encourage EU regions to develop a strategic approach that is based on their unique competitive advantages. Scotland has already been pursuing a smart specialisation approach through our focus on supporting and developing key sectors, thus placing us in a strong position to participate in the smart specialisation agenda. A Scottish smart specialisation approach paper was submitted to the European Commission for review on 26 January and we will receive initial feedback from the Commission on our proposals later today. Over the summer, we will work to refine and develop our strategy with a view to officially joining the smart specialisation platform later this year.

I very much agree with the member about the need for local and locally driven initiatives. Our experience, not just of European funding programmes but across many areas of Government, is that community-led initiatives are far more successful and long lasting than those that are handed down from central Government. I give the member an absolute guarantee that a major focus of all our efforts on European funds and beyond will be to help community-led regeneration. The LEADER project, in its various guises, is a good example of how community-led regeneration in rural areas can be very effective—I am totally at one with the member on that. That is a key part of our strategic approach.

I can confirm that. The ERDF, in particular, has a clear focus on helping to fund the transition to a low-carbon economy. Indeed, 30 per cent of funding has been allocated in that way, amounting to about £90 million. The Cardenden heat and power project, to which Annabelle Ewing referred, is exactly the kind of project that we want to encourage throughout Scotland.

I entirely agree with the member. It is extremely important that the Highlands and Islands is regarded as a transition region, which will allow it to access the necessary funds to help to reinforce and expand the economy in the area. Although many parts of the Highlands and Islands—not least in and around Inverness—are doing particularly well, in many areas, such as parts of the Western Isles, there are still relatively high levels of unemployment and deprivation. We will need to continue to fund and invest in the Highlands and Islands between 2014 and 2020, to ensure that we bring the whole region up to a similar standard to that enjoyed by the rest of Scotland.

There are a number of lessons to be learned, one of which is the need for better co-ordination and integration in relation to the use of the funds. Let me put things in perspective: we expect a budget of around £600 million in structural funds between 2014 and 2020; the European rural development fund is of a similar size, and there is much complementarity between the two funds. That is why we are keen to move to a more integrated approach. If we had our way, we would move faster to a much more integrated approach than the Commission is proposing. Nevertheless, we are taking the right direction of travel, because the ability to look at the funds in a more rounded way and to have a more integrated and co-ordinated approach will help us to get a bigger bang for the buck as we use the moneys.

The Government works with the Department for Work and Pensions day in, day out on a range of programmes, including the youth contract. We will use any programme and any fund that will help to generate youth employment and reduce youth unemployment in Scotland, which is a key priority for the Government. We do not care if we have to sup with the devil to achieve that objective; the important thing is that we get young people into work.

The Scottish Government’s position is very clear. We support both the concept and the practice of transition regions and, for a number of reasons, we are anxious to ensure that the Highlands and Islands continues as a transition region in the 2014 to 2020 programme. Rob Gibson referred to the opportunities for young people in the Highlands and Islands. In the past, one of the problems there has been depopulation, particularly as a result of young people leaving to get job opportunities outwith the area. Depopulation feeds unemployment, deprivation and poverty, and eventually erodes communities. It is therefore extremely important not just for youth employment but for the long-term economic sustainability of many communities in the Highlands and Islands that we get additional funding to ensure that the income per head and levels of employment in every corner of the Highlands and Islands are not just brought up on average but brought up to the Scottish average and thereafter to the European average.

Additionality is a key aspect of European funding. It is important that we continue to ensure that we get maximum added value from our European funding, which is why match funding rules and the like are in place. They are to ensure that we get a joined-up approach as often as possible. In relation to sustainability, a very good example is the SPRUCE, or Scottish partnership for regeneration in urban centres, fund, which is a JESSICA, or joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas, fund. A total of £50 million is available for investment, albeit that it is loan funding, in regeneration projects in Glasgow and elsewhere. There are 13 qualifying authorities for the SPRUCE project. I think that it will make a major contribution to the regeneration of many parts of our urban areas in the years to come and that it will help to maintain not just the sustainability of the funds but, more important, the sustainability of urban communities.

Unfortunately, it is too early to say that. We do not know the answer to that question, and it is likely to be months, if not even longer, before we do. However, in our wide-ranging engagement with our stakeholders, including the new Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, we want to ensure that the funds that are eventually allocated to and confirmed for Scotland are used most effectively, particularly in tackling major problems, such as youth employment. We also want to ensure that both urban and rural communities benefit from those funds and that they are targeted in the areas of highest priority need.

It is not an English inquiry.

I do not ask the following question to try to score points. Given that we have gone back into recession and that the construction industry provides one of the best and quickest ways of getting us out of recession, does the member think that the UK Government should consider allocating additional funding for capital spending, particularly on housing and construction?

As it is clear that the member watched “Sunday Politics Scotland”, will she answer the question that Mr Baker could not answer and tell us what Labour would cut in order to reinstate the BSOG?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member join me in asking the UK Government to reverse the crazy decision that was announced in the budget to have a further hike in fuel duty from 1 August this year? That would be far more beneficial than any further changes that we could make.

I met the chair, chief executive and finance director of Scottish Water on 26 March 2012 to discuss Scottish Water’s business plans for 2012-13. I plan to visit Scottish Water to see some of the assets that it operates and to meet its staff over the coming months.

I am aware of the report and the concerns that were raised and I intend to raise the matter with Scottish Water to ensure that there is no repeat of the kind of problem that was experienced by Mr Maxwell’s constituents.

This is a recent transfer and will be accounted for in the normal way.

We have considered the possibility of funding some of the investment programmes through the use of bonds, but that has been blocked by the Treasury and the UK Government, supported by Mr Johnstone.

It is too early to assess the impact. However, the measures restrict the amount of support that is available to people to cover housing costs, which might lead to an increased risk of homelessness. The Scottish Government remains committed to the 2012 homelessness target, whereby all people who are assessed as unintentionally homeless by local authorities will be entitled to settled accommodation by the end of 2012.

As long as responsibility for housing benefit remains in London, we are limited in what we can do to make the benefits system work as well as possible for the people of Scotland. More than 150,000 households are experiencing or facing a reduction in their housing support, but not all of those cases will lead to a homelessness application. We are supporting local authorities so that the people who are at greatest risk are provided with help early. I am sure that members of all parties welcome the joint statement to which the First Minister referred earlier and the fact that local authorities and the Scottish Government will between them fund the £40 million cut that the Liberal Democrats and the Tories are making to the council tax benefit budget in Scotland.

Glasgow is being transformed through the building of infrastructure for the games, which will leave a lasting physical, economic and social legacy. The multimillion-pound athletes village will become a desirable new residential community after the games, providing 700 new, quality homes, and the state-of-the-art sports facilities will be available for the local community to enjoy before the start of the games. Connectivity will be improved through projects that have been or will be completed, such as the M74 completion project, the refurbishment of Dalmarnock station and the on-going Glasgow subway modernisation programme. In addition, the Clyde Gateway urban regeneration company is taking forward a number of games-related projects that will benefit the east end of Glasgow, including the provision of new office space and the renovation of the iconic Olympia theatre in Bridgeton.

The member makes a very fair and relevant point. Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council have been asked to focus their full vacant and derelict land fund awards on sites that are related to the Commonwealth games, with 100 per cent being channelled in support of Clyde Gateway URC sites that contribute to the Commonwealth games. [Interruption.] Members can see that I am the minister who is responsible for Scottish Water. Glasgow City Council has been allocated £3 million for 2012-13 and £2.76 million for 2013-14, and South Lanarkshire Council has been allocated £1.27 million for the current year and £1.16 million for 2013-14.

The south-west of Scotland will benefit from a number of investments as set out in the infrastructure investment plan. Those include Scotland’s schools for the future programme, the replacement of Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary and community infrastructure through the south-west hub, as well as other Scotland-wide investment in transport, digital, energy, housing and water programmes. The A75 Dunragit bypass road project, which is due to enter procurement this month, is an example of the significant further investment that is taking place in the south-west of Scotland.

I suggest that members follow my example in Airdrie and Shotts, where I am involved in getting two community development trusts set up—one in Airdrie and one in Shotts—to mobilise funding that is not always available to the local authority for investment in the area and to clean up the mess left by Labour.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am happy to go beyond that if it is required.

I begin by paying tribute to my colleague Bruce Crawford, who has handled the negotiations with the UK Government with aplomb and skill. I say to Willie Rennie—and I only take Rennies when I have a headache—that Nick Clegg could learn a lesson or two from Bruce Crawford. If he had followed Bruce Crawford’s example, he would not have ended up in the mess that he is in as a poodle of the Tories at Westminster.

As long as Miss Goldie is prepared to administer them, Presiding Officer. Despite having majorities in both Parliaments, it has taken the unionist parties—I should say, the anti-independence unionist parties—five years to deliver this modest measure, and they have the cheek to complain that we are going to deliver independence in three years. When the vote is taken in a few minutes’ time, it seems that the Parliament will take a unanimous decision to agree to the LCM. If I may say so, however, the unionist parties do so because they see the measures in the bill as being symbolic of their aspirations for Scotland. We will vote for the LCM, but we see the measures as modest, albeit moderately useful, and going nowhere near matching the aspirations of the Scottish people. Miss Goldie quoted David Cameron as saying that the bill represents a huge transfer of fiscal power to the Scottish Parliament. Let us get real. Before the bill, the Scottish Parliament controlled 7 per cent of the tax revenue in Scotland. When the bill becomes an act we will control 16 per cent of the revenue, so the total value of that massive fiscal transfer is 9 per cent of the total revenue. That is by no means a massive transfer of resources. The reality is that this is a modest measure by any standard. I suspect that, if members went to Princes Street and asked people what is in the Scotland Bill, very few of them would be able to tell members and certainly none would get excited about the prospect.

I will answer that, but first I want to refer to the fact that Mr Rennie has gone on and on about a shambles. It is ironic for anyone whose party is in the current Government at Westminster to call anyone else shambolic because, with the granny tax, the charity tax and the power strike that did not take place, that Government is the very meaning of the word “shambolic”. I will go through the six demands. I do not feel a tinge of embarrassment about them; I feel a tinge of disappointment for the Scottish people. They were clear demands for measures that would have been of major benefit to the people of Scotland. One of the demands was for the transfer to this Parliament of responsibility for welfare benefits. That would have meant that we could change the crazy policy of the Tories and Liberal Democrats and that the £2.4 billion that our deprived communities will be robbed of every year as a result of their welfare reforms would have remained in Scotland.

I will in a minute when I get through the six points. The second major point was on representation in Europe. If we had had representation in Europe down the years, the Scottish fishing industry for one would be in far better shape than it is now. The third point related to the Crown estate. Many members whose parties will vote for the bill support our demand for the devolution of the Crown estate. I find it hard to understand why the Liberal Democrats, who are in government at Westminster, do not demand that. Mr Rennie should consider that with a tinge of embarrassment, because devolution of the Crown estate was even supported by the House of Commons committee, which recognised the massive benefit that the measure would provide to the Scottish people. Air passenger duty is another example. The UK Government is prepared to transfer responsibility for air passenger duty to Northern Ireland but not to Edinburgh, yet it has the cheek to complain that we are in favour of tax competition. What will happen when air passenger duty is transferred to Belfast? That will be unfair competition for every airport in Scotland, yet there has been not a word of protest about that from the unionist parties. Broadcasting is another example. If we had control of broadcasting, we could begin a real cultural renaissance here in Scotland. The most important point is on borrowing powers. Particularly at this time, through the ability to create jobs by the prudent use of borrowing powers, we could do far more for unemployed people in Scotland. That use of borrowing powers would, at a stroke, reduce by about 50 per cent the cost of the money that is available to the Scottish Government that is not part of our main grant. By definition, over a period, if the costs of borrowing reduce by 50 per cent, we could afford to borrow twice as much as would otherwise be the case. That is an important economic power to have. Although the modest borrowing powers are welcome, they are nowhere near the level that we require. The level of ignorance on corporation tax—in the Labour Party, in particular—is incredible. Does the Labour Party not realise that Gordon Brown made a big issue of reducing corporation tax? He did that to bring benefit to the UK economy. Before the crash, in every country—whether you look at Ireland or the UK—where the rate of corporation tax was reduced in stages, revenue did not fall at any time. In fact, quite the opposite occurred. Every year the revenue went up. It went up because the impact was to create jobs, more investment and wealth, and more revenue for the Exchequer. The Labour Party, in particular, should study history and economics, because the reality is that a staged reduction in corporation tax is a major way to create jobs and new wealth in any modern economy.

I will certainly take an intervention from Mr Findlay, who I hope has learned something.

There is no doubt that it was a demand of the Scottish Government—but do not worry: we may not have got it this time, but in two years we will have total control over the whole lot. We are told by the Prime Minister—this is the old ruse to which a number of members have referred—“Vote no in the independence referendum and we could give you more devolved powers.”

If I have time, I will cover that as well, because that, too, will be transferred in two and a half years. The Tories must think that our heads button up our nationalist backs if they think that, as a nation, we are going to be kidded on again that, if we vote no to independence, they could deliver more powers for Scotland. The reality is that they have no intention of delivering any more powers for Scotland. The Tories have fought devolution tooth and nail. When they were fighting devolution, we heard all the scare stories about devolution that we are now hearing about independence.

I heard the Tories talking about economic uncertainty. Every survey by Ernst & Young and everyone else shows that, far from there being uncertainty, Scotland is top of the league in the UK for inward investment and for confidence of the international business community. That is despite the Government in London and because of this Government in Edinburgh. If we had the powers of an independent country, we would deliver a lot more.

We welcome the opportunity to discuss our draft ferries plan and, in particular, the proposals for a Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry service. The plan has always been about the issues that matter most to our island and remote communities. We should not forget that the Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry service was terminated by the previous Labour-led Scottish Executive in 2001. If Elaine Murray is going to quote paragraph 150 of the draft plan, she should at least be honest and quote what we say at the end of it. I will quote it exactly—it states: “We will further consider the economic viability of this proposed service in the context of other planned improvements to services to, and within, the Western Isles.” If Elaine Murray is going to argue the case, she should at least give credit where it is due and quote exactly what is said in the document. We want to improve Scotland’s ferry services, which are key to the social, cultural and economic wellbeing of our remote and island communities. That is why this Government has been the first ever to carry out a thorough review of all ferry services in Scotland, focusing on the things that matter most to communities—fares, what services are in place, the level of services and who should be responsible for providing them. There has been wide engagement, with opportunities for everyone who has an interest to engage in discussions on our ferry services. During a consultation period, it is not the normal practice for ministers to meet people who are lobbying for a particular point of view, but I have always made it absolutely clear that, once the consultation is finished at the end of this month, I will be happy to meet anyone from South Uist, Barra, Lochboisdale, Mallaig or any other community to discuss their concerns. About 600 individuals, groups and organisations replied to the initial consultation in 2010 and, with more than a week to go, we have already received 1,100 responses to the draft ferries plan consultation. I can give members an assurance that we will listen very carefully indeed to what people say in response to the genuine consultation that we are carrying out.

Based on some of the responses that we have had, we are already working on that possibility. We are more than willing to consider any viable proposition that is put to us.

Not at the moment. This is not the first time that the issue has been studied. In 2005, the previous Labour-Liberal Executive produced a report on the reinstatement of the service that it scrapped in 2001. The report is dated May 2005. What did that Executive do between May 2005 and May 2007? Nothing—it did nothing. Did Elaine Murray mention that report in her opening remarks? No, she did not. The reason is that, as usual, the Labour-Liberal Executive commissioned a report but took no action whatsoever. [Interruption.]

Then, the Labour Party has the cheek to come to the chamber with a motion criticising us when we are contemplating the options. Let me give members the facts and explain the issues that we have to grapple with. The report showed that the annual cost of providing the service as a standalone service would have been between £3.5 million and £4 million and that the cost of introducing a new vessel would have been around £26 million—those are 2005 costs. By any standard, and given that the total ferry budget is just over £100 million a year, those are substantial figures. If Elaine Murray is going to be honest, she must tell us where the money would come from. Does she want the £26 million to be spent on a new ferry between Lochboisdale and Mallaig instead of on upgrading the A75, which she said should be a top priority for transport in Scotland?

We have explained exactly why: because we have to consider what resources are available to us and how we can make best use of them. If the Labour Party wants the service—which it abolished in 2001—to be reinstated, the onus is on Labour members to tell us where the £26 million and the £4 million a year are going to come from. Are they going to come from other ferry services, from other transport services, from childcare services or from other services? If Labour is serious about it, as opposed to playing games, it must tell us how it would fund the service. As Dave Thompson has made clear, we are considering a number of options that are being put to us and we would like the maximum number of ferry services for all our island communities. We recognise the special needs of the island communities, but we have to operate within the very limited resources that are given to us by Westminster under Labour and Tory Governments. If we spend money on this ferry service, we will spend less on something else—that is the language of priorities. We will listen to the people, not to Labour politicians, who are guilty of removing the service in the first place.

Nor will we listen to Liberal politicians. The transport ministers between May 2005 and May 2007 were Nicol Stephen and Tavish Scott, but what did the Liberals do about the ferry service? The same as the Labour Party—nothing.

We will listen to the people, not to those who speak a double language, telling one story here and another story elsewhere. I move amendment S4M-02421.1, to leave out from “is disappointed” to end and insert: “welcomes the Scottish Ferry Services: Draft Plan for consultation; in particular the focus of the Scottish Ferries Review and the draft plan on the issues that matter most to island and remote communities and their central theme of further improving Scotland’s ferry services; welcomes the wide engagement and consultation that has taken place throughout the Scottish Ferries Review; notes the Scottish Government’s commitment to fully consider the consultation responses from communities representing their local interests, including those advocating the introduction of a service between Lochboisdale and Mallaig, and looks forward to the publication of the final ferries plan in 2012.”

Will the member give way?

As always.

Is the logic of the member’s argument that, if no routes make a profit and—she argues—they are not economically viable, we should run none of the services? Surely the whole point is the economic viability of the islands.

I must correct Rhoda Grant on that. We specifically said in the plan that the survey—there was a survey—showed that views were divided on the importance of the service. It is not true to say that we did not survey people and that we did not put the results of the survey into the consultation.

First, let me place the debate in context as regards, in general terms, two of the big challenges that are faced by people in the island communities and by the Government. The first is the substantial hike in fuel duty, with a 3p hike confirmed in the budget yesterday for August, which will have a devastating impact on the island communities throughout Scotland. The Tories and the Liberal Democrats have a lot to answer for in supporting that. Secondly, the 33 per cent reduction in our capital allocation has had a direct impact on our ability to invest in new ferry services in different parts of Scotland at the speed and on the scale that we would like. Those are the challenges that we face as a Government. They are not self-made challenges, but the result of policies that were introduced by Alistair Darling and supported by George Osborne and Nick Clegg. I want to make it absolutely clear—I hope that people will read my lips—that, as we said in the draft ferries review, we will listen to what people say in all their submissions, including on the possibility of reintroducing a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. However, there is no escaping the reality of the cost of reintroducing that service as a dedicated service. The capital cost is at least £26 million and the annual resource cost is between £3.5 million and £4 million. If we were to make a decision to allocate money to that service, we would need to take it from elsewhere. None of the Opposition parties has in any way begun to address the cost or from where we would reallocate the funding. The report that was produced in May 2005—an independent report by Halcrow—stated the dilemma about the crossing very clearly. Let me quote the executive summary: “It is also clear however that the vast majority of the demand for the new service is abstracted from existing services, i.e. the Lochmaddy - Uig and Castlebay - Oban routes. Only a small proportion of traffic is generated traffic” and therefore the impact on other services could be quite dramatic.

I do not have much time, unfortunately. We have to take what Halcrow said into consideration, because our responsibility is to consider the totality of the ferry services. I do not want to take action in one area that will have a damaging impact on other areas. The survey work that we did in the run-up to the publication of the draft ferries review showed clearly that the majority of people are satisfied with the existing service and 10 per cent fewer people want it to be replaced by the proposed service, as Kenny Gibson said. Rhoda Grant rose— Jamie McGrigor rose— I do not have time for interventions.

Thank you very much indeed, Presiding Officer. You are extremely generous. I will give way to Sir Jamie McGrigor in a minute. I am always deferential to Scotland’s aristocracy—and I am worried about Sir Jamie, because he might lose his housing benefit if he is living in an underoccupied castle.

The Labour Party proposes a trial. I can see the merit of having a trial service. However, we must decide whether it would be a trial of a dedicated service, with a dedicated ferry that would run only on that route, or a trial rerouting of existing services. There is a debate to be had on that, but members should not underestimate the capital costs and resource costs or, more important, the implications for people in the islands. The rerouting of existing services, albeit well intentioned, might do more damage than good. I give way to Sir Jamie.

It connects to the small isles and to Skye. I recognise the importance of the totality of the infrastructure. Decisions on ferry services cannot be made in isolation. Access to piers and harbours on the mainland and on the islands is important. If I had a bottomless pit of money I would invest much more—

We will have more money when we are independent, and we will be able to do much more. After yesterday’s budget, many people in Scotland will be a lot worse off. I am not talking about the millionaires on the Tory benches. Every granny in Scotland who saved for her company pension will be a lot worse off. The reality is that we must be responsible. Any changes that are made must be properly planned and thought out. I have made it clear and I repeat that we are listening carefully to what the campaigners from South Uist and elsewhere are saying about the reintroduction of a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service and the possibility of a trial service. We will engage with them after the consultation period, on the pros and cons—because there are cons as well as pros, not least the capital costs and resource costs of reintroducing a dedicated service, which need to be addressed. The Labour Party should at least conduct the debate in an honest way. I know from Mr Russell, who was misquoted by Elaine Murray earlier, and from other people, that the people of South Uist are pretty fed up with their comments being manipulated by the press and politicians. We need an honest debate about how we take matters forward.

I am happy to give way to Mr Stewart, if the Presiding Officer permits me to do so.

I absolutely agree, which is precisely why, when we publish the results of our ferries review, we will simultaneously publish a long-term ferries investment plan. That has not been done by any previous Government. We are at one with everyone in the community in South Uist and elsewhere on improving the ferry service. We will look seriously at campaigners’ proposals for a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. We will talk to them about the pros and cons and we will reach a decision based on the needs of all the islanders on the west coast of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

When Labour was in power for eight years in this Parliament, why did it not do any of these things?

We want as many retailers as possible to take part in the conference, and we will work with the Scottish Retail Consortium to ensure that there is varied and broad participation.

I am happy to extend an invitation either directly or through the Scottish Retail Consortium to participants from East Kilbride, and indeed to people from any other part of Lanarkshire who want to participate. The member raises the important issue of the future of our town centres. We have made substantial input on that matter over the past two or three years and we are engaged in extensive discussions with regeneration agencies, local authorities and the private sector on what more we can do to regenerate our town centres.

Presiding Officer, I think that we are on question 5, not question 6.

It is a great feeling correcting the Presiding Officer.

The statutory procedures for the scheme are complete, and construction will commence as soon as funding becomes available. The First Minister wrote to the Prime Minister on 2 March with a view to further capital funding being brought forward by the Scottish Government, with the co-operation of the Treasury, for a number of shovel-ready projects, including our planned improvements to the A75 between Hardgrove and Kinmount. However, those shovel-ready projects did not form part of the UK Government’s budget announcement yesterday.

First, the capital cost is almost £15 million. Secondly, had our capital budget not been slashed by one third by the previous Labour Government, and had that cut not been continued by the Tory-led coalition, the project would have been completed by now. It is thanks to Alistair Darling, Gordon Brown, George Osborne and the current United Kingdom Government that we do not have the money for the project.

It is hoped that the small number of objectors who oppose the AWPR will be willing to accept the recent Court of Session judgment, so that we can get on and build the road. Subject to no further appeal being lodged against the judgment, we will continue to work with our project partners to ensure that this vital project is completed as soon as possible.

Given the procedures that we have been through, such as the public inquiry and the various appeals in the Court of Session, I can say that there will be no further changes to the design of the AWPR. The project has been delayed for long enough and we are anxious to move ahead and get it under way.

We have made it absolutely clear many times that we will do the work on that roundabout as part of the AWPR, and we hope that we will be in a position to start the AWPR process once we know whether there is going to be another appeal. Hopefully there will not be, and that will allow us to get on with the job of completing the entire AWPR.

During the past 10 years, the percentage of houses in Scotland that are rated good for energy efficiency has doubled. That represents significant progress. In the past three years alone, households in Scotland have received more than 327,000 free or subsidised, professionally installed insulation measures. Through our programmes, we have offered advice and free or low-cost insulation to more than three quarters of a million households. To help families with rising energy costs over the next three years, we will spend £250 million on our fuel poverty and domestic energy efficiency programmes.

I agree entirely. I point out that there is a huge difference between our approach to fuel poverty and that of the UK Government. The Tory-led coalition is slashing the fuel poverty budgets, continuing the process that was started under Labour. In the next three years, we will invest £0.25 billion in tackling fuel poverty in Scotland.

The private rented sector does not have as widespread a network of tenant representative bodies as the social rented sector has. To help to address that, we ensure that tenant advocacy bodies such as Shelter Scotland and others are involved in policy making on private rented housing. Similarly, to obtain the views of the many landlords across Scotland, organisations such as the Scottish Association of Landlords often represent the landlord view in dialogue on policy, through membership of the Scottish private rented sector strategy group.

We are already attempting to do that. The private rented sector strategy group is supported by a wider virtual network of stakeholders who are kept up to date and invited to comment on the progress of the group’s work.

Does the member agree that if responsibility for housing benefit were devolved to this Parliament, there is no way that these reforms would ever have seen the light of day?

Quite a number of very good speeches have been made. I was particularly taken by two, one of which was by Margaret Burgess, who talked from her experience on the front line working with the citizens advice bureau in Kilmarnock. It is clear from such an experienced front liner that the human impact of the reforms will be devastating to individuals and families. I was also particularly taken by Malcolm Chisholm’s speech. He is a former housing minister and has been prominent in campaigning for many long years for better housing, not only in Edinburgh but throughout Scotland. He, too, was scathing in his analysis of the impact of the reforms. The first thing that I make clear to members is that, although housing is meant to be a wholly devolved issue, the Scottish Government was not informed or consulted by the UK Government about any of the reforms at any time prior to their introduction. Had we been consulted about the reforms, our strong advice would have been not to proceed with them because they are devastating to individuals and the wider economy. As the minister said in his opening speech, if we add up the effects of not just housing benefit reform but the totality of the welfare reforms that are being implemented by the coalition Government in London, the annual impact will be to take £2.5 billion out of deprived communities in Scotland and £25 billion out of deprived communities throughout the UK. By any measure—

Sorry, but I do not have time. By any measure, that is a devastating blow to the people who live in those communities. In today’s budget, it was announced that the 50p tax rate for those earning more than £150,000 will be reduced and, in the same breath, that, over the next few years, an additional £3 billion will be cut from the UK welfare budget. That equates to about £300 million in Scotland. By any measure, the reforms will make the poor poorer and, combined with the tax measures, make the rich richer. I have never understood the Tory argument—

No, not at the moment. I have never understood the Tory argument for cutting tax for the rich to create incentives while devastating the living standards of the poor. When will the poor get an incentive and a decent standard of living? It is bad enough to get these reforms from the Tories—we expect it from them after the Thatcher and Major years and, clearly, we have the most right-wing Tory party in recent history. However, many people, particularly in Scotland, will be disappointed, to say the least, that these measures are being actively promoted by people who call themselves Liberal Democrats.

The member has not been in the debate. There is nothing liberal or democratic about the tax reforms or the welfare reforms. The Lib Dems thought that they had got a bad result in the elections to this place last year, but it will be nothing compared with the doing that they will get in the local elections in May. It will be a well-deserved doing indeed, for doing the Tories’ dirty work for them on welfare and taxes.

The member was not in the debate, Presiding Officer—obviously, he was not interested enough. Many members have pointed out that the practical impact of the measures is extremely dehumanising. Take the example of an old person who has been living in the same house for 40 or 50 years and who has brought up two or three children in that house. The family have all gone, perhaps the spouse has died, and the old person is living alone in the family house. The Tories and the Liberal Democrats will come along to take away a large chunk of that old person’s housing benefit.

No, I will not. That old person will be forced out of the family house and will probably be unable to find the right kind of housing in the same community with their friends and family. That is the kind of country that the Tories and the Liberal Democrats are creating—inhumanity of the worst kind. As Malcolm Chisholm and others rightly said, there has been no regard whatever to the impact on homelessness. Indeed, the reforms do not even make financial sense because the cost of making someone homeless is more than £5,000. I do not know of many people on housing benefit who are getting £5,000 in their pocket. The cost to the public purse in Scotland of the impact of the reforms will be devastating. It is no exaggeration to say that some people will literally be driven on to the street as a result of the housing benefit reforms. They are ill thought out, costly, cruel and not the kind of 21st century policy that we should be promoting. Of course, it is not only people who are out of work who receive housing benefit. In Scotland, 42,000 people who are in work receive it. One consequence of the reforms will be that, in many cases, people will be worse off staying in work than they would be receiving welfare. That defeats the purpose of the policy. The DWP estimates that a fifth of single homeless people in Scotland will lose the prospect of a home as a result of the reforms. The DWP’s own assessment of the impact of the reforms points out that they will lead to increased rent arrears; increased homelessness; an increase in the number of children being forced to change schools, with adverse effects; a greater adverse impact on the rural communities that Alex Johnstone claims to represent; additional costs for councils, including increased pressure on services; and, of course, an adverse impact on the provision of housing in both the private rented and social rented sectors.

By any measure, these ill-thought-out and inhumane reforms are utter madness. They will create in our society ghettos of people who cannot afford to live a decent life. We expect that from the Tories, as it is part of their philosophy to make the poor poorer and the rich richer, but the people who will never be forgiven by the Scottish people are Willie Rennie and the other so-called Liberal Democrats. Lloyd George must be turning in his grave at the betrayal by the so-called Liberal Democrats. We will continue to fight these reforms and argue for a humane welfare policy that keeps people in work, puts people in work and takes people out of poverty rather than putting them further into it.

Scottish ministers have not yet received Aberdeen City Council’s tax increment financing business case for its city centre regeneration plans, which include the city garden project. Aberdeen City Council is working with the Scottish Futures Trust to develop the business case, which will be considered by Scottish ministers in due course.

I repeat that we have not received the business case. It is difficult for me to comment on something that I have not received. However, I am sure that Aberdeen City Council, under the excellent management of some of my colleagues, will submit a robust business case and ensure that the council’s finances remain in a robust position. I am sure that Richard Baker will be glad to join me in wishing that that happens.

When we receive the business case, one of the issues that we will look at is the private sector leverage. Indeed, one reason why we asked for the business case to be submitted was that the projected private sector leverage in the proposal, as opposed to the business case, was very attractive. However, I will not be in a position to make a detailed comment on the business case until I receive it from the city council.

I think that the motion is one that should have been moved in Aberdeen City Council chambers rather than in the Scottish Parliament. The Labour Party’s record on referendums is not one of which it can be proud. Unfortunately, I am old enough to remember the 1979 referendum, when the Labour Party and Labour Party MPs proposed the 40 per cent rule, denying the Scottish people the assembly that they voted for by a majority. It is the Labour Party, along with its Tory bedfellows, that in the run up to 2014 is trying to undermine by various means the referendum on independence. This is a soor grapes motion from the Labour Party because it lost the referendum in Aberdeen. The facts are that 165,830 voting packs were sent out to Aberdeen residents and 86,568 votes were cast, which is far more than voted Labour in Aberdeen last year. The turnout of 52 per cent far exceeded both expectations and turnout in many other elections. It seems that the Labour Party accepts a result if it wins and denies that the process was right if it loses. As Adlai Stevenson said in 1952, “The people have spoken”. I will not add what he said after that, but it perhaps reflects the attitude of the Labour Party to the result of this referendum. A total of 28,702 votes were cast online, 9,154 by phone and 48,629 by postal ballot.

I will give way shortly. The counting officer was Crawford Langley, a long-standing counting officer of great reputation and independence. If he had any concerns about the legitimacy of the process, I am sure that he would have raised them.

I will answer that question, but to be fair I will now take the other Mr McDonald.

I agree with the intervention from Mr McDonald number 2 and disagree with the intervention from Mr Macdonald number 1. The reality is that 45,301 people voted for the city garden project design and 41,175 voted for retaining Union Terrace gardens. Even on the basis of Labour Party mathematics, there is still a majority of 4,126 in favour of the project. The Labour motion refers to opinion being divided. That is the whole idea of democracy. That is why we have elections: to find out what the division of opinion is and who is in the majority. In a democratic society, we should not say, “Because we lost, and because opinion was divided, we will challenge the legitimacy of the decision.” In last year’s election, opinion was divided between Mr Macdonald and Mr Stewart but Mr Stewart had the majority opinion. Did Mr Macdonald challenge Mr Stewart’s legitimacy to be here as the first-past-the-post candidate? Perhaps he did; indeed, it has become a way of life for the Labour Party to challenge democratic decisions.

The Labour Party has just made a major concession: people are now entitled to their views and are not entitled to be told their position by Labour. The reality is that the Labour Party has ruled Scotland for far too long. Those on the Labour benches still think that they have a divine right to rule in Aberdeen and every other part of Scotland, but the political geography has changed dramatically and for ever. This was a legitimate referendum with a legitimate result and it is perfectly legitimate for the city council and the project’s organisers to proceed with planning and the business case for the TIF scheme. Obviously, it would be entirely inappropriate for me to comment on the planning process but, as far as TIF is concerned, I make absolutely clear what we have always said: in considering the business case for the project, we would need proof that the majority of people in Aberdeen approved of it. The Scottish Government is taking the referendum result as a resounding endorsement of the project, but the project itself is still subject to the TIF process. In other words, Aberdeen City Council and the sponsors have to submit a business case that will be duly considered under the TIF process; only then will the Scottish Government make a final decision as to whether the project can proceed with TIF. Everything now depends on the business case.

As far as the Scottish Government is concerned, the first hurdle has been overcome. We look forward to receiving a robust business case and giving it due consideration. We should all be proper democrats and accept the majority decision. I move amendment S4M-02246.1, to leave out from “confirmed” to end and insert: “resulted in a majority vote in favour of the City Garden Project; notes that ministers now look forward to considering the tax incremental financing (TIF) business case for the council’s city centre development proposals, including the City Garden Project, which will be brought forward by the elected members of Aberdeen City Council when this has been finalised through work with the Scottish Futures Trust, and recognises that decisions on local development proposals are for local elected members and, where appropriate, Scottish ministers to make, in line with the statutory requirements of the land use planning system.”

Like Nanette Milne, I am a mild-mannered member of the Parliament. My speech will focus on three particular issues but, first, I declare that I have no particular interest in the local election campaign in Aberdeen. I am not standing in Aberdeen or, indeed, anywhere in the local elections. It behoves political parties to be very careful about challenging a democratic process, particularly when a party is on the losing side and particularly when the turnout for the referendum was higher than the 50.2 per cent turnout for the Aberdeen City Council elections in 2007. If we look at the by-elections that have been held in Aberdeen, the turnout in every case was under 30 per cent. In terms of turnout, the result of the referendum is as legitimate as that for the by-elections and elections to which I referred. Indeed, the result is arguably more legitimate because of the higher turnout, which produced a majority.

I would have thought that building consensus or unanimity on the issue would have been extremely difficult, to say the least. We have elections and referenda so that where there is a division of opinion or a choice of points of view, we can settle the matter according to the majority vote. I say to the Labour Party that the water is under the bridge and it is time to get on with trying to build a new future for Aberdeen, and Aberdeen city centre in particular. As Mark McDonald said, there is a legitimate debate to be had about whether we should have a referendum act to set out the rules and regulations to govern the administration of locally organised referenda in Scotland. Had the motion been on those lines, I am sure that the chamber might have been able to reach unanimity on that point. However, today’s motion is not one of high principle in relation to future rules and regulations for local referenda but one of low principle—in fact, of no principle other than, “We lost the referendum and we are complaining that we lost the referendum.” That is not a legitimate point of view.

I will have more to say about TIF, but I can categorically assure the member that the Aberdeen proposal, like every other TIF proposal, will be considered within the regulations and the process that we have set down and that there will have to be a successful business case before it receives approval from the Scottish Government. Sir Ian Wood and Aberdeen City Council and its officers are all fully aware of the fact that planning and approval of the business case are the next steps in ensuring that the project goes ahead. We will approve it only if the business case is sustainable, and I now expect a robust business case to be put forward.

The leverage from the private sector is one of the considerations in deciding on the robustness of any TIF business case. My final point is another warning to the Labour Party. It is a dangerous precedent for even a shadow spokesman to say that, if his party is in the majority in a city council, it will not give a proposal planning permission when it comes before the council. That is a complete contravention of the wording and spirit of our planning laws, and I hope that Lewis Macdonald will retract his promise not to give the project planning permission if his party is in a position to reject it.

I expect to receive a copy of the Scottish fuel poverty forum’s interim report in April. I met the chairman of the forum, Professor David Sigsworth, this morning, and we had a constructive discussion about how we can take forward a number of new approaches to tackling the problem of fuel poverty.

Last week, I announced a further £2 million for the Scottish Government’s boiler scrappage scheme and the universal home insulation scheme, which brings the total funding this year for fuel poverty and energy efficiency to over £57 million. I urge local authorities to tell households that are concerned about the cost of keeping their home warm to phone the home energy Scotland hotline—the number is 0800 512012—and free and impartial advice will be provided. Further, localised promotions are delivered through the five regional energy saving Scotland advice centres. That ensures that local authorities and voluntary organisations are fully briefed on the help that is available to their clients.

This morning, I wrote to the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee with my response to its very good report. We will be glad to endorse a number of the committee’s recommendations. In the current spending review period, over the next three years, the Scottish Government and the energy companies will invest a significant amount—our share will total around £0.25 billion—in tackling fuel poverty in Scotland. That compares with a budget that has been cut to ribbons south of the border under the previous Labour Administration and the current Tory-led coalition.

In November 2011, Aberdeen City Council was invited to work with the Scottish Futures Trust to develop a tax increment financing business case for the city centre regeneration plans, including the redevelopment of the Union Terrace gardens. At that time, it was emphasised that Aberdeen City Council’s plan to use TIF for the Union Terrace gardens project would be progressed for ministers’ consideration only if public support for the project could be demonstrated. The recent referendum in Aberdeen demonstrated that public support, and we look forward to receiving the final TIF business case.

Presiding Officer, I hope that we are not going to have a tiff about TIF. I have no plans to meet Aberdeen City Council to discuss its bid for a TIF pilot. I expect finalisation of the TIF business case to be taken forward by the Scottish Futures Trust and the council, and I look forward to considering the business case in due course.

On 8 February, the Minister for Housing and Transport announced that work to progress the £28 million A737 Dalry bypass would get under way with an initial investment of £10 million. That funding will allow the scheme to progress through its preparatory stages and begin construction, subject to satisfactory completion of the statutory processes. A road improvement scheme at the Den near Dalry is in preparation, and approximately £2.3 million has been allocated for the current structural maintenance programme in North Ayrshire in this spending review period. In addition, a road safety route action plan on the A737 has been commissioned. The first phase is complete and works are currently being implemented on site. Subject to the availability of funding and finalisation of the detailed design, preparations are also under way for an estimated £14 million improvement to Brodick pier to be completed by 2015.

The £10 million also includes the initial construction phase. We will continue into the further spending round to ensure that the job is completed. It is absolutely not the case that the project is being funded by reallocation of funds from road safety. Indeed, the figures show that there has been a reduction of something like 70 per cent in road safety problems throughout Scotland. We are also making substantial progress on road safety in North Ayrshire, including—as I said in my initial reply—implementing the road safety route action plan on the A737. We are tackling road safety as well as building a bypass for Dalry.

I am never one to meddle in the politics of a part of Scotland outwith my constituency. All that I can say is that we have taken the right decision and are proud of the fact that, after many years of waiting, it took a Scottish National Party Government to make the decision to build a Dalry bypass.

We have ensured that the contractual arrangements for the Forth replacement crossing provide all possible opportunities for Scotland’s firms and workforce to benefit from the huge public investment that is being made in this essential infrastructure project. The main contractor must advertise all subcontract work that is to be tendered so that Scottish companies are fully aware of opportunities to bid. However, as it is not a public procurement process, that is entirely a commercial matter for the main contractor.

The member makes some very valid points. The suggestion that we should suspend the Forth crossing contract is absolute economic madness, would result in many Scottish workers being made redundant and would cost the Scottish taxpayer an absolute fortune.

The main contract is subject to substantial community benefit requirements, which include the provision of apprenticeships and training places and a range of other requirements. One of the restrictions that we face is in our ability to place community benefit contracts throughout the supply chain of a major contract. That is an issue that I intend to address in the sustainable procurement bill.

Shopping around for the best deal on energy can bring significant savings for households. Many households need help in accessing the most appropriate tariff; the marketplace is confusing. I have brought forward discussions between the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and Scottish Government procurement officials, to find solutions. I am also asking the Scottish fuel poverty forum to provide fresh thinking in the area. The most sustainable way to reduce bills is to ensure that a property is well insulated and has an efficient boiler. Yesterday I announced just under £2 million of further funding for the universal home insulation and boiler scrappage schemes, to help households in that regard.

I will be more than happy to engage with Ms Marra on the issue. We have had meetings with SFHA, Link Housing Association and our procurement officials, to discuss how to take matters forward. Housing associations that have registered Scottish charity status are eligible to join the national electricity contract for Scottish public bodies and can receive significant savings. That is one option in relation to initiatives of the kind that Ms Marra is talking about. In all such initiatives, the barrier is in persuading the end user—tenants, in particular—to switch supplier, because people are often reluctant to do that. However, I am happy to meet Ms Marra and to receive other ideas on how to take the matter forward.

I have recently written to the European Commission on two issues relating to public procurement. Following my meeting with John Park in November last year, I wrote to the Commission to seek clarification on whether public bodies can make payment of a living wage a criterion in a public procurement process or a condition of a public contract in a way that is compatible with European Union law. Last month, I wrote to the Commission to press for a change to EU public procurement rules to allow public bodies to take account of local economic impact in their contract award decisions and for a significant increase in the thresholds at which advertisement in the Official Journal of the European Union is required. Despite chasing up those bits of correspondence, I still await responses from the Commission.

The UK Government has not supported us in the EU procurement policy review on either of those propositions—on the living wage or on local economic impact being a criterion for deciding how to award contracts. We will continue to press our colleagues in the UK Government, because I believe that those measures would be beneficial to every country in the United Kingdom and the European Union. We will continue to press the UK Government on that, but Labour members have more influence over the Tories than we do, so perhaps they could help us on that.

Will the member take an intervention?

All the increases in tourism and so on to which the member refers were a result of RETs for passengers and cars; the additional visitors did not arrive by lorry. Today we are talking about the RET for haulage vehicles; RET for cars and passengers remains as a permanent feature of services to the Western Isles.

I think that members universally agree on the importance of the island communities to the economy and wider society of Scotland, and I hope that everybody agrees that we should try to do our best not only for the Western Isles, but for all our island communities. I hear what Tavish Scott says about the particular situation in the northern isles. As he knows, there is a heavy subsidy for the ferry service to the northern isles, and that subsidy will be continued, as we believe that it is essential. In talking about ferry services, we are talking not only about increasing tourism, improving standards of living and all the other good things that we are trying to achieve, but, in many cases, about lifeline services. Therefore, we are very committed to the ferry service in Scotland. Indeed, the central theme of the ferries review and the consultation is the need to improve the ferry service—both the number of services to the islands and the quality and the number of ferries that are available. We start from that basis. RET was introduced in the Western Isles for the reasons that Mary Scanlon outlined. There were very high levels of unemployment, deprivation and poverty there. As a result of policies that have been pursued by London in recent years, other areas have suffered, producing equally difficult statistics on unemployment and deprivation. That is one of the reasons—although not by any means the only reason—why we have already announced our intention to roll out RET for cars and passengers to all the island communities down the west coast of Scotland. I hear what Tavish Scott says about the need to address some of the issues in the northern isles, and I am happy to meet him to discuss them, as is Keith Brown. I want to nail two myths that have arisen during the debate. First, Rhoda Grant said that some hauliers are facing an increase of 134 per cent in fares. That is simply not true. There is an onus on all members not to exaggerate and create hysteria, bringing about a situation in which people are informed, wrongly, of increases that are far in excess of what is actually happening. Secondly, a lot has been made of the hauliers not agreeing with the Scottish Government when we say that the benefits to the hauliers of RET were not passed on. It is not the Scottish Government that says that; it is the hauliers. Elaine Murray should listen to this and she will be educated. The independent research that was carried out as part of the evaluation of RET—an independent evaluation not by the Scottish Government but by an independent company—involved a detailed survey of 160 hauliers in the Western Isles. It was the hauliers who told us that only 7 per cent were passing on the benefits to the end users in the Western Isles. I accept that, now, the hauliers say that that is not true. However, members can believe me when I say that the information came, in the first place, from the hauliers themselves. That is in a public document, which members can check.

I will, in a minute. We accept that the hauliers say that that is not the case. That is why the minister has already agreed, with the hauliers, to a study to examine the situation and to evaluate the impact on the Western Isles economy of RET for hauliers. That is also why we have introduced a transitional arrangement. At the end of the transitional arrangement, we will review the position in the light of the results of the study, which we will carry out with the hauliers. That is a reasonable position for us to take.

We have already announced the transitional arrangements, and I see no reason at the moment to change them. I remind members of the situation that we inherited five years ago. There was a rebate scheme for hauliers in the Western Isles—only in the Western Isles, not on any other island, although some islands could have claimed that they should benefit from it as well. The total value of the subsidy to the Western Isles through the rebate scheme under the previous Executive was £500,000. With this transitional arrangement, we are giving a subsidy of £2.5 million to the hauliers in the Western Isles, which is five times the level of subsidy that we inherited five years ago.

I will, in a minute. The independent survey that I mentioned said that, according to the hauliers, ferry fares to the Western Isles accounted for, on average, less than 10 per cent of their total operating costs. Therefore, if the fare is increased by 50 per cent, that represents an overall increase in their operating costs of 4 to 5 per cent. Compare that with the 60 per cent increase in fuel duty that Gordon Brown—Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer—implemented, and the damage that it has done to the economy, the ferry service and the hauliers in the Western Isles. Compare it also with the increase in VAT in the very first budget of the coalition Government in London, which took VAT from 17.5 to 20 per cent. The VAT increase is on all the goods and services that Mary Scanlon referred to, as well as on the hauliers. VAT is calculated such that, when hauliers pay VAT on their diesel fuel, they pay it also on the fuel duty. Therefore, fuel duty was put up by 60 per cent, then VAT went up by one seventh, from 17.5 to 20 per cent, and then there was VAT on the higher fuel duty on top of that. The Opposition then has the cheek to accuse us of not looking after the Western Isles. We have done far more for the Western Isles than that shower put together.

The reality is that if we had not had an SNP Government, there would have been no RET in the Western Isles: Labour and the Tories opposed it. We are not only maintaining it permanently in the Western Isles and extending it to the sounds of Barra and Harris, but extending it to all the islands on the west coast. It is high time that the Opposition parties woke up and smelled the coffee and realised that it is only this Government that has delivered on RET.

Not true.

Schedule 7 to the 2001 act was repealed by the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010 and replaced, at section 36 of the 2010 act, by a duty on the new Scottish Housing Regulator to consult on and then issue a code of conduct on the governance and financial accountability of registered social landlords. The intention was to replace a prescriptive and detailed set of rules with a code that was more proportionate and which would give individual RSLs reasonable discretion to decide their own governance arrangements. In that spirit, section 36 of the 2010 act neither promotes nor prohibits payments to members of RSL boards but provides for the regulator, in consultation with interested parties, to determine what provision the code should make in that regard.

As the minister who piloted the legislation through Parliament, I made it clear at every stage and in the accompanying documentation that there was no requirement on—it was not mandatory for—the new regulator to impose any particular conditions or payments on RSLs and their board members. I am happy to debate the issue in Parliament—it might be up to the member to secure a members’ business debate on it.

In listening to the unionist parties’ front benchers, I am reminded of a Victorian undertaker praying for a hard winter and a full churchyard. They seem to be searching for bad news about Scotland and boasting about any chink of doom and gloom that they can find. I will begin by putting the facts on the record. They are based on the latest economic indicators available, not from the Government, but from the independent Office for National Statistics and from independent statisticians working in Scotland. The retail sales index in Scotland is higher than that in the UK. Growth in the production sector and in the distribution, hotels and catering sectors in Scotland is higher than that in the UK. The employment level in Scotland is higher than that in the UK and, as Mr Swinney said, Scotland has the highest rate of employment and the lowest rate of inactivity of all the UK countries. The unemployment claimant count in Scotland fell at the last count, while in the UK it rose. Scotland’s employment rate has been higher than that in the UK for 15 consecutive months.

I will in a minute. Growth in the construction sector in Scotland is higher than that in the UK. Only today, Ken Gillespie, the head of Morrison Construction, claimed that Holyrood was better than the UK Government at green lighting public sector building projects “to help get the economy moving again”. He went on to say that the Scottish Government “has managed to keep its capital projects moving while we have seen many shelved elsewhere in the UK”, and that “Holyrood has made the connection quicker than central government that investing in major infrastructure projects in the public sector is the quickest way to get the economy moving again.” I will now take an intervention from the undertaker, Mr Brown.

Of course we are looking at the overall figures. Some of the figures that I gave are overall figures—I did not restrict myself to particular sectors. On the overall position on inward investment, an Ernst & Young 2011 survey reported that Scotland was the leading location for foreign direct investment in the UK in terms of employment generation, which gives the lie to all the scaremongering that the prospect of a referendum on independence is chasing away investment from Scotland. On procurement, I will deal specifically with the Forth replacement crossing, on which the main Opposition party takes the ludicrous position that we should suspend a contract, which would result in laying off and making redundant thousands of Scottish workers and making large numbers of Scottish companies bankrupt. If ever an idea was irresponsible and stupid, it is the idea that we should suspend that contract. Labour members forget that, before we implemented our reform programme, Labour’s procurement record was a very poor one indeed. For example, in 2005, the then Scottish Executive awarded a contract for fishery protection vessels to a Polish shipyard instead of Ferguson’s shipyard. That contrasts with my announcement, two months ago, that we would give Ferguson’s the contract for the first two hybrid ferries in Europe. When Jack McConnell, the then First Minister, was challenged about giving that contract to a Polish shipyard, he said that he was “a bit restricted by the rules of procurement and tendering ... we have to be honest”— that was a first. He went on to say: “We cannot give preferential treatment to one company”.—[Official Report, 16 June 2005; c 18051, 18054.] As the Labour Party knows, we are engaged in a procurement reform programme. One of the reforms that we are demanding from the European Union is that we should be allowed to take into consideration the local economic impact of awarding a particular contract to a particular company. Regrettably, the UK Government has utterly refused to support us in that demand, which is absolutely shameful, to say the least. When we look at Professor Bell’s argument, the question that we need to ask is: what would the unemployment rate in Scotland have been if John Swinney had not implemented his programme of capital investment? Over the next three years, despite a cut of £3 billion in capital investment funding from Westminster, across the Scottish Government, we will invest nearly £12 billion directly and through leveraging in private sector investment. Seven billion pounds will follow the £3 billion reduction. We would not have had the £2.5 billion NPD programme if we had followed the Labour Party’s private finance initiative policy. On top of that, the Scottish Futures Trust is involved in mobilising total investment of £9 billion, including that £2.5 billion. The tax increment financing programme will result in hundreds of millions of pounds of investment in Scotland, and investment in the railways is worth £1 billion. The enterprise zones that Mr Swinney announced recently will generate hundreds of millions of pounds for Scotland. Members on both Opposition front benches have displayed their ignorance of housing finance in Scotland. What matters is not how much money we put in, but what we get out, in terms of both the leveraging in of finance and the number of houses— Gavin Brown rose— Derek Brownlee would have telt ye that. When we announced our programme—

I am running out of time. Ken Macintosh rose— They are queuing up, Presiding Officer. Before Christmas, we announced our programme of £460 million-worth of investment to build more than 4,300 new houses in Scotland. Our share of that money was £110 million, which we used to leverage in another £350 million. If we had followed the policies of the unionist parties, the total leveraged in would have been £35 million. That is why we will exceed our 6,000-a-year manifesto commitment on social housing, and why we are building 5,000 council houses, whereas Labour built six a year—in Shetland. Labour talks about Scotland, so let us think about what Scotland would be like under Labour policy. There would be no NPD and no £2.5 billion investment. Ed Miliband and Ed Balls—an appropriate name—said that—[Laughter.]

Presiding Officer, I thought that I was doing a good job of winding up the Opposition. I will make one more point about Labour’s policy to reduce public sector wages and take demand out of the economy. That is the difference. The Labour Party wants to be the Victorian undertaker of the Scottish economy. We are the champions of Scotland and we are delivering for the Scottish people.

Placing Scotland at the forefront of the digital revolution and making world-class digital infrastructure a reality is one of the Scottish Government’s top priorities. On Tuesday, the Scottish Government published “Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan”, which sets out our ambition and commitment and the steps that we will take to deliver world-class and future-proof digital infrastructure throughout Scotland by 2020, with a step change by 2015. It also sets out our intention to move forward at a rapid pace. The action plan is about delivering transformational change in the quality and coverage of internet and mobile access across Scotland, enabling people to connect from their homes, at work and while on the move. I hope that that will include an improved service in this building. The scale of transformation will require significant investment and the Scottish Government is committed to sourcing and securing that investment for Scotland. Delivery of the plan will require strong partnership working across the private, public and third sectors, and a willingness to collaborate to realise our shared vision. Our ambition is a society that takes full advantage of the digital age and thereby prospers economically, socially and culturally. We are clear about where Scotland should be. We are determined to lead the world in the quality of provision and in our ability to take full advantage of the benefits for all Scotland.

I can confirm that a key part of the Government’s approach is that rural and remote areas will not be left to the tail end of the process because they are rural and remote. In fact, the benefits that will be gained by rural and remote areas are proportionately greater than those that will be gained by some of our more urban and central areas. They will be starting from a lower baseline, so the improvement will be greater. From an economic as well as a social and cultural point of view, we are keen to ensure that rural and remote areas are not left at the end of the queue when it comes to the roll-out of the technology.

We have already spelled out what money is available to the Scottish Government and how we will use our funds. We are waiting for two key decisions from the United Kingdom Government, one of which is in relation to the urban mobile fund of £100 million, which was announced in the autumn statement. We believe that, in the future, the UK Government may provide additional funding for urban areas—that might happen in next month’s budget, although, of course, I have no insight into what will be announced. More important for rural areas, the allocation of the £150 million fund for mobile access is still to be announced. Many rural areas in Scotland will require mobile access rather than fibre-optic access. Our view is that, once we know what our share of that allocation is—I hope that it will be a higher share than the share that we got of the BBC licence money to reflect the particular needs of Scotland—we will be in a position to be more precise about which communities our share of the resources will go to. I share the member’s ambition—indeed, in the spirit of consensus, we will support Richard Baker’s amendment. We are always keen to ensure that there is clarity. Once we know the final allocation of the budgets in question, we will be in a position to be precise about the allocation of funding in Scotland.

The 4G spectrum auction will raise money for the UK Government. There are no Barnett consequentials from revenue; the Barnett consequentials come from the expenditure side. For example, if the UK Government decides to increase expenditure on broadband as a result of the revenue that it gets from the spectrum auction, we would benefit. If it decides to put all that money into the general Government fund and to make no allocation for responsibilities that are devolved to this Parliament, there would be no Barnett consequentials. If we were independent and we had our own 4G spectrum auction, all the money could come to Scotland and we would all be a lot better off.

As I was saying before those three interruptions—or rather, interventions—the importance of digital connectivity to rural areas was debated by the Parliament last June, when there was overwhelming cross-party consensus that improving broadband and mobile coverage in rural areas must be a key priority of not just the Government, but the Parliament. Addressing the digital divide that Mr Gibson referred to is at the core of the action plan that we published on Tuesday. The action plan is not just about taking hard wires to homes and workplaces. As I have just said, improving mobile coverage across Scotland is also critical. More and more people are accessing the internet from mobile devices while they are on the move. A report by the Boston Consulting Group cites the fact that, by 2016, mobile devices will account for 80 per cent of all broadband connections. Quite simply, Scotland’s businesses and people—and its MSPs—cannot do without faster broadband speeds and decent mobile coverage.

Why wait until 2014 for the new franchise? We are doing it already. We are working with ScotRail to ensure that wi-fi is available on as many train services in Scotland as possible. We will certainly look at building that in as a permanent feature of the contract, but we are not prepared to wait two years before we make progress. Indeed, I believe that my colleague the Minister for Housing and Transport may well have an announcement to make on that fairly soon. The action plan has four critical programmes. The first programme will bridge the current digital divide and provide a step change in speeds for everyone by 2015. It will focus on Scotland’s core or backbone infrastructure, ensuring that it is fit for purpose and future proofed, and that it reaches those areas where the market, if left to its own devices, would not go. Those areas will mostly be rural areas, but we know that there are urban and semi-urban areas, such as Kirkliston outside Edinburgh, that also struggle to get good digital connectivity. By 2015, we aim to achieve speeds of 40 to 80 megabits per second for 85 to 90 per cent of the population, and we aim to achieve the best possible speeds for those for whom it will not be possible to deliver speeds of 40 to 80 megabits per second. We recognise the early progress that is being made in the Highlands and Islands and will progress with the current procurement for the region because we do not want to hold it back. A contract will be awarded this summer and improvements will be delivered from January 2013.

We are not only aware of the progress but have played our part in ensuring that it happens, particularly in and around the Annan area, which will be the early priority in that programme. For the rest of Scotland—including Coatbridge and Airdrie—we will produce a procurement strategy by March and commence procurement by the summer with the aim of awarding a single contract in the first half of 2013. As Mr Hume mentioned, some areas are more advanced with their local plans than others, but I urge every local authority in Scotland to get in touch with us as soon as possible, either in combination—as is the case with Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council in Grampian—or individually, with their aspirations and action plans for broadband in their areas.

Absolutely. I am even prepared to be quoted in any press release as a result of that intervention. The second programme will be taken forward in parallel with the first and the others, and will focus on developing a longer-term plan to deliver world-class infrastructure by 2020. We want Scotland to be, and are determined that it will be, at least on a par with the best in the world. That will require a different approach. We need to ensure that we have the right mechanisms, partnerships and commercial models in place to deliver sustainable digital infrastructure for decades to come. By the end of this year, we will develop a full plan outlining the options for delivering our world-class ambition. Programme 3 will encourage and support the development of local projects that deliver local solutions for communities to which the market will not go, or in which early progress to world class can be demonstrated. That could support projects in the remote Highlands and Islands, such as the Tegola project. By April this year, we will establish a seed fund and provide an initial injection of £5 million from the Scottish Government to encourage that process. We expect that money to leverage funding from the private sector, communities, third sector, local government and Europe. Indeed, in Lothian and Fife—I am going around the country during this speech—there are already good examples of that beginning to happen. The final programme is targeted at increasing digital participation rates for individuals and businesses. Increasing take-up is fundamental. It is the only way in which we will achieve our overarching objective of ensuring that everyone in Scotland is well placed to take full advantage of the opportunities of the digital age. For business and the public sector, those opportunities can lead to productivity gains through more efficient and lower-cost provision of services. In the plan, we have outlined two projects to communicate to the small and medium-sized enterprise sector the benefits of getting online. Those projects are due to commence this year. For individuals, digital participation can deliver household savings, increase learning opportunities and provide enhanced entertainment experiences. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment also tells me that it will be a substantial enhancement for farmers by helping them to claim their European subsidies with a quicker turnaround than is currently the case. That news is, no doubt, music to Mr Johnstone’s ears. We are fortunate in that we are supported by a groundbreaking alliance of more than 35 organisations from the public, private, academic and third sectors that have signed up to Scotland’s digital participation charter. In so doing, those organisations have committed themselves to aligning resources and delivering a difference in Scotland’s level of digital participation. Discussions are under way on the Glasgow area, where there are particularly low levels of take-up, with a view to understanding how partners can work together to make a difference. The two programmes that I have described, along with programmes 3 and 4, about which I will go into more detail in my closing speech, represent a comprehensive, ambitious, challenging and realisable plan for digital in Scotland. We do not just want to be up there with the best; we want to be the best. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of Scotland’s Digital Future - Infrastructure Action Plan and the commitment to world class, future-proofed infrastructure that will deliver digital connectivity across the whole of Scotland by 2020; recognises that putting this infrastructure in place will make a real difference to the way people in Scotland live and work, including how they access public services; agrees that achieving the ambition will require the Scottish Government to work in partnership with local authorities to deliver committed and coordinated action across the whole of Scotland; calls on the private sector to work in partnership with the public sector to deliver open access future-proofed infrastructure and to support measures to increase take-up and participation in the digital economy, and calls on the UK Government to make available the right levels of funding to meet the challenges of delivering infrastructure in rural and remote areas of Scotland, to ensure that mobile 2G and 3G not spots are addressed in Scotland and that the roll-out of 4G in Scotland at least matches the UK average.

Obviously, the Scottish Government welcomes the £68 million that we got from the BBC licence money, but compare that to the £58 million that Wales got. Scotland has not received its fair share.

This has been an interesting debate with some good contributions from all parts of the chamber. David Stewart’s speech was particularly thoughtful, as were Dave Thompson’s and several others by SNP members. Of course, I am always fair in complimenting the Conservatives as well. The first thing that comes out of the debate is that we are all in this together. There is consensus that this is a very important agenda for the future of Scotland in the 21st century. It is important economically, culturally, technologically, socially, democratically—as Christine Grahame said—as well as from the point of view of creating a fairer and more prosperous society. We are also all signed up to the fact that we need to be ambitious. We recognise that in some areas we are not as far ahead as we would like to be, but we have to catch up and overtake our competitors. Our geography means that if we are to achieve our other ambitions it is particularly important that digital connectivity is given the priority that we are giving it. As well as supporting my motion, SNP members will vote for the Labour amendment. Unfortunately, we are unable to support the Tory amendment. I accept that the Tories have broadly welcomed the action plan and are in agreement with the strategy, but the wording of their amendment, for many of the reasons outlined by Elaine Murray, is unacceptable to the Government. I will say a few words about funding. The investment required to get to the 2015 targets will involve many hundreds of millions of pounds. We will know the exact figure only once we see the results of the procurement exercise. Between 2015 and 2020, getting to a world-class level will also require a substantial investment. Picking up the point made by Alex Johnstone, our strategy is to fund the areas where the market will not go; it is not to duplicate, pre-empt or undermine the role of the market. I anticipate that, broadly speaking, about two thirds of Scotland will be covered by the market—by investment by the private sector—and that the role of the public sector, not just the Scottish Government, will be to go to the areas where the market will not go. We will need to fill the gaps left by that market failure and to do so in a way whereby, as Mary Scanlon said, we get good value and a good bang for our buck for the investment of taxpayers’ money. That is why we have deliberately built into the procurement strategy outlined in the plan two important principles to which we will adhere. First, there is the principle of clawback. The pathway programme was well-intentioned—I am not making a party-political point—but one of the failures of the pathway contracts was that once the private sector started to make reasonable profits on the back of the scheme, there was no payback for the public sector. We therefore want to ensure that once a set level of activity is reached in the areas where we need to put in public money, there should be a degree of payback to the taxpayer that can be used for reinvestment and additional capacity building throughout the network. The second important principle is that of community benefit. John Park and members across the chamber are keen to ensure that we maximise community benefit in all the contracts. We have deliberately built the principle of community benefit into the contract or contracts, as the case may be. Elaine Murray made a good point about the procurement strategy and where HIE is and where we are in relation to a national contract. We have said in the plan that we are consulting HIE to ensure, first, that we do not hold up in any way the timescale that HIE has set for its own procurement exercise and, secondly, before that goes any further, that it will be compatible with our national approach so that we get an holistic approach across Scotland. If we had a national contract—and there would be many value-for-money benefits in having a national contract—it would have to be flexible enough to allow the locally developed strategies in HIE, in the south of Scotland and in Grampian to be applied. The fact that we are using a national contract for the benefits that it brings does not, either by design or by accident, undermine the need for a customised approach in different parts of Scotland.

We have already agreed with HIE that we will absolutely make available to it any information, intelligence or data to which we have access, subject to any confidentiality agreements that we have had to sign. I see no problem in that, as the people who have supplied us with confidential information are keen to ensure that it is shared among the relevant public bodies in Scotland. I take Mark Griffin’s points about the service in Cumbernauld. He should not interpret this as an attack on North Lanarkshire Council, as it is not intended to be that. I have nothing but the highest respect for the employees of North Lanarkshire Council. Nevertheless, I have deliberately mentioned three areas—the HIE area, Grampian and the south of Scotland—to which I would add Fife, where local authorities have come together and are now far advanced in their plans. Unfortunately, that is not the case in many other parts of Scotland. I encourage Mark Griffin, who is still a councillor in North Lanarkshire, to get the council—along with South Lanarkshire Council—to get a strategy together so that it is ready to roll out whenever we begin the procurement exercise. We have said that a key criterion in deciding where the strategy will be rolled out first is which areas are ready to roll it out. We cannot expect Grampian, for example, or the south of Scotland to wait for everybody else to get their act together. Those areas that are not at the stage that Grampian and the south of Scotland are at should get to that stage as quickly as possible because we want to move on this as quickly as we can. On the general funding, we are working with the UK Government but, frankly, we have not had our share of the BBC licence money. Wales got £58 million, although its population is half the size of Scotland’s, and we got only about £10 million more than that. Therefore, I say to my colleagues representing the coalition Government that, as we are all in this together, they should stand up for Scotland and get us our share of the money.

We will seek to maximise the employment and training opportunities for local people when the A96 projects move to the construction phase. That will build on the approach taken to securing community benefits through major infrastructure projects such as the Forth replacement crossing, which is expected to support more than 1,200 new jobs and has involved the award of subcontracts worth more than £20 million to 118 Scottish companies. I will now put my card in, Presiding Officer.

I do not think that it will have any direct impact, as the Government is treating the Inveramsay bridge scheme as a project in its own right. Obviously when we are planning the A96 work we must take into account the timing of the Inveramsay bridge contract, but Dennis Robertson can be assured that we are working on both projects.

The problem lies not with the Scottish Government’s procurement policy, but with the fact that we must adhere to European procurement directives, whereby any project over £4,348,350 must go to European-wide competition. Inevitably, based on the criteria, we must accept the most competitive tender. Whoever was in Government would have had to—and did—accept those rules. The difference between us and Richard Baker’s party is that we have committed to dualling the A96 and it never did so.

Broadband access is generally available in Glasgow, but to take up such access the household is required to purchase it from a broadband provider. Data from the Scottish household survey for 2009-10 indicates that 60 per cent of households in Glasgow had broadband access, compared with a figure of 64 per cent for Scotland as a whole. Total home internet access was 63 per cent in Glasgow, compared with 67 per cent in Scotland. Earlier this month, the Scottish Government issued a publication entitled “Digital Participation in Scotland: A Review of the Evidence”. The findings of that research will inform our approach to addressing digital participation and broadband take-up in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. We will work on that during this session of Parliament with the public, private and third sectors, particularly through the digital participation action group, which was set up after the GovCamp Scotland event that was held towards the end of last year.

Yes, I agree. It might be of interest to the member to know that, in the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement last year, he announced an additional £100 million for the development of superfast broadband services in the capital cities and six other cities in the United Kingdom. Glasgow was identified as potentially being one of those other cities. Obviously, we are actively pursuing that with the UK Government.

I met Richard Ackroyd and Ronnie Mercer on Thursday 12 January 2012. Mr Ackroyd is chief executive of Scottish Water and Mr Mercer is chair of Scottish Water and Business Stream. I last met the board of Scottish Water on 29 November 2011 and the chief executive of Business Stream on 26 October 2011.

I agree with what the member said about the levels of fuel poverty and the impact of the price increases that were announced before Christmas. I welcome the recent average 5 per cent price reduction, but that has to be compared with the average price increase of 15 per cent that was announced prior to Christmas. Scottish Water is already diversifying into renewable energy and has a subsidiary company that leads that diversification. I would be happy to send the member more details of Scottish Water’s involvement in renewable energy.

I have regular discussions with representatives of the construction sector and Construction Scotland, the industry leadership group that represents the construction sector throughout Scotland. I am currently planning a follow-up summit with key members of the sector to consider specific issues in relation to procurement. The construction sector in Lanarkshire will be represented. Construction Scotland is an industry-led initiative that aims to drive improvements in Scotland’s construction sector. Its members are drawn from the public and private sectors. It seeks to encourage best practice, improve research and increase communication across the construction sector. It is currently leading on the development of a refreshed strategy for the sector, supported by Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Government. We continue to support the construction industry through investment in infrastructure, social housing and skills and training.

I am well aware of the project to which Michael McMahon refers. The upgrade of the M8 is vital to the future of not only the Lanarkshire economy but the Scottish economy. I am more than happy to meet Michael McMahon, Scottish Enterprise and Transport Scotland to try to address any blockages to the M8 project. However, I must be careful not to make any comment on a pending planning application. With that restriction, I will be happy to pursue the matter and discuss it in detail with the member if he writes to me with more detail of his concerns.

The member said that Labour delivered devolution within months. The original Labour mandate for devolution was the October 1974 election. It did not take Labour months; it took it 25 years.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member should stick to the facts. It was not a minority Government.

Is the main lesson to be learned from the 1979 referendum that we cannot trust Westminster to run a fair referendum on Scotland’s constitutional future and that it must be controlled from this chamber?

I asked Michael Cameron, chief executive of the Scottish Housing Regulator, to respond. His response is as follows: “The Scottish Housing Regulator has statutory powers under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to intervene if it is of the view that a social landlord is failing to deliver for its tenants and other service users. In so doing, it will have regard to the Performance Standards.”

If the member writes to me with details of the cases, I will be happy to see what I can do to assist.

Ensuring appropriate, good-quality accommodation and support for those who are experiencing homelessness is a priority for the Scottish Government and we have seen great progress. Fewer homeless families are in unsuitable temporary accommodation such as bed and breakfasts than at any time since 2007. It is clear that councils should not use the least suitable forms of temporary accommodation for children and pregnant women. If they do, they will be in breach of the unsuitable accommodation order. Breaches are very unusual and are one of the measures that the Scottish Housing Regulator considers when it reviews local authority performance. The Scottish Government is not complacent about the issue and will continue to support local authorities and to work with stakeholders in ensuring that all temporary accommodation is of a suitable standard.

The most recent figures that are available from the Scottish Government, which are used by Shelter, are not from Christmas, but from 31 March 2011. They reveal that progress is being made on what is an important issue. There were 4,988 children in temporary good-quality social rented housing, while a small number—51 in total—were in bed and breakfasts. That is 51 children too many, but it amounts to less than 1 per cent of children in temporary accommodation. Back in 2006, the figure was 3 per cent. We will continue to improve the situation to the best of our ability.

We intend to announce more details on our timetable in 2012.

Early in 2012, I will announce the details of each stage to complete the dualling between Perth and Inverness. Some of that is already built into a programme, but most of it will be in the period beyond 2015. We will be specific about the sequence in which we undertake the works and when we hope to start and complete each stage.

Mr Thompson makes a worthwhile point and we are considering it during the compilation of the schedule that I referred to in my previous answer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In the light of your announcement, perhaps I should emphasise that electricity supply is not part of my infrastructure responsibilities. I welcome this debate on the long-term plans for infrastructure investment in Scotland. I will begin by explaining why infrastructure is so important and by putting the infrastructure investment plan in the context of our longer-term plans for the Scottish economy. As the Parliament knows, Mr Swinney published “The Government Economic Strategy” about two months ago, we published our “Infrastructure Investment Plan” about two weeks ago, and the Deputy First Minister will publish the cities strategy shortly. All those documents need to be read together as part of our overall plan to achieve long-term, sustainable economic growth in Scotland. Part of our strategy in the GES as well as in the IIP is to increase, where we can, the overall level of capital spending. We want to do that for two reasons. First, it is generally accepted that spending on capital investment has a significantly higher multiplier impact on the economy than resource spending. Every additional £100 million of capital that is invested per year is estimated to generate £160 million-worth of economic activity and support 1,400 jobs. In the climate that we are living in, both nationally and internationally, that is a major consideration. Secondly, I point out that, contrary to some claims that I have read about our plans for capital investment in the three-year period that starts next April, it is not true to say that we will be reducing the Scottish Government’s overall capital investment, in terms of both our direct investment and the capital investment that that leverages from the private sector and others. There are broadly five sources from which we can raise money for capital investment. The first and most obvious one is the capital grant that we get from the Treasury every year. That was cut by Alistair Darling—a cut that was confirmed by the current Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, when he came into office. That cut represents a real-terms cut to the Scottish Parliament of 38 per cent every year. As a result of last week’s autumn statement, the cut has been reduced to 32 per cent. However, that is still, basically, a one-third reduction in the level of capital investment that can be funded from the capital grant from Westminster and means that, instead of having about £3.5 billion a year to invest, we have something like £2.5 billion a year, over the period of the current spending review. Therefore, as announced by Mr Swinney, the Scottish Government will transfer over the next three-year period a total of more than £700 million from the resource budget to the capital budget. Over the piece, taking the £2.5 billion as the base, we will increase the level of capital spending despite the cut in the capital grant from Westminster.

Absolutely. This is an open and transparent Government. We have nothing to hide and a lot to boast about in terms of that figure.

I am afraid that the member is out of date. The information is en route to the committee this very minute. As I say, there is nothing to hide. We are proud to boast of the fact that we are transferring £700 million of resource to make up for the cuts that Mr Findlay’s chancellor imposed on the Scottish Government. The second source of capital funding is the non-profit-distributing investment programme, which will invest £2.5 billion over the next few years—£1 billion on transport, mainly to fund the M8 bundle and the Aberdeen western peripheral route, when the courts allow us to do so; about £750 million on health, mainly to pay for the Royal hospital for sick children and other such worthy causes; and £750 million on education, mainly for the college sector and schools. That money is also part of our strategy for filling the black hole that has been left by the cuts from Westminster that were imposed by the Tories, Labour and the Liberal Democrats. I see that we have one Liberal Democrat in the chamber—the party’s full membership from the Borders. The third major source is what is called the regulatory asset base—RAB—which funds our investment in Network Rail infrastructure. That will be well over £1 billion in the next few years. Two major projects alone will come to more than £1 billion—the upgrade of the Glasgow to Edinburgh link and the reopening of the Borders railway. That represents significant capital investment, funded through the RAB mechanism. The fourth source is a variety of innovative types of funding that we are employing in order to leverage additional investment from other sectors. I will give two of many possible examples. Two months ago, Keith Brown and I announced a £460 million programme of investment to build more than 4,300 new houses in Scotland. If members look at the profile of that £460 million, they will see that £110 million is Government money and the other £350 million will be leveraged from other sources: a combination of local authority borrowing for council houses, housing association borrowing and private sector borrowing. Four years ago, for every £2 of Government investment in housing, we got only £1 of investment from elsewhere. We have now completely reversed the situation so that, for every £1 of Government investment in housing, we get an additional £3 of investment from other sources. That is why we are able to spend the money that Shelter asked us to spend over the next three years in the housing programme, but we will get much more out of it in terms of new affordable houses over that period. We are therefore very confident that we will meet our target of 6,000 new affordable homes in Scotland over the next three years.

Coming from a Liberal Democrat, that surprise question really poses me enormous difficulties. The Liberal Democrats are the last people to talk about muddled words or muddled thinking. They are the prop for the Tory party throughout the country. The other example is tax incremental funding. We have announced six pilot projects throughout Scotland that will leverage substantial amounts of private sector investment. That will help to generate economic growth in the areas concerned and contribute enormously to the infrastructure. The fifth source from which we can raise money for capital investment is the borrowing powers that we do not currently have but will get, I hope, in the not-too-distant future. We will put those powers to good use to invest in the future: in our infrastructure, in capital investment and in sustainable economic growth for the benefit of the people of Scotland.

Mr Macdonald misses the point, which is that, despite the cuts from his chancellor, the repeated cuts from the Tory chancellor and the cuts that he has just enunciated, over the next three years we will invest between £11 billion and £12 billion in the Scottish economy because we are taking an innovative and dynamic approach that is unprecedented in the history of the Parliament. I wish Mr Macdonald all the best when the results of the Labour Party’s deputy leadership contest are announced on Saturday. I believe that there are three candidates. Although the bookies’ choice is Anas Sarwar, I am sure that Mr Macdonald will give him a run for his money. We look forward to the results. The infrastructure investment plan, which goes up to 2030, is about roads, railways, houses, harbours and rolling out broadband.

I bet that this will be a question about the Scottish Borders.

They may go to England, but perhaps they do not go to Europe any longer via England. As we spelled out in the plan, which no doubt John Lamont will have read diligently, the individual projects that are listed in it are those that cost more than £20 million. Therefore, if the Borders roads are not in the list of projects in that plan, I can assure him that when we publish our transport refresh early in 2012, we will consider all the appropriate opportunities for investment in the south-east of Scotland, despite his Government’s massive cuts in our capital budget.

Of course—I will cover the south-west as well.

As the First Minister announced two weeks ago when he opened the new Stena Line link at Cairnryan, we have brought forward the Maybole and Dunragit bypass timescales, and we will deliver those projects. Labour members had 13 years to deliver those projects and did not deliver any of them. That is what our plan is about, and we intend to deliver on all of it. No previous Government set out a plan for dualling the A9 between Perth and Inverness, on which we will make a start in January, or for dualling the A96 between Aberdeen and Inverness. When we carry out those improvements, every city in Scotland will be joined up by motorway or by dual carriageway. That is a major achievement to help to make Scotland competitive and grow in the 21st century. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of infrastructure investment to delivering sustainable economic growth, managing the transition to a low-carbon economy, supporting delivery of efficient and high quality public services and supporting employment and opportunity across Scotland; notes the significant investment underway in a wide range of projects to deliver new schools, hospitals, houses, roads, water infrastructure, community facilities and improved availability of high-speed broadband across Scotland; supports the long-term commitment to continue and build on these investments; supports the Scottish Government’s use of a broad range of funding methods for investment to help offset the 32% real-terms cut to Scotland’s capital budget inflicted by the UK Government, and welcomes the publication of the Scottish Government’s Infrastructure Investment Plan 2011, setting out the Scottish Government’s intentions through to 2030.

Is there a split in the Tory party? Mr Fraser has been issuing press release after press release demanding that the A9 be the overriding priority for road investment.

I do not understand how 30,000 new homes will not make a major contribution to reducing waiting lists in Scotland. That is an absurdity.

I thank the member for giving way. I caution him against using the CPPR figures, because at first glance it looks to us as though they have made a substantial arithmetical mistake.

The pilot projects do not require legislation. If we were to roll out a longer-term programme, that would require legislation.

I say to my Labour colleagues that I have never met such a depressing crew in all my life. If it had been left to them, we would not be talking about the dualling of the A9. They never made any commitment to the dualling of the A9, to the Forth replacement crossing or to the A96, and they did not want the Scottish Futures Trust or an NPD programme. If Labour had still been in office, they would just have accepted the Labour-Tory-Liberal cuts and would have offered nothing to fill the black hole that is being left by those cuts. We, on the other hand, are filling the black hole through the SFT and the NPD programme.

To be fair to Helen Eadie, she has supported the new Forth bridge. I remember that she went even further in the first session of Parliament, when she wanted to completely dismantle and rebuild the Forth rail bridge. That would have been a highly ambitious programme. Contrary to the reaction of the Labour Party and the other Opposition parties, our programme has been widely— Members: Wildly. It has been welcomed with wild enthusiasm by the business community. Let us look at some of the quotations. My good friend Iain McMillan from the Confederation of British Industry Scotland is fully supportive of Government policy. He said: “Many of the capital projects identified in the Infrastructure Investment Plan, particularly those relating to transport such as the dualling of the A9, the A96 and M8 and the Edinburgh-Glasgow rail improvements, are ones CBI Scotland has called for and their inclusion is very positive and will be widely applauded by business.” However, they will not be widely applauded by the party that claims to represent business.

We are talking about an investment programme that will have a high return to CBI members and to everyone who lives in Scotland from the point of view of jobs and economic growth. The Tories’ position seems to be incredible. They are arguing for the dualling of the A9 and, to be fair, they welcomed the dualling of the A96. We have also had John Lamont, who—we were told in his absence—is being accused of riding two horses at once in the Borders. That is a gross underestimate of the number of horses that Mr Lamont tries to ride in the Borders. He wants us to do more on the A1. We also heard calls for more investment in the A95, more houses to be built and more ports—more everything. They say that and then they tell us not to borrow a penny. The fact of life is that, if the Tories looked at the plan in detail, they would see that the bulk is funded through capital grant and not borrowing. There is an element of borrowing, but if we had control over our own purse strings the amount of borrowing would be substantially less and the amount of investment would be substantially more. Let me go on to some of the other people who have welcomed the programme.

Of course, Mr Hume.

To be fair, Presiding Officer, Jim Hume is a farmer and maybe “Ewe” is a common term that he uses. I just wanted to ram that home. [Laughter.] Let me continue with my quotations until 5 o’clock. Liz Cameron, who is the chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said: “The Scottish Government has set out a clear central purpose to increase Scotland’s sustainable economic growth rate and this can only be achieved through attaching a high priority to infrastructure investment. This review of the infrastructure investment plan was an essential response to the changing economic climate and we welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to a long term plan to improve Scotland’s transportation links and built environment.”

Of course, Miss Beamish. I am delighted to do so.

That is no problem. The plan is totally consistent with the UK Government’s plan that by 2050 we should all be driving about in electric cars. Electric cars are like cars that are powered by the internal combustion engine in that they need roads. The pollution is caused not by the road but by the internal combustion engine, which is not in the road but in the car. If we meet Chris Huhne’s ambitious plan for us all to be driving in electric cars, we will be sure to have the road network to deliver on that promise. We have heard some other interesting points about the cost of the plan. Let me tell members this: if we did not have to pay out nearly £700 million a year in private finance initiative annual payments, we would have a lot more money to invest without borrowing at all.

They are queuing up. Presiding Officer, the voting has finished for the deputy leadership of the Labour Party in Scotland. Therefore, it cannot be influenced anymore, so it is only fair to give Mr Neil Findlay the opportunity.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It could be said that the whole thing has been a bit of a wind-up this afternoon. I finish by commending to the Parliament my motion and the plan as a way forward for Scotland.

Good progress has been made, facilitated by the Scottish Government’s £250,000 loan and grant funding to Homes for Scotland. The captive insurance company for the scheme has now been established, and Homes for Scotland has begun discussions with lenders and house builders regarding participation.

I am glad that the United Kingdom Government is catching up with the Scottish Government in that regard. We will finalise the details of our scheme early in the new year, when I will make a detailed announcement and answer detailed questions.

We are happy to try where we can to help parties—in that case, the developer and the local authority—to reach agreement more quickly. The Scottish Government is undertaking a range of initiatives to help the owner-occupied sector, including shared equity programmes for new-start houses and the open market. We recently launched an infrastructure loan fund specifically to assist in private sector housing development. I point out that before the crash in 2008, section 75 agreements that resulted from private sector development helped to pay for one eighth of all social housing in Scotland.

Scottish ministers have not yet had any direct discussions with the European Parliament regarding additional funding for broadband. As the European Parliament has not yet commenced discussions on future funding for broadband, the most appropriate level of engagement at present is with the European Commission at ministerial and official levels. It is at that level that the Scottish Government has been progressing its engagement. I recently met the European Commissioner for Regional Policy, Johannes Hahn, and discussed the connecting Europe facility and the provisions in that for next-generation broadband networks. The Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs also raised the matter with the United Kingdom Government at the meeting of the joint ministerial committee on Europe on 21 November.

We published our overall approach and strategy earlier this year, and we will publish a detailed action plan in January. Liz Smith will see from that that we will focus on the roll-out of broadband in rural areas in Scotland and in particular on filling the gaps that are not being filled by the private sector.

I will answer that question in two parts. First, the details of the scheme have not been made clear to the Scottish Government, so I cannot give a specific answer on whether it will qualify for European funding. When the details become available, I will of course inform the chamber. Secondly, our priority is for such investment to be focused on rural broadband. However, there are some areas—Kirkliston comes to mind—where communities are adjacent to cities but are unlikely to be covered by private sector investment. I hope that at least some of the £100 million announced in the autumn statement will be available for the Kirklistons of this world.

We will not reduce capital investment over the budget period, despite a cut to our capital budget by the United Kingdom Government. Our focus on capital investment will support economic recovery and boost employment. As a result, Scottish Government-supported capital investment will be 25 per cent higher in 2014-15 than in 2011-12.

The member is talking utter rubbish. The capital spend in Scotland over the next three years will total between £11 billion and £12 billion, averaging nearly £4 billion a year. The capital spend is not just funded by our main settlement from the Treasury. Our non-profit-distributing programme will involve additional capital spend of £2.5 billion; our Network Rail investments, funded by the regulatory asset base, will be another £1 billion; and the Scottish housing announcement that Mr Brown and I made two months ago involves, on its own, £460 million of investment in new housing—some £110 million of that was Scottish Government money, which was used to leverage in an additional £350 million. I hope that, in the future, the member will do his homework and get his facts right.

I met representatives of Scottish Water—indeed, the board—on Tuesday 29 November 2011, two evenings ago.

Scottish Water’s investment programme will be as planned during this regulatory cycle and will not in any way be reduced. What has changed is the need for Scottish Government money to fund that programme. That is because, as a result of its outstanding performance in managing its assets, Scottish Water has been able to husband enough money to make a much more significant contribution to funding the investment programme than had been forecast. As a result—I am sure that the member will be glad to know it—we are making much more effective use of the Scottish Government’s resources.

I am aware that there is an on-going audit and police investigation into the statutory repairs system at the City of Edinburgh Council. That is potentially a serious issue, and it is right that it is fully investigated. It would not be appropriate for the Scottish Government to comment while the investigation is on-going.

The Scottish Government will take cognisance of any recommendations from the council as a result of the investigation. It is far too early for me to comment, but in principle the Government always listens to recommendations on where we need to improve our own procedures.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Jim Hume realise that we inherited that long waiting list because, in the eight years that the Liberal Democrats were in administration with Labour, they built fewer than 4,000 houses a year on average, only about 3,000 of which were social rented houses?

The Scottish Government is evaluating three proposals for the operation of national tenancy deposit schemes. Prior to final approval, public consultation will be conducted on the terms of all schemes meeting the Tenancy Deposit Schemes (Scotland) Regulations 2011. Once a scheme is approved by ministers, full details of that scheme and its date of implementation will be announced.

I can assure Mr Biagi that we will do everything possible to promote the scheme, once it is introduced, to all the target groups. The purpose of introducing it is to ensure that the most vulnerable people are fully protected.

Scottish ministers have written to the UK Government on a number of occasions to make the case for a reduction in the rate of VAT for work on houses. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth wrote to the Chancellor of the Exchequer on 16 November on that issue.

I entirely agree with the member. Such a reduction would also create more jobs and improve housing in Scotland. I point out that the chancellor has the power to do most of what has been suggested and could do so on 29 November, because on 10 March 2009 the economic and financial affairs council—ECOFIN—gave him that power in relation to labour charges for repairs and renovations, which is by far the largest element of the cost of repairs and renovations for housing. We call on the chancellor to act now.

Thank you very much indeed, Presiding Officer. I will try to use it as productively as possible, as always. Regeneration of Scotland’s most disadvantaged areas—

It is on now.

I will add injury time. Regeneration of Scotland’s most disadvantaged areas and strengthening of our communities are key priorities for the Scottish Government. We are committed to ensuring equality of opportunity and support for the places and people who need it. Our vision is of a Scotland in which our most disadvantaged communities are supported and where all places are sustainable and promote wellbeing. The Scottish Government’s regeneration strategy, which I will publish shortly, will set out the Government’s plans for delivering that vision in partnership with our stakeholders. Since 2007, this Government has invested significant amounts of money in regeneration—I will talk more about some of that investment in a moment. Together with our public, private and third-sector partners, and alongside communities themselves, we have achieved some notable successes, but over the years our collective efforts have not been enough. Too many of Scotland’s people still live in communities that are suffering the effects of deprivation, high unemployment and disadvantage, where too many people are not in work and have low educational attainment, where crime and fear of crime are too high, where the physical environment is poor and where people still die far younger than their fellow Scots. The regeneration strategy will reinvigorate efforts to change that. I make it clear that the strategy will not offer a silver bullet—there are no silver bullets—but we will re-energise our regeneration policy and focus on the priority areas that the evidence tells us are vital to success. Those priorities include a focus on tackling area-based deprivation by reforming the way in which mainstream resources are used and by working together more effectively; a stronger focus on community-led regeneration as a way of delivering the change that local people want; and a commitment to ensuring that the right type of funding and other support are in place at national and local levels to support Scotland’s communities to flourish. I will talk about each of those strategic priorities later. I turn now to the investment so far. This Scottish Government has invested record levels of funding to improve the physical and economic fabric of our cities, towns and villages. In the face of unprecedented Westminster cuts, we have continued to provide support to the communities that need it most. We have developed the £50 million JESSICA—joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas—fund in partnership with the European Investment Bank, and we have, since 2007, invested more than £90 million in Scotland’s urban regeneration companies, which has already secured more than 1,300 new jobs. A further £25 million investment is planned in 2012-13, with priority being given to Clyde Gateway in recognition of its key role in securing an economic legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth games. We have supported 89 town centres with £60 million of funding from our town centre regeneration fund, and we have invested more than £40 million to tackle the issue of vacant and derelict land in some of our most deprived communities. We have made a commitment to establish four enterprise areas in Scotland to support economic growth, and we have brought forward tax increment financing pilot projects in partnership with the Scottish Futures Trust as a way of unlocking private sector investment in local areas. We have invested about £700,000 in the past three years in the Development Trusts Association Scotland to support communities in owning assets. In addition, our investments in skills development, employability, housing, transport, renewables and other infrastructure projects all help to ensure that disadvantaged communities can access new opportunities. Despite those investments, however, there is much more to be done and many challenges to face. Earlier this year, I published a regeneration discussion paper—“Building a Sustainable Future”—that kick-started the debate about the future of regeneration in the current economic climate. More than 70 written responses were received, and a wide range of stakeholders engaged through a series of events. A number of key themes emerged from those discussions. They included the need for a clear vision for regeneration policy; clarification of the roles that different organisations have in delivering regeneration; support for a co-ordinated local and national approach to tackling area-based deprivation; the importance of community-led regeneration; the need for continued funding; and support for town centres as a central part of community life. I anticipate that those themes will feature in today’s debate and I assure members that the themes have shaped the development of the regeneration strategy and are at the heart of the Government’s approach to future regeneration. I mentioned the three key priority areas that will form the strategy and I will speak about each in turn. First, there will be a renewed approach to tackling area-based disadvantage. Respondents to the regeneration discussion paper recognised that addressing the deeply ingrained economic, physical and social issues that some of Scotland’s communities face requires a sustained and co-ordinated approach across the public sector and its partners. I recognise and support the good work that is being progressed at local level: a key aspect of the regeneration strategy will be to build on that localised approach, which will include working with public-sector partners to raise the profile of efforts throughout the country to tackle area-based disadvantage, and to promote and encourage best practice and culture change in the public sector in order to join up mainstream resources and services to tackle area-based disadvantage. The strategy will also involve working with local authorities to identify barriers to delivery and opportunities to strengthen skills and capacity. We will lead the way in developing better partnership working between the public and private sectors and in improving collaboration between public-sector agencies. Secondly, there will be a stronger focus on community-led regeneration. Strong, engaged and empowered communities are vital to Scotland’s success. The regeneration strategy will place support for community-led regeneration at the heart of the approach, because we recognise that the changes that are required to make all communities sustainable will be achieved in the long run only through a bottom-up rather than a top-down approach. Through the regeneration strategy, we are committed to supporting community-led regeneration in order, first, to grow the number and strength of locally controlled enterprising community organisations that act as anchors for regeneration; secondly, to support locally based organisations to take on ownership of viable assets; and thirdly, to help people to organise and respond to the challenges in areas where capacity is low. Community-led regeneration is about local people identifying for themselves the issues and opportunities in their areas, deciding what to do about them, and being responsible for delivering the action that will make a difference. We are starting from a strong position. An impressive range of activities is already taking place across urban and rural communities, led by organisations such as development trusts and community-based housing associations. The regeneration strategy will build on that strength through a range of new and existing support from both the Scottish Government and partner organisations including the Big Lottery Fund Scotland. We are at the early stages of developing proposals for the community empowerment and renewal bill. Through a wide-ranging dialogue, we are exploring how legislation can help communities to own certain public-sector assets, to have their voices heard on local decisions and to tackle vacant and derelict properties in those communities. We expect to consult on proposals next spring.

As the member will know, the Scottish Government has given priority to Ravenscraig; indeed, it is the subject of one of our TIF pilot projects. Along with North Lanarkshire Council, we are determined to work together with everybody involved to make it successful. My third point is that investing in the economic potential of our communities is also vital. That covers a broad spectrum of activity, including support for projects that deliver physical and economic change, including and especially jobs. That is not an easy task. The limited availability of public-sector funding and private-sector resource means that our funding models need to change and become more innovative, with a move towards financing and investment, as opposed to grant, where possible. Nonetheless, we will confirm a range of support in the strategy, including confirmation that JESSICA—Scotland’s regeneration loan fund—is open for business. The fund currently totals £50 million and it is anticipated that it will be recycled up to three times in 10 years. There will be continued support for Scotland’s urban regeneration companies in the short term, building on their considerable success to date, and a move to more flexible capital funding for them in the medium term, which will be focused on enabling infrastructure and town centre support. There will be funding to enable local authorities to tackle vacant and derelict land, continued support to enable registered social landlords to carry out their regeneration role, and continued support to enable coalfield communities to grow in strength and access opportunities to prosper. In addition, we will continue to work with the private sector and other partners to develop new and innovative methods of funding, building on the initial approach through JESSICA. The three priority areas of tackling area-based disadvantage, strengthening community-led regeneration and investing in the economic potential of our communities will form the basis of the strategy that will focus the efforts of the Scottish Government on ensuring that all Scotland’s communities are sustainable and promote wellbeing and that, in the pursuit of sustainable economic growth, no one is left behind. In my view, the central issue is to safeguard existing jobs and to create as many new jobs as we can. Access to decent jobs and reasonable income is an absolute prerequisite for the success of any regeneration strategy at local and national levels. That is why we have given such priority to attracting new investment in Scotland and why earlier this year Ernst & Young classified Scotland as the best location in the whole United Kingdom for new investment. The jobs that go with that are crucial to the success of regenerating the deprived communities. The actions within the strategy will contribute directly to the Scottish Government’s overarching purpose of sustainable economic growth and increased job opportunities. However, I am clear that the Scottish Government alone cannot deliver regeneration. If it is possible to get cross-party support for our strategy, we would very much welcome it. Successful regeneration is dependent on a wide range of organisations and individuals working together—I believe that that includes the political parties. It relies on co-ordinated action that encompasses economic, physical and social aspects, along with input from the public, private and third sectors and—crucially—the communities themselves. We are committed to working with partners to deliver on the actions that will be identified within the strategy and to delivering change for the communities that need it most. I hope that, today, the Parliament will support us in that commitment. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that in the current challenging financial climate it is imperative that there is a strategic vision for the regeneration of the most disadvantaged communities across Scotland; acknowledges the importance of regeneration to The Government Economic Strategy and the Scottish Government’s ambition to create a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, and recognises that successful regeneration relies on a wide variety of organisations and agencies working together and an increased role for communities themselves to help them improve their circumstances.

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on his award at the Scottish politician of the year dinner as the politician who has made the most impact on Scottish politics over the past year. Had he won the leadership and abolished the Scottish Conservative Party, he would have had an even greater impact of more benefit to the rest of us than perhaps anything else. As I am fair, I should also put on record my congratulations to my colleague Nicola Sturgeon, who won the debater of the year award despite the stiff competition from me and my colleague Michael Russell. Just for the record, I also say to Mr Fraser—

I say to Mr Fraser, on his constituency interest, that I will meet Blairgowrie and Rattray Regeneration Company later this month. As he knows, we have done everything possible to assist the town centre regeneration project in the Blairgowrie and Rattray area. We will continue to work with BARRC and Perth and Kinross Council, because we are keen for that community to benefit as intended from the town centre regeneration fund. I will be happy if Mr Fraser includes that statement in the press release that, no doubt, he has already written. I will also comment on Patricia Ferguson’s speech. It was interesting that she boasted that the total number of social houses built during the eight years of the previous Administration was 31,000. If we divide 31,000 by eight, we get an average figure of just below 4,000. I find it incredible that the Labour Party brags about having built an average of less than 4,000 social houses a year but complains because we are building 6,000 social houses a year for each of the next five years. With all due respect, that is an indication of muddled thinking if ever there was one. A number of issues have been raised and I will try as best I can in the 10 minutes that the Presiding Officer has awarded me to update members. On the big picture, despite the cuts that are being imposed from Westminster on our capital budget, the Scottish Government, through various means—particularly through our imaginative and innovative programmes—will be spending or leveraging something of the order of £12 billion of capital spend over the three-year period that is covered by the comprehensive spending review. That includes £7.5 billion, which is the capital part of the allocation from Westminster, £2.5 billion from our NPD programme, about £1 billion from Network Rail’s regulatory asset base, and a range of other investments, including the housing investment that we announced six weeks ago. The housing investment budget is core to the regeneration of every one of the communities mentioned in this debate. Within the space of a week, Mr Brown and I between us announced total investment of £460 million to build more than 4,300 new houses. The important point about that is that the Scottish Government’s share of that was £110 million, so we were leveraging £3 for every £1 spent. In these difficult times, using what Government money is available to leverage in additional resources from elsewhere, so that we can build the houses that we need, not just in the areas mentioned in the debate but the length and breadth of Scotland, has to be the right approach. We cannot judge or predict the success of any programme, let alone the housing programme, by the amount of Government money that goes in; we have to judge it by the total investment and the output that comes out. More than 4,300 houses, 74 per cent of which are for social rent and many more of which are for intermediate rent, is a huge achievement by any standards. In that one announcement, we announced more new houses than the average house building programme total for the previous Executive in any one year. I heard a number of speakers mention colleges. The role of education—college education, school education, pre-school education and university education—is essential to all our communities that are involved in regeneration. I, too, welcome the initiative that Glasgow City Council announced this week to facilitate better destinations and training opportunities around the Commonwealth games for graduates in Glasgow. That announcement is welcome and I hope that other local authorities follow that example. The role of the college sector is important. For the record, it is worth pointing out that, between 2007 and the end of the spending review period that we are about to go into, we will have spent 40 per cent more in the college sector than the previous Administration did in eight years. I am comparing our eight-year period with the previous Administration’s eight-year period. We will have spent 40 per cent more in cash terms in the college sector than the previous Administration did. One need only look at the impact of the capital spend on the college sector. I was in the new Motherwell College in Ravenscraig the other day—it takes pride of place in the Ravenscraig estate. If we look at the improvements at Cumbernauld College and other colleges throughout Scotland, we see that the capital estate is absolutely ready for the 21st century. As part of our NPD programme, we will include new college campuses in Inverness, Glasgow and Kilmarnock. It is therefore simply not true to say that the Government is neglecting the college sector. My colleague Mr Swinney will make an announcement in the period ahead about his decisions on the future of enterprise zones in Scotland. I agree, and I know that Mr Swinney agrees, with Patricia Ferguson that, in devising and designing the enterprise zone policy, we must ensure that there is no repetition of what happened with many enterprise zones in the 1980s—including Clydebank, for example—when far too often the jobs that went into the enterprise zone were simply relocated from adjacent areas. One of the major considerations in designing the enterprise zones that Mr Swinney will announce is the need to ensure that there is net additionality in jobs and investment into the regional and national economies of Scotland. I am sure that, when Mr Swinney makes his announcement, everybody will be satisfied. There have been a number of myths around the urban regeneration companies. I fully understand the concern of members, and I say to Duncan McNeil that I am happy to meet him as the constituency member for Inverclyde. I am also happy to meet Stuart McMillan, although by the sounds of things I might need two meetings—one with one and one with the other.

Of course.

I never have any problem in extending invitations to all list members because I want to educate them all about the facts. The reality is that Labour-led COSLA reached an agreement with the Scottish Government in 2008 that the money for the URCs from Scottish Enterprise would come to an end as earmarked funding in 2013-14. I have given a guarantee to Riverside Inverclyde and Irvine Bay, and I will give the same guarantee to Clyde Gateway, that the Government will continue to work with all the URCs to ensure that, against the background of the severe cuts that we face, as much money as possible is made available to them to carry out their priority projects over the period ahead.

Unfortunately, I have to finish now. However, when the representatives come to see me, I will be able to explain to them that, despite Alistair Darling’s cuts, which are deeper than Margaret Thatcher’s were, we are still delivering for the people of Scotland.

The Scottish Government is making good progress towards implementation of the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011. The act will require all factors, including those that provide land maintenance services, to be registered and to abide by a code of conduct. In addition, consumers will be able to approach a new tribunal, the home owner housing panel, if they are dissatisfied with the services that they receive. The draft code of conduct is out to public consultation and all key provisions in the act will be in place by October 2012.

Having referred to the code of conduct and approached the panel when it is established, they should make a complaint if the matter is not resolved by then. However, I believe that further legislation might be required in the area. We are actively looking at introducing legislation at a later stage to give people more power to switch companies or factors, because I believe that that competitive environment might be the best and most effective way of resolving many of these issues.

Sustainability labelling was introduced to building standards on 1 May. The principles are applicable to all new housing and build on the degree of sustainability that is already embedded in the building regulations. In providing grant subsidy to a programme of new-build social housing, we require high standards of energy efficiency—standards that will be achieved by compliance with current building regulations.

Absolutely. The member raises a valid issue. One of my first visits when I became Minister for Housing and Communities in the previous session was to the Lochside estate off the A76 in Dumfries. I met a tenant who had moved from an old two-bedroom flat to a new four-bedroom bungalow. Her gas bill went down from £40 a week to £36 a month as a result of the insulation and building standards of her new home. That is a typical example of the huge improvement in heating and insulation standards in new-build social housing throughout Scotland.

Some Scottish local authority pension funds have confirmed to the Scottish Government that they are interested in investing in social and affordable housing. They are considering the options available to them to do that, taking account of their fund managers’ advice and their investment criteria. The Government is also undertaking due diligence on a number of major bids for the innovation fund that seek to use new forms of institutional and other investment to support affordable housing supply.

I entirely agree with the member and I commend his efforts in seeking to ensure that the Forth Valley pension fund looks at the possibility of investing in social housing while adhering to its investment criteria. We are having serious discussions with a number of pension funds and I hope to conclude those discussions within the next few months.

Those figures exclude the local government settlement element of transfer of management of development funding. In reality, over the period of the comprehensive spending review, we will invest a total of £600 million in social housing, which is only about £10 million short of what was recommended by Shelter. Indeed, only a month ago, between us, the Minister for Housing and Transport and I announced total investment from the innovation and investment fund of £460 million for more than 4,300 new houses. I am still waiting for a statement from the Labour Party welcoming that.

I am quite happy to raise that with Mr Swinney in the hope that he raises it with Mr Osborne. If Mr Osborne fails to do anything, we will act once we get the yes vote in the referendum.

Public contracts Scotland provides a free-of-charge, single access point to public sector contract opportunities, which is open to suppliers of all sizes. Eighty-six per cent of the 58,000 suppliers registered on the site are SMEs. In the past year, 74 per cent of the contracts advertised on the PCS website have been awarded to SMEs.

I am very empathetic to the member’s point. We are looking at ways in which we can increase the opportunities for smaller companies and, indeed, micro-companies. We are considering a range of measures, including, not least, reform of the pre-qualification questionnaire system, with a view to accommodating smaller companies. In addition, I will in future work much more closely on that issue with our local authority colleagues, who are responsible for 50 per cent of all public procurement in Scotland. The way in which some of their framework contracts have been designed makes it extremely difficult for SMEs in their area or, indeed, in the rest of Scotland to compete effectively for that business. One local authority, Fife Council, has tackled the problem highly successfully, and I hope to see the Fife model rolled out among all the local authorities in Scotland.

Over the past four years, the volume of contracts that have gone to SMEs is 75 per cent, which represents 45 per cent of the value.

Ministers and officials meet representatives of Scottish Enterprise frequently. For example, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth met representatives of Scottish Enterprise to discuss the comprehensive spending review on 26 August, and I understand that he is meeting the Scottish Enterprise board later today.

I am not sure to which site Patricia Ferguson is referring: it may be the Ruchill hospital site or it may be another. I am always prepared to meet members who bring forward detailed proposals on how to use vacant public land, particularly if it is available for housing.

We have a range of strategic priorities for capital investment, including the Forth replacement crossing, the new south Glasgow hospitals and the Scottish schools for the future programme. We are using every policy lever to expand the capital programme.

There is a difference between a return to an investor and the massive excessive profits made by the private finance initiatives both north and south of the border. As a House of Commons select committee has recently reported, under the Tory-Liberal Democrat majority the country is now paying a very heavy price for Gordon Brown’s PFI bill. If we were not paying such a heavy price in Scotland alone—towards £800 million a year—in excessive profits to the PFI merchants, we would have much more money to invest in new schools and hospitals rather than having to pay it out to the fat cats in the City of London.

I, too, am willing to congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate, although I must say that members’ business debates are intended to be a bit more consensual than her speech indicated. I suggest that in future she should do more homework and get her facts straight. I do not think that anyone in the Labour Party is in a position to criticise the SNP Government when, during the final two years of the Labour Government in London, one Ed Miliband, who was the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change at the time, reduced the budget for the English warm front scheme by 50 per cent. We would never do that, either north or south of the border.

No, I do not have time for interventions at the moment. Let me give the Labour Party some facts and figures. Fact number 1 is that, by the end of the present spending period, we will be spending well over 40 per cent more on fuel poverty programmes than the previous Lib Dem-Labour Executive did. Fact 2, importantly for fuel poverty, is on our spending on housing. The reality is that we are spending substantially more on the housing programme, too.

Fact 3 is that, unlike Labour and the Liberal Democrats, we are making our programme available first of all to poor families with children under five. They never did. We are making our programmes available to families with disabled children. They never did. We are making our programmes available to people who are terminally ill. They never did.

From 30 November, we are extending the energy assistance programme to carers, which they never did.

We will not take any lessons from the Labour Party on what to do on budgets or eligibility for programmes. The reality is that we are doing far, far more to tackle fuel poverty than Labour ever did either north or south of the border.

I am now prepared to take an intervention, but I am spoiled for choice. Let me take Lewis Macdonald.

It will be 35 per cent higher at the end of the spending review, as I have made absolutely clear. The reality is that, as well as the money that we are spending, we are working closely with Chris Huhne, the UK Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, to ensure that Scotland gets its share of both the green deal money and the energy company obligation money. As we have—

I will maybe raise a point of order to say that Rhoda Grant’s intervention is incorrect. The reality is that, on top of what we are doing with the fuel poverty programmes specifically designed to help people who are in fuel poverty and with our housing programme, we are working with the UK Government as best we can to ensure that we get our fair share of the UK programmes.

The major driver of increasing fuel poverty in this country at the moment is the huge energy price increase that the six major suppliers are imposing. There are three influences on the level of fuel poverty at any one time: first is the level of income; second is the condition of the housing; and third is the price that people pay for energy. All the independent reports show clearly that by far the biggest single driver of increasing fuel poverty at the moment, not just in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom, is the huge increase in energy prices. As Jamie Hepburn and others mentioned, Ofgem’s figures show that the big six suppliers are increasing their profits per household per annum from £15 to £125. That increase is a multiple of six, and I find it incredible that, in her introductory remarks, Jenny Marra totally discounted the influence of energy prices in determining the level of fuel poverty. Every dog in the street knows that in Scotland and south of the border the single biggest influencer is the increase in energy prices.

I do not have time. The other important point, as well the amount of money going into different programmes, is the effectiveness of the programmes. As I told the Parliament earlier this month, I have asked the reconvened fuel poverty forum to carry out a comprehensive review of fuel poverty policy in Scotland to identify ways in which we can better focus our resources. We have re-engineered programmes in the past, particularly the energy assistance programme, particularly by extending coverage, as I mentioned. Also, the universal home insulation programme has been vital, not just in extending the number of people who benefit from our fuel poverty programmes but because it has been a major referral point for the energy assistance programme as well. The energy assistance programme, as members should know, has four major elements, including advice and help for people to move to better tariffs or social tariffs, and positive assistance with insulation and central heating. I have not even had time to mention the boiler scrappage scheme, which is something else that our predecessors never did. I am proud of our record in dealing with fuel poverty, which compares brilliantly with the total inadequacy and poor record of the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats.

You should just have phoned me.

Will the member break the habit of a lifetime and suggest an innovative and creative measure that we are not taking?

I need to correct the member on that point. We have made it absolutely clear that anyone who is evicted because they have been using drugs in a council or RSL house cannot then present themselves as involuntarily homeless. It is only if someone is involuntarily homeless that the council is required to make provision for them. It is simply not true that someone who has been evicted for a drug offence can then go on to the homelessness register.

Leaving aside the fact that it is Danny Alexander who is making the cuts, I wonder whether the member can tell us what he would cut from the Scottish Government’s fixed budget to increase the housing budget.

With all due respect, I do not think that the member understands that the £40,000 is a benchmark figure. We have made it absolutely clear that, in remote rural areas or for disability housing, for example, the £40,000 figure is not a maximum and that if more is required it will be granted.

We have had a good debate, with excellent speeches from all parties—well, nearly all parties. The Government will take forward the points that have been raised. Siobhan McMahon, for example, made a number of suggestions, and we will look seriously at them to ascertain whether we can move them forward. We have never claimed that we have a totality of wisdom, although having listened to some parties’ front-bench speakers I think that on this subject we have a monopoly. Every politician and Government must be judged on their track record. It is not just what we say; it is what we do. I have been looking at the track record of Labour and the Liberal Democrats on housing in Scotland and I have found some interesting statistics—facts, Presiding Officer. Fact number 1: when Labour and the Liberal Democrats were running the Government of Scotland during the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament, they built a grand total of 346 council houses; during those eight years, there were three years in which they built no council houses at all.

Later. Sit doon the noo till you hear the facts. We have heard a great deal this morning from Labour and the Liberal Democrats about the levels of subsidy. However, they did not mention the fact that they gave no subsidy whatsoever to councils—zilch. We are giving £30,000 a unit to councils to build houses.

I thought that that was meant to be an intervention, not a speech. While Labour and the Liberal Democrats built an average of 45 council houses a year, we are building 13 times that. That is what we are doing here and now. Of course, they talk about the RSLs but, if we look at their record, we can see that, on average, they built 10 per cent fewer housing association houses than we have done. Even with the reduced subsidy to the housing associations, we have built more housing association houses, year after year for four years, than they did. For six of the eight years of the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration, Mr Macdonald was a minister, as was Mr Henry. Indeed, Mr Chisholm—who is no longer in the chamber—had direct ministerial responsibility for housing for two years. I have checked how many council houses he built: zilch. I do not think that the Labour Party is in a good position to criticise others, especially when it was a Labour chancellor and a Labour Prime Minister who reduced capital spending for this Government and this Parliament by 36 per cent. I think that the Labour Party has a real cheek to demand more spending by us when it cut our budget by such an amount.

I will, later. Despite that cut, two weeks ago we announced a programme for new house building that is unprecedented in Scotland in the past 30 years. [Interruption.] I say to Lewis Macdonald that he can fall off his chair telling fibs. Two weeks ago, we announced a total investment in new housing in Scotland of £459 million. Some £110 million of that comes from the investment in innovation fund and £340 million comes from other sources. What matters is not the level of subsidy that we put in, but the quality and number of houses that we get out. For that investment of £459 million—nearly half a billion—we will get more than 4,300 new homes built in Scotland. Just before you go, Presiding Officer, I can tell you that 70 per cent of them are for social rented housing. However, the other 30 per cent are very important as well. Labour derides anything that is not, strictly termed, social rented housing. However, that other 30 per cent is taking people off the waiting list and stopping people going on the waiting list. By putting money mainly into social renting but also helping the mid-market, engaging in shared equity and engaging in the reuse of empty properties—for example, by giving money to Tory-led South Ayrshire Council, which wanted to invest in an innovative idea that obviously did not come from Alex Johnstone—we are taking people off the waiting list and stopping them going on to the waiting list. That is extremely important. We have a lot to be proud of in our record during the first four years of an SNP Government, and in our plans for the future. We are utterly committed to giving priority to building new houses. A lot of members mentioned fuel poverty during the debate, and we heard a very good statement on that in Parliament yesterday. One of the most effective ways of dealing with fuel poverty is building new homes to the new building regulations. When I became Minister for Housing and Communities, one of my first visits was to the Lochside estate in Dumfries. I met a single mum who had three teenaged kids. She had moved from an old two-bedroom flat, where her weekly gas bill was £40, to a brand-new, two-storey, four-bedroom house with new levels of building standards, and her gas bill had gone down to £36 a month. That did not just take her out of fuel poverty; it took her out of poverty entirely. That should be the objective of the Parliament, and it is the objective of this Government. I congratulate the Tories on fielding someone from the old Tory party alongside someone who wants to discard it and set up a new Tory party. I do not know whether its housing policy will be the same, but they will not need many pages to write it on because they do not seem to have a housing policy, except to moan and groan about the consequences of the cuts that are being made by their own party at Westminster. The housing policy in totality cannot be judged by the level of subsidy alone, although that is important. The figure of £40,000 is interesting, but I emphasise that it is a benchmark figure and not a maximum. When we need to give more than £40,000 per unit, we will do so. Indeed, we have done so. Sometimes the subsidy can be more than £100,000 per unit, such as in remote communities on some of our islands. We doubled the original amount for the investment in innovation fund because of the quality of the bids that we received. Many of those bids from housing associations show that they are building houses for a subsidy of far less than £40,000. For example, one of this Government’s many innovations has been the introduction through the national housing trust initiative—it will come through other means as well—of giving a rental guarantee instead of giving a capital subsidy. That allows the developer and the housing association to raise the money to build houses under reasonable terms and conditions. The rental guarantee costs the Scottish Government £2,000 per house, compared with the capital subsidy that was £65,000 per house. For the same amount of money, we can build many more houses. What matters to the folk on the waiting list is not the level of subsidy, but whether a house is available for them to move into. The Government south of the border is cutting social housing by 80 per cent. We are building houses for the people of Scotland. We are building high-quality houses—

We have got the finance. We have already announced £459 million as a starter for 10, and we will continue to fulfil all our commitments to the people of Scotland by building homes fit for the 21st century.

The Scottish procurement policy handbook provides clear policy guidance to all public sector procurement organisations. As part of the procurement reform programme, policy is actively reviewed and supplemented by Scottish procurement policy notes.

I am not unsympathetic to John Park’s point. At the construction industry summit that Mr Ewing and I recently held in Inverness, the industry made the point that it would be helpful to build into procurement practice a requirement for successful contractors to pay the going rate for trades, which is of course much higher than the living wage. We are considering these matters. I am happy to meet Mr Park and to see whether we can incorporate his ideas in our procurement policy.

We are committed to improving the digital infrastructure to ensure that next-generation broadband is available to all Scotland by 2020, with significant progress by 2015. We are making early progress. The Highlands and Islands project has entered procurement and will bring connectivity benefits to the region within 12 months, and the south of Scotland project is expected to enter procurement shortly. To accelerate improved digital infrastructure in rural areas, the Scottish Government announced as part of the spending review a £50 million next-generation digital fund, which we will enhance with up to £25 million of European funding and with public sector contributions from other sources. We will use that to lever in additional private sector investment.

I agree with Dennis Robertson. When we roll out our strategy, it will show that our emphasis is on rural areas and on giving a high priority to areas that are poorly serviced by today’s technology. It is no accident that the first two areas to get ahead are the Highlands and Islands and the south of Scotland, both of which have substantial rural hinterlands. However, I appreciate the urgency in other areas, including north-east Scotland.

We are supporting 31 local authorities with £12.5 million to lead delivery of the universal home insulation scheme over the next year. That will allow a range of free home insulation measures to be offered to about 200,000 homes across Scotland to improve energy efficiency and reduce fuel poverty. That will add to the 500,000 homes that were offered support through earlier area-based insulation schemes, which has resulted in the installation of about 57,000 free or discounted insulation measures since November 2009. Our energy assistance package has given energy advice to about 200,000 households and has referred more than 25,000 households for insulation measures since 2009.

As the member will be aware, yesterday I announced a review of fuel poverty policy, which will be carried out by the fuel poverty forum. One remit of the review is to consider extending the range of measures that are available through our various schemes. Obviously, consideration of the suggestion that the member makes will be incorporated in the review.

We are absolutely committed in our support for town centres and that will form a key strand in our wider regeneration strategy, which we aim to publish at the end of the year. However, as the results of the research that we published on 26 September indicated, town centre regeneration is a complex area and many factors are at play in determining the success or failure of individual towns and local high streets. We have a role to play alongside local government, which is responsible for local economic development and regeneration.

Absolutely—I totally agree. When we had the town centre regeneration fund, which is one of the best initiatives that the Parliament has ever taken on a cross-party basis, it was noticeable that many of the projects were organised from the ground up by the kind of organisation to which the member refers. The quality of the projects, and even of the proposals that did not make it to become projects and receive funding, was excellent.

I am always happy to congratulate North Lanarkshire Council when it performs well. Coatbridge has been one of the beneficiaries of the town centre regeneration fund. If I remember correctly, we gave financial support of around £80,000 to the mobility project there. That has been a first-class project, and it is essential to the regeneration of that part of Scotland.

I thank the Presiding Officer for allowing me to update members on fuel poverty in Scotland. Fuel poverty is a problem that currently affects one third of Scottish households. It is caused by high fuel prices, energy-inefficient housing and low household incomes. It is a complex issue: although it is a subset of general poverty, it can affect those on a higher income who would not consider themselves to be poor. We are emerging from the worst economic recession since the second world war and we face severe restraint in public expenditure. Scottish households are under severe pressure and, at the same time, energy prices continue to increase due to movements in the wholesale markets and other factors. I am sure that all members in the chamber are concerned by the latest round of price increases by the big six energy suppliers. Despite significant energy efficiency improvements in Scotland’s housing stock, increases in fuel prices are undoing that good work and making the basic right to a warm home seem out of reach for many. Indeed, campaigning groups are highlighting stark choices for households between heating and eating. I, along with other members in the chamber, have a long-standing commitment to the issue and many of us support organisations, such as Energy Action Scotland, that work on fuel poverty matters. The issue has cross-party support in Scotland and I wish that to continue. Members will be aware that the First Minister has called on the energy suppliers to meet us and stakeholder groups, such as Consumer Focus Scotland, at a summit to discuss the situation. Consumer Focus Scotland has highlighted that the companies have a major role to play, alongside us all, in helping to make Scotland’s housing as energy efficient as possible. It described the initiative as having the potential to lead to an innovative response. I trust that we have the support of all members in the chamber for the summit, and I anticipate a positive outcome. The Scottish fuel poverty forum was reconvened in 2008 to advise ministers on tackling fuel poverty and it played a major role in the establishment of the energy assistance package. I have considered ways in which the forum could be strengthened and how it could play a greater role in connecting its work with our commitments on climate change. I am pleased to confirm that Professor David Sigsworth will be the new chair of the Scottish fuel poverty forum. He brings a breadth of knowledge and experience in the energy sector and a commitment to tackling fuel poverty. I am also pleased to announce that Norman Kerr of Energy Action Scotland will support David Sigsworth in his new role by acting as vice-chair. We are boosting the forum’s strategic reach by establishing links between it and the recently established sustainable housing strategy group, which will ensure joint action on fuel poverty, energy efficiency and housing quality. We have made excellent progress on energy efficiency through our energy assistance package. It has given energy advice to more than 200,000 households in Scotland, helped to reduce annual fuel bills by almost £12 million since 2009 and delivered heating measures for more than 21,000 homes—complete systems and boilers. The programme continues to help older people, but it also provides valuable help to families. Since it was introduced, we have listened to stakeholders and extended to families with children the help that the programme offers. In March, we made help available to people with severe disabilities and those who are, sadly, terminally ill. This week, we have laid regulations that extend assistance under the programme to people on carers allowance. That will provide much-needed help, and it recognises the pressures on family budgets as a result of higher fuel costs. It is estimated that up to 7,000 households throughout Scotland could benefit from the change. I recently announced the allocation of £12.5 million of funding this year to 31 local authorities through the universal home insulation scheme. We wish to build on our strong relationship with councils throughout Scotland and put that at the heart of our future programmes for tackling fuel poverty. Despite that, more needs to be done. The dramatic increases in fuel prices that were announced this summer could push up to 170,000 additional households in Scotland into fuel poverty, taking the total to nearly 1 million. We must consider how our programmes can work alongside the new green deal and energy company obligation when they come to fruition next year. For those reasons, I am instigating a review of our fuel poverty strategy to ensure that we are best able to assist fuel poor households. The Scottish fuel poverty forum will be integral to the success of that review and will lead it. There will be three strands to the review: a review of the nature of fuel poverty and its drivers; future options for our fuel poverty programmes and how we can maximise the leverage of external funds; and an examination of engagement on reserved matters. I will report back to the Parliament early next year with a statement of policy and an action plan resulting from the review. The spending review this year confirmed that the Government is determined to tackle fuel poverty head on and made increased funds available to enable it to do so. I am very pleased to announce that funding for Scottish Government fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes will be £65 million in 2012-13 and 2013-14, rising to £66.25 million in 2014-15. That is a 35 per cent increase on the £48 million that is being provided in 2011-12 and illustrates clearly the importance that we attach to supporting households that are affected by fuel poverty. More generally, that funding will also enable us to fund the domestic energy efficiency commitments in the report on policies and proposals under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. The spending review also provided additional funding to establish the warm homes fund. That fund of £50 million over the course of this parliamentary session will assist those living in communities that are affected by fuel poverty. The fund will focus on the potential of renewable energy to provide a long-term, sustainable means to address fuel poverty. Development of the fund will be considered alongside the fuel poverty strategy review. Finally, I am also pleased to announce an additional £5 million for this year, taking the total spend this year to £53 million. The extra £5 million will be for insulation and heating systems targeted at the most vulnerable and fuel poor people in our society. We are proud of the action that we are taking and we are determined to do everything within our power to reduce and eventually eliminate fuel poverty in Scotland.

I, too, pay tribute—as I have done many times—to the work of the Rev Graham Blount as the fuel poverty forum’s chair. His resignation is now history, but I do not accept the record of events that Lewis Macdonald relayed to us. We are making available as much funding as we can to tackle fuel poverty against a background of very substantial cuts from Westminster. Mr Macdonald might remember that his colleague Mr Darling cut capital spending by 36 per cent in real terms over four years in his last budget before the United Kingdom election. It is a bit rich of the Labour Party to complain if budgets are cut. We can look at the totality of the money that we are spending not just directly on fuel poverty programmes but on our housing programme. Two weeks ago, we announced that 4,300 new warm homes would be built in the next two years. That is many more than were ever built in any one period under the Labour-Liberal Administration.

I thank Alex Johnstone for his remarks welcoming the statement. I will assure him about skills. He raises a fair point of which we are conscious. I am sure that he will be glad to hear that ensuring that the skills are available is the job of not just the Government, but the private sector. Scottish Gas—the contractor that delivers the energy assistance package—has invested heavily in new skills and in establishing green academies in different parts of Scotland. We have supported Scottish Gas in its training and skills programme. In working with local authorities and third sector organisations across the board on delivering programmes to relieve fuel poverty, we are keen to ensure that they make maximum use of the facilities for apprenticeships and other training places that are made available through Skills Development Scotland and other Government agencies. As part of our contract for the EAP, we are also extracting from providers community benefit clauses that relate to training and apprenticeships.

Last Wednesday I was in London, where I talked to a number of UK Cabinet ministers, one of whom was the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Chris Huhne. The main point of our discussion was the final stage in the passage of the Energy Bill, which provides new measures relating to the green deal programme and introduces the energy company obligation, which will replace the carbon emissions reduction target programme within the next 18 months to two years. The meeting was productive, and I pay tribute to Chris Huhne for his co-operation with the Scottish Government in developing the proposals and during the passage of the bill. Members will be glad to know that he accepted and endorsed every major proposal that I put to him regarding amendments to the bill to ensure that Scotland gets the maximum flexibility in its application when it becomes law.

The figure relates to the 7,000 who will be assisted every year by the programme. There is a capacity issue for the programme. Around £5 million of the programme has been specifically allocated for people on the carers allowance. That is a permanent feature of the programme. Over a number of years we hope to get through as many carers as possible who require, in particular, stage 4 assistance, which is central heating and insulation assistance.

I am very conscious of that problem. Indeed, over the past couple of years we have implemented a number of measures to ensure that, as far as possible, we do everything that we can to address the issue. It can be quite difficult to deal with rural areas, and in particular, with older properties in those areas. Loft insulation is a major problem in some houses of a certain age, for example. Alternatives and alternative technologies therefore have to be available. We have made alternatives available where we have been able to; whether we have done enough will be considered in the fuel poverty review. If we have not, we are prepared to do more.

The money has been invested in tackling fuel poverty and recycled into the programmes.

I give a complete assurance that Professor Sigsworth will have all the information that he requests and needs to do his job and that of the fuel poverty forum. In particular, we will be more than happy during the review to supply any information that they request. It is important for us to have a good, close working relationship with the fuel poverty forum and to allow it to do its work, not just in the review but more permanently. On the standards in the private housing sector, one of the issues I discussed with Chris Huhne last week was the measures that are being taken down south, particularly in relation to the private rented sector, whereby it will become illegal for houses that are graded as an F or a G to be newly rented out to tenants. We are considering whether we need to do more in that respect in our housing bill next year. The issue will be included in the consultation on the bill at the turn of the year.

That is relevant to the debate that will follow this statement. We are continually lobbying our colleagues in London for more assistance for those who are vulnerable and who are in fuel poverty. The fuel poverty targets, including the definition of fuel poverty, will be visited by the review. Luckily, our review can be informed by the conclusion of a similar review that has been taking place down south, which, according to Chris Huhne, is due to report within the next few weeks. That review has been considering the definition of fuel poverty and whether it needs to be updated. Obviously, any targets are contingent upon the definition of fuel poverty. The current definition in Scotland is that anyone spending more than 10 per cent of their disposable income on fuel is deemed to be living in fuel poverty.

I hope that the review will consider that and make recommendations. It is not intended that the review will be a long review—I hope that it will report fairly timeously so that the Government can take any action recommended by it.

I did indeed discuss that in some detail with Chris Huhne. As the member will know, Ofgem has been undertaking an energy market review of the retail market and has been considering the relationship in pricing between the retail market and the wholesale market. That review has been done in stages and it should be completed by the turn of the year. I hope that, as a result of the review, we will see action by Ofgem to deal with excessive fuel prices and excessive increases in fuel prices where they are not justified. There is a dispute between the energy companies and Ofgem and others in relation to the justification for the massive increases, which allegedly—if we listen to the fuel companies—are on the back of massive increases in wholesale prices. However, as many people point out, when the wholesale price goes down, the retail price does not seem to go down simultaneously or by the same amount. I hope that the Ofgem retail market review report, due in January, will help us to resolve that issue.

The fuel poverty forum will carry out the review. It will report to the Government and, indeed, to the Parliament. I will have to see its recommendations before I will be in a position to decide whether we have the money to implement them all. It would certainly be more helpful if we did not have to suffer a 36 per cent cut in our capital allocation during the next three years.

Some of those technologies, such as air-source pumps, which are installed quite regularly, are available under the energy assistance package. We are conscious, however, of the need to ensure that the range of technologies that are really only useable for rural communities is made available through our various programmes. The first meeting of the sustainable housing group took place yesterday. We are looking at the kind of issues that the member highlighted. I welcome the recent significant reduction in the price of solar electricity panels. Two years ago, the average price per unit was running at roughly £8,000; it is now down to £6,000 and is forecast to go down to £4,000. That means that the payback period is substantially reduced and, therefore, that the use of those panels is a much more economic measure now than it was perhaps four or five years ago.

I am happy to pay tribute to the work of the Energy Saving Trust and its energy advice centres. The trust runs the energy assistance package helpline and is also involved in marketing the package. It provides a very good service, particularly during stages 1, 2 and 3 of the package, which are more about advice, information, referral and counselling, but also about ensuring that those who deserve it get to stage 4. I am happy to endorse Jim Eadie’s comments.

We are very keen to work with third-party organisations, because they are particularly helpful in identifying the most vulnerable people in our community—that happens through such organisations and local authorities. One of the areas that I want the review to look at is how we can better penetrate local communities, because one of the problems that we face is that people are often not aware of the variety of programmes that are available. Regardless of how much you might spend on television or press advertising, I find that by far the best advert is word of mouth in those communities. I encourage every member to do everything they can to spread the word about the suite of fuel poverty programmes that the Government administers.

This debate is about welfare to work. In my experience, the best way to get people off welfare is to put them into work, so that they are not reliant on benefits. Speakers from all sides of the chamber have bandied about the figure of 2 million people who are trapped on out-of-work benefits. The reason why they are trapped on out-of-work benefits is not because the bulk of them are work-shy and do not want a job; it is because the jobs ain’t there. The reason why the jobs ain’t there is that capital spending was slashed under Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown, and is being slashed now by George Osborne and all the Tories’ Liberal Democrat poodles. It is true: the best way to get people out of welfare and into work is to keep the capital spending budget going, create jobs and save money. For every individual who gets out of welfare and into work, we save £10,000 a year from the deficit in benefit savings and additional tax revenue. There is no other way to get people off welfare than putting them into work. That is why this Government is all about creating the conditions in Scotland for getting people into work. As the figures show, our strategy in Scotland, even with our limited resources and our very limited powers, is beginning to pay off.

I think that that says it all about the modern, compassionate Conservatives. They are not modern; they are not compassionate; they are just conservative.

Mr McLetchie asks what the alternative strategy is. I will tell him. To reduce the deficit and get people off welfare and into work at the same time, we should stop wasting billions every year on Trident and other nuclear weapons and put that money to good use. We should collect the £35 billion in uncollected tax revenue, mainly due from the rich pals of Mr McLetchie and the others throughout the country. If the Conservatives want to help Scotland, they should give us our fossil fuel levy, so that we can use it to get people off welfare and into work. It would be extremely unfair of me to pour all the blame on to the Tories. I notice that, when the Labour Party is in government, Labour members argue for Tory policies but, when they go into opposition, they argue against the same policies that they introduced. As Margaret Burgess said, and many others have pointed out, this right-wing welfare agenda was started under Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling. Remember the 75p rise for the pensioners. Remember when poor Malcolm Chisholm, who is not in the chamber, resigned after five minutes in the Scottish Office, because of what the Labour Government did to single parents. Remember the introduction of the employment support allowance, which Margaret Burgess mentioned, and the other measures that Labour took to do down disabled people in this country. Remember also the fiasco over the introduction of the 10p cut in tax for the low paid. We will not be taking any lessons from the Labour Party. It followed the Tory agenda and it is only now that it is in opposition that it opposes it. I will say a word or two about the Liberals—[Laughter.] I apologise; I should have said the Liberal, as there is only one in the chamber. As we would expect, he is from the northern isles, a very great part of the country. When Mr Balfour was the Tory Prime Minister in an age that Mr McLetchie might remember but I do not, they used to describe the House of Lords, to where no doubt Mr McLetchie aspires, as Mr Balfour’s poodle. Here we are, over 100 years later and Mr Cameron now has a poodle called the Liberal Democrat Party and the chief poodle is Danny Alexander. We will not take any lessons from the Labour Party, the Tory party, the Liberal Democrat party or any other unionist organisation about the welfare system. In a statement yesterday, Mr Cameron, who heads a coalition Cabinet of millionaires, told everybody that he wanted them to pay off their credit cards as soon as possible. Well, if you are a Tory toff from Oxford, you may have the money to pay off your credit card, but if you are a poor soul who has been made unemployed as a result of the Tory cuts, you cannot afford to pay off your credit card—in fact, the chances are that you may rely on a credit card to get by next week and the week after that. I think that what most of us in the chamber are particularly critical of are the specifics of some of the welfare reforms. Nobody has said that they are opposed in principle to welfare reform. Of course there is a case for reforming the welfare system, but the purpose in reforming it is not to do down the people who are the most vulnerable members of our society. As Margaret Burgess said, the purpose of reform should be to make this a fairer society, not a more unequal society. The attack on disability living allowance is therefore particularly abhorrent and the housing benefit changes can be described only as inhumane. Let me say right away—

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Let me say right away—[Interruption.] I hate my peroration being interrupted. Let me say right away that, even though housing is a devolved matter, at no time has the Scottish Government been consulted about the changes to housing benefit or the impact that those changes will have. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy spelled out, the changes will be devastating for people.

The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations says that one in five tenants will be adversely affected by the changes. The reality is that in 2013, when the rule about underoccupation comes in, an old body who has lived in a house for 40 or 50 years and who depends on housing benefit could be forced out of her lifetime home as a result of the inhumane measures that are being taken by the Tories. The only people who can hold their heads up high when it comes to welfare to work are in the SNP Government and party because, unlike the unionist parties, we promote the welfare of the people and do not cut the welfare of the people, and our policies are putting people into work and not taking work away from them.

As well as developing savings of nearly £1.2 billion across the public sector since 2006, the Scottish Government’s procurement reform programme also aims to improve public procurement from a business perspective. We are improving the efficiency of procurement processes and making it easier for businesses to compete for contracts. For example, over 55,000 businesses are now registered on the Government’s public contracts Scotland advertising portal, which is making it simpler than ever before to find public sector work.

Every major contract that is issued by the public sector will have a community benefit clause, and high on our agenda for such benefits will be apprenticeships, training and recruitment of unemployed people. With regard to the Commission, two months ago, I had a very productive meeting with the relevant commissioner in Brussels and we have asked that, in deciding the outcome of public sector contracts, we be allowed to consider local economic impact. After all, the cost of such impacts can amount to more than the savings made in the contract. The commissioner listened sympathetically and we have some support from other member states. However, I regret to say that the point was not supported by the United Kingdom Government. The other major aspect of European Union reform is increasing the threshold at which a contract has to be advertised in the Official Journal of the European Union. I can fairly predict that, when the reforms are announced, that particular reform will feature.

We are very conscious of the need to use public procurement to drive down our carbon emissions as well as to achieve other objectives. We are still engaged in our reform programme and are looking at how we can achieve that objective more effectively, and how we can encourage and facilitate the ability of more small to medium-sized enterprises to obtain public sector work in Scotland. People should be aware that there is £10 billion-worth of work from public sector procurement in Scotland and we are determined to make the system work better for the people of Scotland in order to promote the growth of the Scottish economy.

First of all, I congratulate Jackson Carlaw on his straw-poll showing in Aberdeen at the weekend. I believe that he got 57 per cent of the vote. We are working very closely with all six major business organisations on our procurement reform programme. I chair the public sector procurement reform board and we are actively involving the SME sector in, for example, refashioning the pre-qualification questionnaire procedure and contents. I repeat that the sector will be actively involved before we finalise the detail.

Not only will I consider it, but we are—as I said in my previous reply—doing it. There are three major problems with the PQQ process, the first of which is the ridiculous situation in which companies have to submit a full PQQ every time they bid for work. Instead of reinventing the wheel every time, they should have only to update the PQQ. Secondly, the PQQ should be SME-friendly, which it is not at the moment. Thirdly, we want to simplify and streamline the PQQ to ensure that it is much easier for every business to understand. I am sure that the member will follow progress closely and I will be delighted to keep him abreast of the Government’s progress.

The water services charges exemption scheme was set up as a temporary measure in 2002 to help small organisations that had received relief from water charges to make the transition to paying. The scheme was subsequently extended, with some revisions, and will run to 2015. The Scottish ministers have asked Scottish Water to review the current arrangements, working with stakeholders such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and licensed providers, with a view to devising a new scheme to run from 2015. As other water customers pay for the exemption scheme through their water charges, I would expect any new scheme to operate within the same financial envelope.

I am happy to endorse that point. We will consider whether organisations that were previously excluded should be included. I should emphasise that the scheme is not exclusively available to charities; it is available to other organisations that are not registered charities. I am aware of one or two organisations in Dr Murray’s constituency that have met with some difficulty. I have asked Scottish Water to work with those organisations and to accommodate them as far as possible, as I am conscious of the impact that those charges can have on the overall viability of well-meaning organisations.

I am very much aware of the issue. As we look to the new scheme we will take members’ points into account. I am not currently in a position to make specific promises, because we are in the process of reviewing the scheme, which will be refreshed in 2015. However, we are listening to what people are saying.

The Scottish Futures Trust leads on delivery of the non-profit distributing programme, which is valued at £2.5 billion. The SFT is supporting public sector procuring bodies such as NHS Lothian and Transport Scotland to deliver NPD projects. The SFT is also in frequent contact with private sector companies regarding the detail of the project pipeline and the commercial opportunities therein.

We will make announcements before Christmas. Local authorities are heavily involved in a number of NPD projects. The NPD £2.5 billion covers transport, health and education. We are consulting widely in all those areas, particularly with the participating authorities, which in some cases are local authorities. The feedback that we have had from local authorities is that if the SFT was not here the Government would need to invent it.

An updated infrastructure investment plan will be published by the Scottish Government in the autumn.

I am more than happy to include in the plan as much information as it is possible to provide at the time. The plan takes a very long-term perspective—around 10 years—and will contain less of the precise information that the member described for projects that are planned for towards the end of a 10-year period than it will for projects that are taking place within, say, the next three years. However, I am always happy to share with members information about the excellent suite of projects that we are taking forward.

As Transport Scotland is part of the Scottish Government, we have regular discussions with that agency about capital infrastructure projects.

The delivery of the project is and always has been the responsibility of the City of Edinburgh Council. We recognise the complexities and difficult circumstances that the council has faced as it has sought to make the right decisions for the people of Edinburgh. The Scottish Government will now fully consider all the factors in the council’s revised proposals before it makes any further decisions. Those proposals will be considered on their merits.

We have already said that there will be a public inquiry into the trams project—the First Minister has confirmed that—but we will decide the remit and timetable for and the composition of that inquiry at a later date. The important priority is to try to get the project back on track—if members will pardon the pun—to ensure that it is delivered and finalised in the best way possible.

As the member knows, my colleague Mr Swinney has been working with him and others particularly on Prestwick airport and the need to expand all aspects of the diversification of jobs in the area. We will endeavour to give whatever support we possibly can to Prestwick airport, the surrounding area and the Ayrshire ports to ensure that they are developed to their full economic potential.

We have made it clear, as have many others, that the United Kingdom Government’s initial proposals to restructure the coastguard’s maritime rescue co-ordination centres around the UK were not well thought through. We will formally respond to the Maritime and Coastguard Agency’s revised proposals by its deadline of 6 October. Our response will reflect strong local concerns about the proposal to close the Clyde MRCC, including about the potential impact of the loss of local knowledge and expertise on the safety of all mariners and industries in the area. Notwithstanding the UK Government’s proposed cuts, we continue to invest in regeneration in the area. Since 2007, the urban regeneration company Riverside Inverclyde has received funding of £25.2 million from the Scottish Government, including £2.3 million in the current year.

I agree entirely with the fair and substantive points made by Stuart McMillan, and I hope that members on every side of the chamber will join us in making it clear to the United Kingdom Government that the proposals are totally unacceptable and pose real questions about the future of maritime safety and facilities. We will be very robust in our response and I am happy to incorporate all the points that Stuart McMillan made, which I am sure are shared across the chamber.

David Stewart makes a fair point and I am happy to raise the issue to see what can be done to rectify the situation.

The Forth replacement crossing is on budget and on schedule to open to traffic in 2016. We have ensured that robust project governance structures have been put in place that reflect industry best practice and build on the principles deployed to deliver the M74 and the M80 projects so successfully, both of which finished under budget and well ahead of time.

All Forth replacement crossing works will be carried out in line with the code of construction practice that was developed through the Forth Crossing Bill process. A traffic management working group, a marine liaison group, a noise liaison group and an environmental working group have been put in place to ensure that the contractors carry out the works using the best practical means to minimise impact on local communities and the road network. In addition, community forums took place in June and August with participation of the community councils and other organised resident groups, to ensure that communities are aware in advance of the commencement of any works that may affect them.

Because this is my first speech in my role as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, I thought that it would be useful to begin with an overview of my responsibilities and to touch briefly on all the main areas of policy for which my colleague Keith Brown and I are responsible. First, this is probably the first portfolio of its kind in the whole of the United Kingdom, as it brings together the total infrastructure and capital investment of the entire Government. The figures show that that is a substantial responsibility. In the public sector in Scotland we procure £9 billion of material and supplies every year. We have a £2.5 billion mainstream capital investment programme to manage, on top of which we have a £2.5 billion non-profit distributing investment programme. We are responsible for Scottish Water—a company that has a turnover of more than £1.1 billion—as well as for the European structural funds, regeneration, fuel poverty, housing policy and, of course, transport. By any definition, we have a fairly wide range of responsibilities, which we are both looking forward to working on. Unfortunately, we are coming to the job against a background of substantial cuts in capital spending that have been enforced on us by successive Governments in London to the tune of 36 per cent over the four-year period of the current UK spending round. However, our attitude to the cuts is not to just lie down and take them but to rise to the challenge and to identify new ways of getting more value out of the money that we have, as well as ways in which we can make better use of the asset base in the public sector and use money that has been saved as a result of more efficient use of our assets for reinvestment in essential front-line services. My function is a combination of my previous responsibilities for housing and communities and some of Mr Swinney’s previous responsibilities for infrastructure and capital investment. I pay tribute to the tremendous innovative work that Mr Swinney undertook over the past four years. During that period he presided over £14 billion-worth of investment in the capital assets of our country. He has been instrumental in starting major new projects, including the south Glasgow hospitals, the Forth replacement crossing and schools for the future. Only yesterday, along with the Duke of Gloucester, Mr Brown and I had the pleasure of attending the opening of the new section of the M74, a project that has been talked about since 1965, and which we have now delivered as of last night, when we saw the first traffic transgress the new part of the motorway. The M74 will bring together the east and west of Scotland, cutting journey times by up to 10 minutes and, I believe, bringing up to 20,000 new jobs to that part of Scotland.

It also, of course, had those from Transport Scotland, Renfrewshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council. I would be the first to recognise that. They, along with me, traversed the M74. They did not “transgress” it; it has been a long day, starting at the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee this morning. On top of that, we have a record housebuilding programme—the highest number for 20 years. Over the past four years, the Scottish Futures Trust has developed into a major instrument of Government policy and is a model that is now being copied by Governments in other parts of the United Kingdom and, indeed, overseas. We would all agree that the role of infrastructure and capital investment is absolutely central to improving the economic growth prospects of our nation. Capital investment and infrastructure facilitate and enable the growth of private sector and wealth-generating activity, and they improve the performance of public service delivery. Policies are all dependent on one another. For instance, to have a successful education policy requires us also to have a successful housing policy, because a child who lives in an overcrowded house will not realise his or her full potential at school. They will not do so unless they are living in decent, spacious accommodation. Similarly, to achieve maximum outputs on health, it is far better and more sensible to have good housing, so that old people, in particular, do not need to live in housing that is damp or that can otherwise make them ill, directly or indirectly. All those services are extremely important. The issue is not just one of investment in new housing, new hospitals, new colleges and new roads; it is also important to maintain our existing assets at a high level. One question at the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee this morning was about the role of the road maintenance budget. That is a very good example of where a good maintenance policy, with significant investment, can save us having to spend more money on upgrading, renovating or replacing particular assets. Funding those assets presents the major challenge in the years ahead. I have already mentioned our mainstream programme and the NPD programme. We are also considering other approaches to innovative funding, not the least of which is more substantial borrowing powers coming to the Scottish Government through the Scotland Bill—I hope—than the powers that are currently proposed. We are seriously considering the possibility of raising equity capital from pension funds and from individual savings accounts and other institutional funding, along with pension funds and other private institutional funds, for housing and possibly wider infrastructure investment. The role of innovation is absolutely critical. Of the new housing investment and innovation fund, £20 million is for new council housing, £20 million is for new housing association houses and £10 million is open to all comers for innovative ideas. The innovation £10 million has been oversubscribed by a factor of five; the other two elements have been oversubscribed by a factor of three. I was glad that the Minister for Housing and Transport this morning announced a major new innovation for the Scottish Government in working with Homes for Scotland—the umbrella organisation for developers in Scotland—to introduce a mortgage indemnity guarantee to help the first-time buyer market, in particular, to get moving. That was a proposal that was also in the Labour manifesto, although I think that it was probably nicked from our January policy document, as every good idea from the Labour Party has been. I do not want to underestimate the importance of European funding. Tomorrow, the European Commission will publish its set of proposals on European funding for the period after 2013. Again, I am sure that Parliament is united in agreeing that we must make maximum use of European funding. It is likely that there will also be an announcement from the European Commission that a European infrastructure investment fund and a European digital investment fund will be established. I want to emphasise the importance of the digital strategy and transport to connecting our cities and our rural and urban areas to each other, and to connecting Scotland to the rest of the world. We attach great importance to transport and to our digital strategy and we look forward to receiving a fair share of the £530 million that is being made available across the UK for investment in digital. That is a brief overview. I believe that the chamber is united over much of what I have talked about. It is important for us to look forward rather than backward and to deliver as much as we possibly can in terms of capital investment for the benefit of our businesses, our people and our nation.

I thank the member for allowing me to intervene. Just to correct him: the £40,000 is not a limit; and the other figure that he gave is not the correct overall figure.

Maureen Watt should by now have received a letter to confirm that we will include a community benefit clause in the contract.

Primary responsibility for regeneration projects in Airdrie and Shotts rests with North Lanarkshire Council. Over the period from 2008 to 2011, £400,000 was allocated from the Scottish Government’s town centre regeneration fund award of £2 million to the council to support improvements in Airdrie town centre. In addition, a total of £1.3 million of vacant and derelict land fund money was allocated towards projects in Airdrie and Shotts. Earlier this year, we published a regeneration discussion paper. The paper is the starting point for a wider debate with stakeholders about the key challenges and opportunities for regeneration in the future. Following completion of the discussion phase on 10 June, we will be developing our regeneration strategy. We welcome input to that debate from the communities of Airdrie and Shotts and from North Lanarkshire Council.

I am delighted to be answering the question both as the new Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment and as the new member for Airdrie, Shotts and the surrounding villages. I have always made it clear that, in my view, we should do everything that we possibly can to establish a new railway station at Plains. A new railway station was provided in West Lothian, which was initially partly funded by the council there. The role of—if I may say so—Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council is absolutely essential, and so far, it has refused to put up any money towards funding any new railway station at Plains.

On Wednesday 25 May, we announced that the preferred bidder for the Gourock to Dunoon ferry service tender is Argyll Ferries, a subsidiary of David MacBrayne. Subject to a statutory standstill period, the contract to run the service is due to be signed on 7 June. The new passenger ferry service will then start by 30 June.

Not everyone agrees with David Stewart’s assessment, including those who write to the local newspaper. Indeed, before I came into the chamber this morning, I received an unsolicited letter from a member of the public in Argyll— Members: Mike Russell! The letter said: “I was delighted to read that the Dunoon - Gourock Ferry saga has reached conclusion. It is a decision which I am certain will be welcomed by the vast majority of ferry travellers on the Cowal peninsula.” I am sure that that sentiment is shared by the local member, as well as many others. I recognise that there is a need in general terms to consider the issues of competition and the co-ordination of ferry services. As I indicated when I announced the outcome of this contract award, we are seriously considering the possibility of establishing a ferry regulator.

The origin of the contract and tender was essentially the European Commission. The Scottish Government had no option other than to tender the service. We had to take decisions on the basis of the tenders that were returned, and we took the option that involved the absolute minimum number of redundancies. Had we taken any other option, the number of redundancies involved would have multiplied by four. I take it that all members in the chamber will welcome the Government’s policy of minimising redundancies in such situations.

In awarding the contract, two considerations arose that are relevant to the question. First, we wanted to ensure that there was adequate staffing. We are absolutely satisfied that under the successful contract bid adequate staffing will be made available on the service at all times. Secondly, one of the welcome aspects of the service is that the hours will be extended substantially. On the weekends it will run from 5.40 in the morning through to 1 am the following morning, and the regularity will be every half hour. No one has provided that range and quality of service on the Gourock to Dunoon route in living memory, and it is a huge improvement on what has gone before.

I point out that we will build more than 6,000 houses next year, which compares with fewer than 5,000 houses built when Johann Lamont was the minister.

I lodged amendments 1 to 4 as a result of the on-going dialogue on the bill between the Government and the Law Society of Scotland. As the bill stands, an individual who had no involvement in the original proceedings for an order under part 1 of the bill, and who is not otherwise directly affected by the order, is unable to apply to vary, recall or extend the order. That might cause a difficulty for the victim, if the original application was made by a support agency and the victim then moves to another part of Scotland and wishes to rely on a different support agency to apply to vary, recall or extend the order. Given that the bill already makes provision for other persons, including the victim and those who would be affected by the order, to apply to vary, recall or extend the original order without leave of the court, it is not thought that that difficulty will arise often. The amendments are intended to ensure that no such difficulty will arise, however infrequent. I therefore ask members to support amendments 1 to 4. I move amendment 1. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to. Section 8—Extension of orders Amendments 3 and 4 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to. Section 9—Offence of breaching order

Amendment 5 will ensure that if a person is convicted for breach of a forced marriage protection order, that person cannot thereafter be punished again for contempt of court for the same conduct that constituted the breach. Although the person cannot thereafter be punished for contempt, the amendment will not alter the fact that the individual could still be convicted of a separate criminal offence, such as assault. The amendment will therefore ensure that any criminal offence in relation to conduct involving cases of forced marriage can be prosecuted by the courts and sentenced appropriately. I move amendment 5. Amendment 5 agreed to. Section 17—Crown application

Amendment 6, the final Government amendment, will put it beyond doubt that Her Majesty will not in any way be affected in her private capacity by the bill. In particular, it will make it clear that Her Majesty cannot be made criminally liable under section 9(1) of the bill for breach of a forced marriage protection order or for breach of any equivalent offence in an order under section 10 relating to civil partnerships. I hope that the Parliament will vote for amendment 6 and that I will appear in the next honours list as a consequence. I move amendment 6.

I thank the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, its convener, Margaret Mitchell, and the committee clerks for their work on the bill. I thank also my Government team, which has worked extremely hard, proficiently and efficiently on the bill. It has been clear since the bill’s introduction that there is a shared commitment between the Government and committee members—and, I believe, the Parliament as a whole—to make the legislation the best it can be and to ensure that it provides the protection that the very vulnerable victims of forced marriage require and deserve. I know that in some cases there has been a learning experience in relation to the complexities of the issues surrounding forced marriage. I think that we would all like to thank the excellent witnesses who during stage 1 brought the issues to life with powerful and compelling evidence, which went on to inform the bill’s development through the parliamentary stages. However, what no one in the chamber needed to be told was the unacceptability of having one’s life choices and one’s connections to one’s family and community taken away and, in many cases, of suffering a spectrum of abuse including threats, blackmail and violence. We know that forced marriage is a human rights violation, as well as a form of violence against women in particular and, in many cases, of child abuse. I was pleased to hear from those who gave evidence on the bill at stage 1 that the bill’s purpose is clear and its principles sound. Witnesses told us that they welcomed the introduction of forced marriage protection orders because the existing legal remedies are not flexible or accessible enough to offer the required level of protection to victims. I believe that our provisions for forced marriage protection orders will meet the needs of those who have been, or who are at risk of being, forced into marriage. The orders can be tailored to address individual circumstances. Although we give some examples in the bill of actions that a court might require to be taken or actions that are prohibited, the court can include any such provisions that it deems necessary for the safety of the victim. That means that forced marriage protection orders will genuinely be able to provide the highest level of protection to each individual victim. I made it clear from the development stages of the bill that I wanted it to have teeth, so I was pleased that the inclusion of a new criminal offence of breach of a forced marriage protection order was welcomed by support organisations such as Scottish Women’s Aid, and by the Law Society of Scotland, the police and the Equal Opportunities Committee. I also wanted the legislation to be as easy to use and accessible to victims as possible. That is why I included the provision for relevant third parties to be able to step in and take forward the process of having a protection order put in place. That is because in many cases, disturbingly, the victim is not at liberty to do that. In some cases, the victim might not even be in this country and might therefore be unable to apply for such an order. The bill has survived relatively unscathed from the version that was introduced to Parliament last September and the amendments to it have made it stronger. The amendments very much had an eye on how the main provision—the introduction of forced marriage protection orders—would be implemented in practical terms. I listened to what the witnesses and committee members had to say when I considered the recommendations in the committee’s stage 1 report. Even when I felt that amendments were not strictly necessary, there was a clear feeling that they would assist those who would use the legislation at grass-roots level. For that reason—and because they did not detract from the effect of the bill—I was happy to accept the amendments. We have now debated all the amendments and reached an agreed position on them. Once again, I thank members, particularly members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, for the supportive manner in which they have dealt with matters. It is clear that we in the chamber are united in a desire to ensure that the victims of forced marriage have the best possible protection. On implementation, we all know that what we do here in Parliament in relation to shaping the law of Scotland is only part of the picture. With an issue such as forced marriage, which we hope will not happen every day and therefore will not be a common issue for those who are asked to support victims, the legislation will not do its job without an appropriate implementation package. I know that support must therefore be in place to help the users of the legislation understand its effects and get the most out of it. Quite rightly, the implementation phase of the legislation has been a particular focus of the committee’s attention. The consultation on draft statutory guidance will begin later today. I felt that it was important to get it under way before the pre-election period began. I want to ensure that, in producing the guidance, we can take on board the views of Scotland’s public sector, including police and local authorities, while ensuring that it is in place in time to allow organisations to be ready for the introduction of forced marriage protection orders in the autumn. I will ensure that the Parliament is informed of the developments from the consultation and that the revised guidance is shared with members. Witnesses, the committee and members have regularly raised the lack of good data on forced marriage. I am very aware of the need to have more robust data for Scotland and I am confident that the bill will act as a driver for data collection, as has happened in England. Training on forced marriage is another important issue. Particularly important is training for key professionals, which will be developed in the months ahead to ensure that anyone who might come into contact with a victim of forced marriage knows what to look for, how to support them and what remedies are available. We do not expect a large number of people to apply for forced marriage protection orders on their own behalf or via third parties.

I am afraid that I am just finishing my speech. We expect the bill to result in more victims seeking help because—for the first time in Scotland—a focus will have been created for the message that such behaviour is unacceptable. I thank everybody who has been involved. I look forward to the debate and—I hope—to the bill’s successful passage. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Johann Lamont started by saying that it is not often she and I do short and sweet. I disagree. We do short and sweet all the time: she does the short, and I do the sweet. [Laughter.] I endorse all the comments that have been made about Marlyn Glen. SNP members will miss her input, particularly in relation to equal opportunities issues. We appreciate and admire her contribution to the Equal Opportunities Committee and to issues around equal opportunities, human rights and women’s rights. We wish her all the best in whatever she decides to do next. I endorse Anne McLaughlin’s comments about the late Bashir Ahmad. In this four-year session, the high point at the beginning was when he was elected as the first Muslim MSP; the low point was when he passed away so suddenly halfway through the session. The bill is as much a tribute to him, his philosophy and his thoughts as it is to anyone else. Bashir would have been not just very proud of our passing the bill but proud and appreciative of the tremendous contribution that his successor Anne McLaughlin has made to the Parliament and, particularly, to the kind of issues that we are discussing this morning. She has been an able and fit successor to him. As members from all sides of the chamber have said, forced marriage has no place in any civilised society. Today the Scottish Parliament is taking an important step towards eradicating this dreadful practice in Scotland. I thank members from all sides of the chamber for their excellent contributions to the debate. As I said in my opening speech, I have been encouraged by the support for the bill throughout the parliamentary process and throughout the country. It truly has been an example of the Parliament at its best, and it has been a pleasure to be the minister in charge of the bill. Nearly every member who spoke raised the importance of awareness raising. A big part of the success of the bill’s implementation will be that people know about the legislation and the issues surrounding forced marriage. As a Government, we share the Parliament’s view that significant work is required to raise awareness and understanding of forced marriage in Scotland—especially, although not exclusively, among young people. We are committed to undertaking that work and have established a group of forced marriage network members to develop and take it forward as a matter of priority over the coming months. The group has already met and is due to meet again in early April. Members will also know from the bill’s financial memorandum that I have allocated resources to that work over the next three years. I want to pick up on the point made by Hugh O’Donnell, Johann Lamont and Elaine Smith that it is important for the Parliament to engage in post-legislative scrutiny. As a Government we will take measures to monitor the effectiveness of the implementation of the legislation. That will be done 12 months on from the bill’s passage today. We have already put resources in place for that, and we will share all the information with the Parliament and with the relevant committee in particular. If we identify any issues that need to be taken forward to make the implementation of the legislation more robust and effective, we will be prepared to address them. On the wider issue of representation, we have identified a budget of £90,000 over the next three years to support implementation. Half will be committed during this financial year to the development of practitioner guidance and the delivery of training. In subsequent years, resources will be committed to monitor and evaluate the success of the legislation, as I just said. Although as everybody has said the bill concerns an issue that affects a relatively small number of people, it potentially has a huge impact on the lives of that small number of people. I believe that it also sends an important message to wider Scotland about the kind of country that we want Scotland to be: a Scotland where no one is at risk of abuse or is forced to do anything against their will and where everyone is free to participate in society and achieve to their fullest potential. A country that does nothing to tackle the evils of forced marriage fails on all those counts. Today we have taken the first important step towards ridding Scotland of that totally unacceptable practice. Importantly, we have made it clear that we are just as concerned about issues that impact on the few as we are about issues that impact on the many. Earlier, we agreed amendments to the bill that will ensure that it is as clear and unequivocal as it can be. I thank individual members and the committee as a whole for their suggestions on amendments, which I think have strengthened the bill and made it much more lucid and therefore much more effective. I apologise that I could not accept Elaine Smith’s amendment on nobile officium—a common term in Coatbridge—but as I said to the committee the advice that we received was that the equitable distribution provision in the bill incorporates the points validly and lucidly made by her and by the Law Society of Scotland about nobile officium. On the campaign trail, therefore, we can all discuss nobile officium knowing very well that we all know what it is, as does everyone out there.

The Minister for Community Safety has just intimated to me that the correct pronunciation is “nobil-ay” officium. I am sure that the minister knows all about Latin, having been a top-class lawyer prior to being a top-class minister.

Another lawyer—they are all around me this morning. I put on record the fact that Robert Brown, who nearly made an intervention, has made an enormous contribution to the Parliament. Before I close, I pay tribute to the most important people in the debate: those who have been the victims of forced marriage. They have helped us to understand the importance of the issue and what we needed to do to protect others from ending up in a similar situation to theirs. It is hard to imagine how horrifying it is for someone to be told that they are going to be married against their will and perhaps taken from Scotland, where they have lived all their life, to another country where they know no one, possibly do not even know where they are being held and are cut off from any source of support or help. That is not only humiliating but dehumanising. The bill will not eradicate forced marriage overnight. We know that there is a long road ahead, involving awareness raising, training, monitoring and robust enforcement of the legislation. We must all play a part in taking us closer to where we want to be: a Scotland in which everyone is free to marry or not, as they choose for themselves. In passing the bill on the final day of this parliamentary session, it is important that we do so on a totally consensual basis. I look forward to decision time at 1 o’clock today, which I believe will be a celebratory decision time because we are passing the bill. Given the provisions that I introduced this morning in relation to the protection of Her Majesty, I do not expect any problems with royal assent.

I met a range of housing stakeholders, including the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, at the housing policy advisory group on 10 March to discuss the Scottish Government’s recent policy document, “Homes Fit for the 21st Century: The Scottish Government's Strategy and Action Plan for Housing in the Next Decade: 2011-2020”.

If it had been left up to Johann Lamont, housing associations would have been getting nothing per house, because she and her party voted against the budget. It is not true to say that there is a maximum of £40,000 per unit: it is a benchmark, and we will build more than 6,000 houses every year for each of the next three years. That is substantially more than the number that were built during the period in which Johann Lamont was the housing minister. During her time in office, we had the worst housing record in 12 years of the Parliament.

I think that we are in regular touch with Pentland Housing Association anyway, but I certainly give an undertaking that we are happy to talk to it to explore every avenue, because I recognise the importance of rural areas and the particular housing problems that prevail in some remoter rural areas in the north of Scotland.

We are in detailed discussions with the SFHA, particularly on the transitional arrangements over the next few months. When those discussions are finalised, we will be in a position to give detailed replies on the exact number of houses and the exact figure for transitional funding.

I asked Michael Cameron, the acting chief executive of the Scottish Housing Regulator to respond. His response is as follows: “The Scottish Housing Regulator expects all social landlords to maximise and simplify routes into housing. Common housing registers are a way of helping landlords to achieve this. The Regulator collects information from registered social landlords on an annual basis around the use of common housing registers, and may include further scrutiny in an RSL’s Regulation Plan.”

I will shortly announce the appointment of the new regulatory board, which will be independent of Government. However, I am absolutely confident that there is a robust process in place. If John Wilson or any other member has examples of situations in which a homeless person is not being properly registered as homeless, they should bring that to the attention of the regulator as, clearly, that is not an acceptable situation.

Published statistics from 1 April 2010 to 31 December 2010 show that excellent progress has been made in providing affordable housing in 2010-11. Up to 31 December, 4,663 homes had been completed and a further 4,772 homes approved, which included 1,872 new council house approvals.

We have to look at the overall figure, which is extremely encouraging. In preparing my reply to the question I have been looking back at the total figures for the affordable housing investment programme, which show that in the first three years of this Administration we gave approval to 7,500 new units per year on average, compared with fewer than 6,000 new units per year under the Labour Party’s Administration. It ill behoves Mary Mulligan to complain about any of that, given that she voted against the budget, including the money for housing, and given that at no time during the budget negotiations did the Labour Party put forward proposals for additional spending on housing. The only party other than the Scottish National Party to do that was the Conservative party.

The amendments in this group are minor drafting amendments that make slight changes to the wording of a few sections in order to clarify some expressions, remove ambiguity and make the drafting consistent. Only amendment 4 needs specific comment. It relates to new section 93A of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which is inserted by section 8 of the bill. New section 93A gives the court the power, when a person is convicted of offences relating to operating as an unregistered landlord, to disqualify that person from registering as a landlord for up to five years. A landlord may not be an individual; it could be a body such as a company or a partnership. As currently drafted, the section allows the court in such a case to disqualify a director, partner or other person involved in the management of the house. However, such a person may not be directly involved in the management of the house. Amendment 4 therefore replaces the word “house” with the word “person” so that, where the landlord is a company or other body, anyone involved in the management of the company or other body concerned could be subject to disqualification. I invite Parliament to support amendment 3 and the other amendments in the group. I move amendment 3.

The amendments relate to the proposed power for a local authority to refuse to consider an application for an HMO licence when it considers that use of the property as an HMO would be a breach of planning control. It has always been the policy position that a local authority would be able to refuse to consider a licence application if it thought that the owner of the property had failed to obtain requisite planning permission or to comply with conditions or limitations that were contained in planning permission that had been obtained. However, the current wording of proposed new section 129A that section 13 of the bill would insert into the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 would allow consideration to be refused where there had been any breach of planning control as defined by the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997, including minor breaches due to failure to give or display notices. Amendment 7 will correct that position by restricting the local authority’s power to refuse consideration of an application to cases where there has been a failure to obtain, or comply with conditions of, planning permission. It has always been the Government’s intention that a refusal to consider an HMO licence application would occur before full consideration of the application, and therefore would not be the same as refusal of the application. When a local authority considered that planning permission was required, the HMO licence application would not be considered until the planning situation had been rectified. We wish to ensure that that important point is beyond doubt. Therefore, amendment 8 makes it explicit that a local authority’s refusal to consider an HMO licence application because it considers that there are planning issues is not to be regarded as a refusal to grant the licence.

I confirm that landlords cannot operate an HMO until they receive a licence to do so. Amendments 9 and 10 are consequential and remove provisions that amendment 8 renders unnecessary. I invite Parliament to support amendment 7 and the other amendments in the group. I move amendment 7. Amendment 7 agreed to. Amendment 8 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to.

We are all trying to achieve the same objective. The issue is the best way to achieve it. As Pauline McNeill stated, her amendment 1 would introduce subdivision of rooms and alteration of water or drainage pipes as issues that a local authority would have to take into account when considering an HMO application. Pauline McNeill suggested a similar amendment at stage 2. As I highlighted then, local authorities are already required to consider the suitability of the accommodation when deciding whether to grant or renew an HMO licence. Section 131 of the 2006 act places a duty on local authorities to consider the property’s location and condition, any amenities it contains, the type and number of persons who are likely to occupy it, the safety and security of likely occupants and the possibility of public nuisance. That is not an exhaustive list, and local authorities should consider other relevant matters that might make accommodation unsuitable to be used as an HMO, such as the subdivision and adaptation of rooms. The statutory guidance on part 5 of the 2006 act, to which local authorities are required to have regard, will set out further recommended standards and licensing conditions. Therefore, I consider that Pauline McNeill’s amendment 1 is unnecessary, because the same objective will be obtained on a statutory basis as a result of the guidance on part 5. In granting or renewing HMO licences, local authorities already apply space standards to ensure that rooms are of a sufficient size. Our guidance encourages local authorities to work with colleagues in building standards to ensure compliance. There have been issues when bathrooms and kitchens have been relocated in flats, causing nuisance. However, that applies not only to HMOs, but to adaptations of owner-occupied housing. It is for building standards to deal with such matters. I hope that my comments provide Pauline McNeill and others with the reassurance that they need that the matters that she is rightly concerned about are already addressed and that no further amendment is required. I ask Pauline McNeill to seek to withdraw her amendment, as the matter will be dealt with by guidance under part 5 of the 2006 act.

Having listened to Ted Brocklebank’s concerns about the issues that concentrations of HMOs are creating in St Andrews, I welcome his amendment 15 . Given that Ted Brocklebank is also retiring on Tuesday, I thank him, on behalf of the whole chamber, for his enormous contribution to the Parliament and wish him well in his retirement. [Applause.] If amendment 15 is agreed to, it should be forever known as the Brocklebank amendment. It is only right and proper that local authorities should have the powers to weigh up the needs for HMOs against their impacts on neighbours and communities in deciding whether to grant HMO licences. Making that a discretionary power—I emphasise the word “discretionary”—will allow local authorities flexibility to deal with issues in problem areas where necessary without unnecessarily overburdening those that have no need for it. To provide protection for vulnerable tenants and minimise the risk of homelessness, in using the powers local authorities will have to consider tenants’ and applicants’ views and the need for HMOs in the locality; I believe that that deals with the points made by Iain Smith and Patrick Harvie. That is especially important, given the potential impact of the welfare reform agenda. Amendment 15 includes the power for ministers to specify through secondary legislation other matters for consideration in deciding whether to refuse a licence on the ground of overprovision or assessing whether there is overprovision. That is helpful, as it will enable the Scottish Government to make provision to ensure that full consideration is given to relevant matters before an authority decides to refuse a licence on that ground. Before making any such secondary legislation, ministers would be required to consult local authorities as well as landlord and occupier representatives. I therefore welcome amendment 15 and invite the Parliament to support it.

I thank Mary Mulligan for moving amendment 2, which I support. I have previously told the Local Government and Communities Committee that the Scottish Government would monitor the number of overcrowding statutory notices issued and review their effectiveness in dealing with overcrowding and their impact on homelessness. As I made clear at stage 2, I consider it to be sensible to reassure those who have concerns about overcrowding statutory notices by going further and placing a statutory requirement on ministers to publish a three-yearly report on the number of notices served and their effects. The power for ministers to obtain the necessary information from local authorities will be useful in enabling the completion of the report. I therefore welcome amendment 2 and invite the Parliament to support it. Amendment 2 agreed to. Section 28—Premiums Amendment 13 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to. Section 29—Tenant information packs Amendment 14 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to.

I am pleased to open the debate and to move the motion in my name. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for its detailed consideration of the bill, which was informed by evidence from a wide range of stakeholders. I appreciate the time that was taken by the committee to seek the views of key stakeholders. The bill has benefited from the debate in committee and the chamber, and from on-going dialogue with stakeholders. I thank the clerks to the committee for their help and co-operation throughout the passage of the bill. I also particularly thank the bill team in the Scottish Government, who have been extremely helpful to me in progressing a fairly complex and complicated bill. The Scottish Government sees a modern, thriving, high-quality Scottish private rented sector as an essential part of housing provision in Scotland. In our document, “Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas”, we outlined our wish to strengthen the private rented sector. We also want to do what we can, within our limited power and resources, to make that happen. We have made submissions both to the previous Chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling, and to the current chancellor, George Osborne, asking them to extend the tax advantages that exist for investment in commercial property to investment in the housing sector. If the chancellor were prepared to do so in his budget, on 23 March, that would act as a major spur to investment in housing—in particular, in the private housing sector. It is incumbent on us to recognise that the vast majority of landlords are good landlords. That was shown in the PRS survey that was conducted two years ago by the Scottish Government. The people whom we have to tackle are the small minority, who are often geographically concentrated, who give landlordism a bad name. Those are the people at whom the bill is targeted. At the same time, we want to ensure that the regulation that is being put in place is proportionate while protecting the rights of tenants and landlords. We also want to develop a longer-term strategy for the sector’s growth. I believe that the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill will play its part in that by giving local authorities greater powers to tackle bad practice and penalise unlawful operators, as well as by improving tenants’ and landlords’ awareness of their rights and responsibilities. The bill is the result of a collaborative process in which evidence was taken over many months prior to the bill’s introduction and during the committee stages.

I agree with Tricia Marwick that enforcement is crucial. The powers are now well in place and I believe that the local authorities have the tools to do the job. As Tricia Marwick and others know, we are currently undertaking a review of enforcement practice throughout the country, which will report fairly soon. We will seek to make practical proposals and implement further practical, non-legislative proposals to ensure that there is more effective implementation of both the existing legislation and the additional legislation in the bill. The bill process has involved the local authorities, as well as representatives of the private rented sector. I pay tribute to the work of the private rented sector strategy group, which advised me on these matters and will continue to do so. Members of the group are the expert stakeholders, including tenant and landlord representatives and local authorities, and their recommendations formed the basis of the public consultation leading up to the bill. As part of the process, I established a sounding board that brought together all those with an interest in the bill so that the Government could benefit from their views on how the bill could be enhanced and developed as it moved through its parliamentary stages. Members of all parties will recognise that we have taken on board their concerns and, I hope, accommodated them at least partially in some of the amendments that have been agreed to this afternoon. The bill strengthens the system of landlord registration, including by expanding the fit-and-proper person test and by making it clear to local authorities that issues such as antisocial behaviour must be taken into account. It gives local authorities new powers to obtain information to crack down on unregistered landlords, including an ability to require managing agents to provide a list of properties that they manage. It improves and enhances the system of the licensing of houses in multiple occupation that comes into force this autumn by giving local authorities powers to consider whether requisite planning permission has been obtained. That will help local authorities to strike the right balance between providing safe, decent accommodation for students and other tenants and considering the impacts on communities of concentrations of HMOs. The bill gets tough on the worst offenders by increasing the maximum fines for HMO-licensing and landlord-registration offences to £50,000. That sends a clear message that we recognise the seriousness of such offences and that they will not be tolerated. The bill will not only help local authorities to crack down on poor landlord practice, but help to protect tenants by improving their understanding of their and their landlords’ rights and responsibilities through the mandatory tenant information pack, and by strengthening local authorities’ powers to deal with overcrowding. By clarifying the position and enabling the Government to specify what reasonable fees can be charged, it will prevent unscrupulous agents from charging unreasonable premiums. Further, it will help landlords to meet their responsibilities with regard to the repairing standard by enabling them to access the private rented housing panel for assistance. Amendments at stage 2 strengthened the bill’s provisions on overcrowding, taking account of concerns that were raised by the committee about the impact on vulnerable tenants and potential homelessness. As a result, the bill now requires local authorities to perform a range of additional checks and balances; that includes considering the impacts of serving the notice on the people living in the house, particularly with regard to homelessness. It also places on local authorities a duty to provide information and advice to occupants of the house when serving a notice. David McLetchie’s amendment to the 20-year rules will assist our overall approach to helping the PRS grow by unblocking barriers to new innovative funding approaches—it is a pity that Mr McLetchie is not here to hear my praise. That follows on from the powers for the social rented sector that were introduced in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010. I look forward to a final constructive debate on the bill, which I am confident will make an impact in areas where it is needed most. With great pleasure, I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Can the member confirm that he is registered? [Laughter.]

I am delighted that Mary Mulligan is confident that I am going to be the minister moving the commencement order after the election. Earlier, when we were discussing the amendments, I rightly paid tribute to Ted Brocklebank. I say to him that, given his on-going interest in fishing and the policy position that he has taken, with which we agree but his party leader does not, there is a membership card awaiting him at any time. [Interruption.] I hear that Mr Russell disagrees with that.

This has been a consensual debate, with good contributions from throughout the chamber. It is appropriate that it has been consensual, because the issue that we are tackling should not be one on which there is major ideological difference between the parties; it is about what we do for tenants who find themselves in a position where their landlord is not delivering the services that they should be providing and what we do about the fact that, in too many of our communities, groups of landlords give the industry a bad name. One of those areas, but certainly not the only one, is Govanhill in Glasgow. We have made substantial progress there, in which we were helped—again—by the work of the Public Petitions Committee and others. It is not just Govanhill where there is a problem. Because the problem has been allowed to fester for so long, it has started to spread out geographically. That is why the people of Croftfoot in Glasgow are now, as Anne McLaughlin rightly said, facing similar problems, which we have a duty to try to address. On Monday, I was in Clune Park in Inverclyde, which is another area where there is a major landlord problem. The bill is part—only part—of the answer there, too. As members from all parties have said, it is important to get a strong message out to every local authority in Scotland that we have equipped them with the tools to do the job and that we expect them to deliver and robustly enforce both the existing legislation and the new legislation. Over the past three or four months, we have had three housing bills: the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010 was signed by the Queen just before Christmas; we had the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill; and we now have the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill, which I hope will become an act after tonight. Taken together, those three pieces of legislation represent a major advance in all those sectors of housing. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2010 reforms the right to buy, on which there is some disagreement. The Property Factors (Scotland) Bill brings more control into the property factors industry. The Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill will, I hope, bring more sanity and common sense into the private rented sector.

That is a good point from Mr Doris. I am always one to undersell our achievements. [Laughter.] The legislation is extremely important, but it is also important that we move forward on other fronts, particularly on investment. Whether we are talking about Govanhill and Clune Park or the wider housing sector—both the social and private housing sectors—investment and development are essential. I have charged the private rented sector strategy group with preparing, in consultation, a long-term development plan for the private rented sector in Scotland. Bob Doris was right: given the challenges that we face in the housing sector—the waiting lists, the difficulty that first-time buyers have in putting together a deposit to get a mortgage, an ageing population and a rising population—the demand for housing will rise exponentially in the years ahead. We require a major contribution from every sector—the owner-occupied sector, the social housing sector, the intermediate market sector, the private rented sector, the shared equity sector and every variation of those different sectors—to meet the demands and need for housing that will be placed on us in the years ahead. I want to update members on some of the specific issues that were raised during the debate and which require some answer. Patricia Ferguson rightly raised the role of the courts and in particular their taking a more robust approach to the issues that are referred to them, not only in relation to the private rented sector but more widely in housing issues. Mary Mulligan and others also mentioned that. There is no doubt in my mind that there is a need for a more robust approach. As I promised I would, I have written to the Lord Advocate about how judgments in sheriff courts are not as robust as many believe that they should be. I will continue the dialogue with both this Lord Advocate and the new one to ensure that the issue is properly addressed without interfering in any way with the right of a sheriff to make an appropriate decision. Like Mary Mulligan and others, I think that whoever wins the election on 5 May will have to take up the issue of the future jurisdiction of housing issues in the courts. At the moment, matters are settled in a range of different ways. For example, evictions for antisocial behaviour and disputes in relation to private landlords often end up in the sheriff court, while other matters are decided by the housing panel or referred to ombudsmen of different types. I believe, particularly in the light of Lord Gill’s report last year, that, whoever forms the new Government, it will be a matter of priority attention to get a more streamlined approach to the jurisdiction of housing disputes across the sector.

Absolutely. My view is that some kind of tribunal system may be more appropriate, certainly in some circumstances, than a case immediately going to the sheriff court. Obviously, that is a matter for wide discussion and, I believe, for action in the new session of Parliament. As Patricia Ferguson will know, Lord Gill recommended a dedicated housing court. The Government’s position—and mine personally—is that going that far is not necessarily the right way to approach the situation, but we are open to suggestions. It is important to get agreement on the issue, and we all agree that reform is required. Bob Doris raised the issue of the recycling of revenue from fines back into Scotland. As he and others know, I have taken that issue up with the Treasury on more than one occasion. The most recent response that I received was from Justine Greening MP, deputy to Mr Shapps, the minister with responsibility for housing, who did not agree to review the position or to recycle the fine money into Scotland, so I am afraid that that will have to wait for another day. Some other important points were made in the course of the debate. Many points were made about enforcement. I can tell the chamber—as I have informed the Local Government and Communities Committee—that there are, at present, three areas in which there is close physical joint working between the land registration teams in local authorities and the Department for Work and Pensions teams, especially those dealing with housing benefit. We have found that, through sharing data, working together and taking a joint approach in those areas, our effectiveness in catching those who are engaged in housing benefit scams and in identifying unregistered landlords has been greatly enhanced. Indeed, there is a correlation between those two groups. I would like to see that joint working between the landlord registration teams and the Department for Work and Pensions being rolled out across all local authority areas in Scotland, as it is achieving an effective implementation of landlord registration as well as dealing with those who are engaged—sometimes on a large scale—in benefit fraud. That would be a welcome development. Mary Mulligan asked specifically about Shelter’s proposals on the short assured tenancy and on the provision of information and advice. In relation to the provision of information and advice, we are all agreed that the provision on a statutory basis of a tenants information pack containing basic information about a range of issues including fire and safety will be a major step forward both for tenants and for landlords. It is right that, once that is up and running, we should consider whether further developments are required in the provision of information and advice both in the private rented sector and more generally. We would certainly approach Shelter’s ideas with an open mind. I will make two points on short assured tenancies. As Shelter has proposed, there is a need to consider the situation and review it. However, I emphasise that the Scottish Government will not go down the same road as the UK Government by imposing rules under which tenancies will have a possible maximum life of two years before people have to move out of their homes. We believe that that is a recipe for disaster and for social unrest and that it would be extremely damaging to family life. Therefore, although there is a need to consider reform, that must be kept within the clear parameter that the Scottish secure tenancy is safe with all of us in the Parliament. I have enjoyed the past 15 minutes—the longest that I have ever spoken in the Scottish Parliament. I hope that I have enlightened proceedings. I thank everybody for their help in this consensual debate and look forward to passing, in the next few minutes, the fourth piece of housing legislation in the past five or six months—an achievement of which not only the Government but the Parliament can be proud. We look forward to continuing our programme of reform after the election.

I, too, congratulate Des McNulty on securing the debate and on his gracious and informative speech. Before addressing the issue, I pay tribute to Bill Aitken, who stands down on Tuesday. In his 12 years as an MSP, he has been an exemplary example of someone who can make an enormous contribution not just in the chamber but in committee, which includes being a convener. He will be sorely missed in the Parliament. There is not a great deal to add to what, in particular, Des McNulty and Gil Paterson have said about Clydebank. However, as always, the civil service brief on the matter is very informative and it provides additional information, much of which I did not know. Having not been born until 10 years after the Clydebank blitz, obviously I was not around at the time, but I remember my grandmother, who lived in a high mining village in Ayrshire, saying that she would never forget the night that Clydebank was bombed, because from that village in Ayrshire they could see the German aircraft—the Luftwaffe—heading for Clydebank and, even from that distance, they could see the burning, because it was so ferocious. I will never forget how she described it. Some of the figures are devastating. As Des McNulty said, Clydebank suffered the worst destruction and civilian loss of life in all of Scotland. The figures are mind boggling. As Des McNulty said, of approximately 12,000 houses, only seven remained undamaged. That means that over the two nights, 11,993 houses were damaged or destroyed—4,000 houses were completely destroyed and another 4,500 were severely damaged. In total, 8,500 houses in Clydebank were destroyed or severely damaged. As has been said, the munitions factories were attacked and the Singer factory was hit as well. Of course, the munitions factories and the shipyards were the primary targets. There were 260 bombers on 13 March, with waves of high-explosive bombs, incendiary bombs and landmines dropped over a nine-hour period. As has been said, streets were devastated, fires raged and people were trapped in collapsed buildings. On the second night, 14 March, while rescue work continued from the first night, 200 bombers returned and their bombing raid lasted for over seven and a half hours. Over the two days, 528 civilians were killed, more than 617 people were seriously injured and several housing schemes were completely wiped out. Moreover, 48,000 civilians—many of them shipyard workers and their families, who were packed into Clydebank tenements—lost their homes. The production of ships and munitions for the allies was obviously the target, and a total of 460 bombers dropped more than 1,000 bombs. Royal Air Force fighters managed to shoot down two aircraft during the raid, but none was brought down by anti-aircraft fire. The Polish destroyer ORP Piorun under Commander Plawski was at John Brown’s shipyard undergoing repairs. She joined the defence of Clydebank, firing a tremendous barrage at the Luftwaffe. A memorial to the ship’s crew can be seen in Solidarity Plaza in Clydebank. The Glasgow Herald of 18 March 1941 stated: “The cool, unwavering courage of the people is evident, and when the full story of their heroism in the face of the Luftwaffe is told, they will take their place alongside the citizens of London and Coventry.” On 14 March 2009, a monument commemorating the 528 Scots civilians who were killed during the Clydebank blitz was unveiled by the provost of West Dunbartonshire Council, Denis Agnew, at Old Dalnottar cemetery in West Dunbartonshire. The names of those who died are inscribed in a bronze plaque. My colleague Jim Mather MSP, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, recently represented the Scottish Government at a memorial service and delivered a reading. I do not think that we can truly understand or imagine the ferocity of what happened on those two nights and the impact that it had for years thereafter on the people of Clydebank. As Des McNulty said, the devastation was such that probably only in the past 10 years or so has Clydebank truly started to recover from the impact of the blitz on those two nights in 1941. Although we have had discussions and debates about issues such as the budget for Clydebank Re-built, we are all united in believing that we owe a duty and debt and have a moral responsibility to the generations of people in Clydebank who have suffered so much as a result of what happened on the two nights of the blitz. Irrespective of which party or part of Scotland we are from, we all need to dedicate and commit ourselves to doing everything that we can in the future—especially for the children and young people of Clydebank—not only to remember and commemorate what happened but to ensure that the future of Clydebank is secure industrially and commercially. We must do everything possible to ensure that the town has a prosperous future and, as Bill Aitken said, never again has to suffer the plight that it suffered on those two nights. Meeting closed at 17:36.

I, too, congratulate Michael Matheson not just on obtaining the debate, but on the tremendous work that he has done, especially for Denny and Dunipace, first as a list member and, over the past four years, as the first-past-the-post constituency member for Falkirk West. It would be remiss of me not to mention also the tremendous work that was done by his predecessor, Dennis Canavan, who also showed tremendous loyalty and commitment both to Falkirk and to the Denny and Dunipace area. I will make some general remarks about regeneration and then focus a bit more on Denny and Dunipace. However, I must first say, both as a minister and as a member covering Central Scotland, including that area, that it is not right to say that there is no concern among local people about the state of Denny town centre. Indeed, every time that one speaks to someone who lives in or near Denny, they express real concerns about the state of their town centre. That is a concern that any reasonable person must share. Nevertheless, as the minister replying to a members’ business debate, I will not get into a party-political battle about who is to blame for it; I want to address the general issues.

I am referring to both the need for regeneration and the regeneration process—or, as the local people would say, the lack of a regeneration process. Two or three weeks ago, the Scottish Government published its national regeneration discussion paper, “Building a Sustainable Future”, which sets out the importance of investing in Scotland’s deprived communities to generate growth and employment and to tackle poverty, deprivation and high levels of unemployment, especially youth unemployment. That is why, in our budget strategy, we have put economic recovery and job creation at the core of what we are trying to do throughout Scotland within the limited resources and remit of this Parliament and this Government. We have set out our spending plans, which reaffirm the Government’s social contract with the people of Scotland to protect front-line services and to seek to enhance the resilience of the Scottish economy. That includes support for disadvantaged areas and people, and regeneration is fundamental to the overall purpose of sustainable economic growth. I hope that we share that agenda with everyone in Scotland. One of the big problems that the Scottish Government faces is the £1.3 billion-worth of cuts that are being imposed on the Scottish Government by the United Kingdom Government next year, which come on top of the £500 million-worth of cuts that were imposed by the UK Government on the Scottish Government this year. Many of those cuts—40 per cent of all the cuts over the next two years—will be capital investment cuts. One of the things that John Swinney has been able to do has been to ensure that, despite those cuts, the councils of Scotland have received an increased share of the overall spending by the Scottish Government and, by making imaginative use of revenue, he has been able to establish, in addition to our mainstream capital investment programme, a further programme of £2.5 billion for investment in transport, health and education.

I have visited Falkirk Council to discuss regeneration in general and the needs of certain areas in particular. Of course, every council faces the challenges that have resulted from the cuts that have been imposed on us by London. However, there are initiatives that can be taken, and many council areas are doing that. For example, in East Ayrshire, which is a much more deprived area than the Falkirk district, as a whole, the council is doing a tremendous amount of work on the regeneration of Cumnock and Kilmarnock. That example could be followed in the case of the Denny and Dunipace area. A specific suggestion that I would make would be to consider establishing in Denny and Dunipace a community development trust. There are nearly 400 community development trusts in different parts of Scotland, and they are increasingly successful in regenerating the local areas that they represent. Last week, I announced an additional £250,000 to build up the capacity for the establishment of additional community development trusts, because they are a major way in which the Scottish Government, local authorities, the private sector and the third sector, working together, can mobilise resources for reinvestment in local communities. A good example of that is the community of Neilston, just south of Paisley. That community has established a community development trust, which is situated in an empty property that it bought from the Clydesdale Bank for a nominal fee and put to local use. It is nearing the completion of a community wind farm project that it is sharing with the private sector, which will generate £400,000 a year for investment in Neilston. Following that project, the trust will start work on reinstating a former hydro project, which could generate up to £1 million a year for investment in Neilston. The council should not just put up its hands and say that because of the depreciation in capital values, there is nothing that it can do about Denny and Dunipace.

I am afraid that I do not have time. There is plenty that can be done with a bit of imagination and leadership. If Falkirk Council comes to me as the regeneration minister—as I hope I still am in a few weeks’ time—it will get a positive and helpful response to help it to deal with the challenges in Denny and Dunipace. Of course we do not have a blank cheque to write, but we have a commitment. There are many sources of funding to tap into apart from Scottish Government sources, and many initiatives can be taken. For all of us, irrespective of whether we are from the absent Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, the Tories or the Scottish National Party, it is not party that is important but commitment to the people, and to the regeneration of many towns such as Denny that have never fully recovered from their post-industrial revolution past and which need for the 21st century a level of commitment, investment, leadership and support—from the local authority in this case—to move forward for the future. We owe it to the people of Denny and Dunipace to do everything that we possibly can to help them to turn their town from being a carbuncle into the attractive place that it can be, not only to live in but to visit and to invest in for the future. 12:46 Meeting suspended until 14:35. 14:35 On resuming—

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate and on the tone that she adopted in introducing it, and I pay tribute to the work of Tom Buchanan, the chair of economic development at City of Edinburgh Council, for not just the work that he has done on the programmes that we are discussing but the monumental amount of work that he has done over the past three to four years in helping the economy of the city of Edinburgh to move forward. Before I move on to other things, I will clarify, for the record, the position on fairer Scotland funding. What was fairer Scotland funding has been mainstreamed into the local government settlement, so there is no separate item in our expenditure called fairer Scotland funding. That money has been consolidated; it has not been lost to Edinburgh, because it has been incorporated into the local government settlement. Before I deal with the detail of the Capital City Partnership and the specific points that have been made about it, I make it clear that I fully agree with what has been said about the needs of young people in particular—not just in Edinburgh, but throughout Scotland. Over the past two or three years, the pattern has undoubtedly been a rise in the level of unemployment among young people that is disproportionately high in comparison with that among the population as a whole. We all recognise why youth unemployment, in particular, must be dealt with: it is not just about employment; it is about the long-term futures of young people and their ability to grow up and grow families in more prosperous circumstances than they find themselves in today. There is no doubt that, despite very strong signs of increased growth in some aspects of the Scottish economy recently, in general, the national economic picture is one of a level of growth in Scotland and, indeed, the rest of the UK that is significantly lower than it was before the recession. The possibility of a double dip still exists. We are starting to cope with budgetary cuts—which, last year, amounted to £500 million and, next year, will result in the Scottish Government’s budget being reduced by £1.8 billion in real terms—that will have dire consequences not just for the Scottish Government’s budget, but for the people on whom they will impact. It is against that background that John Swinney and other ministers have been grappling with the best way to allocate resources such that we meet all our commitments. Sustainable economic growth is our number 1 priority. In particular, we feel a strong moral commitment to help young people into employment. John Swinney’s budget contained a number of measures that will have a significant positive impact on young people in Edinburgh. As Ian McKee and others have mentioned, an additional 9,000 modern apprenticeships are to be created in Scotland next year. The number of modern apprenticeships will increase from 16,000 to 25,000, which is a record high. The vast bulk of those will be taken up by young people in the age group that we are talking about.

I am coming to that. The apprenticeships are extremely important because, no matter how much preparation young people do, if the apprenticeships and jobs are not there at the end of it, that is a major issue for them. Edinburgh should benefit to the tune of between 700 and 800 additional modern apprenticeships as a result of the measures that John Swinney took in his budget. That is in addition to the 7,000 flexible training opportunities—an increase of 2,000—and the £10 million that the Government is to provide to support unemployed young people into work and training opportunities through the community jobs Scotland programme. Nor should we forget Edinburgh’s share of the additional 1,200 college places or its share of the additional money for funding college bursaries. To be fair and accurate, we should look at the total picture and all the policies that are designed to address long-term unemployment among young people and prepare young people for work and employability across the board.

I do not have time. I recognise the importance of the Edinburgh Capital City Partnership. Edinburgh will benefit substantially from the additional measures that John Swinney has taken in his budget. That should not be ignored because we have given top priority to those programmes. However, I also recognise the importance of local support. I have two points on the £2.3 million that has been made available to the Capital City Partnership. First, Edinburgh has been the only city to get that additional funding. Secondly, the additional funding was always planned to come to an end at the end of March 2011. In that sense, technically there is no cut because that was always going to be the case.

I do not have time. The Government recognises the importance of the Capital City Partnership and I and John Swinney have been working closely with the City of Edinburgh Council, particularly with Tom Buchanan, to identify areas in which additional funding can be obtained from other Government and non-Government sources to allow the partnership to continue with its good work. However, there is an issue around the transition from the current situation to the new situation in which the partnership will concentrate on leveraging in funding from elsewhere and making maximum use of the additional national programme money that I have outlined. I am sure that Parliament recognises that we have difficult budgetary decisions to make. The fact is that money is very tight. I hear Robin Harper when he says that £2.3 million is not a lot in the great scheme of things, but when that £2.3 million is added to all the other amounts in the budget, it does not take long to come to a very substantial figure. However, we recognise the need to ensure that the partnership gets through the transitional period to the point of being able to identify other sources of funding to allow it to continue its good work. Therefore, I am delighted to announce this afternoon that we have agreed to the council’s request for transitional funding of more than £700,000 for next year to help it to plan the future of employment services in the city in a sustainable way. On that basis, I hope that we will all be able to move forward positively, working together for the young people and the wider population of Edinburgh, to help this great city to grow again in the way that it can and should.

Our vision is for a Scotland where no children are disadvantaged by poverty, and we recognise the particular importance of helping those who are in severe poverty. Our approach to achieving that vision is already covered in some detail in the Scottish Government’s three interrelated frameworks to tackle child poverty: “Achieving Our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland”; the early years framework; and “Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Equalities”. We have extended the United Kingdom Child Poverty Act 2010 to Scotland and are committed to doing all that we can to contribute to the statutory targets to eradicate child poverty by 2020. Our child poverty strategy will be launched in March 2011, and will set out our approach to tackling child poverty in Scotland.

We will continue to work with Save the Children and all the other key stakeholders that are involved in trying to tackle the unacceptable issue of child poverty. It is an issue that cuts across the whole of Government. The contributions from the education, housing, economic development, transport and justice sectors are all important elements in our child poverty strategy. Some of the welfare reforms that were recently announced from Westminster, however, will be damaging in relation to child poverty, rather than assist in eradicating it.

I support this group of amendments, all of which are minor tidying and drafting points. Amendment 1 agreed to. Section 4—Registration

I support the amendments, which relate to the use of property factor registered numbers. Registered factors will be required to use their registration number in communications with customers and others who ministers specify. That will add another element of transparency to the registration system. Failing to use the registration number in that way will be a relevant consideration for registration and deregistration decisions. I believe that that is appropriate. Amendment 2 agreed to. Amendment 31 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 5—Section 4: considerations Amendment 3 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 7—Duty of responsible person to provide information

I support the amendments. In the stage 1 debate I said that a requirement for a factor to send in updates every time that there was a change in their portfolio of managed properties would be unnecessarily onerous. The amendments remove that requirement and replace it with a more proportionate requirement on property factors to provide updated portfolio information to the Scottish ministers on an annual basis. It is my view that an annual update of a factor’s portfolio list of managed properties is sufficient and not too burdensome a duty. Amendment 4 agreed to. Amendments 5 to 9 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 8—Removal from register Amendment 10 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 9—Effect of refusal to enter in register or removal from register

I support the amendments. It is appropriate that charges for work that is carried out after a factor has been de-registered or refused entry to the register should not be recoverable. However, the amendments recognise that work can be instructed before that time and that factors should be able to recover the associated costs. Amendment 11 agreed to. Amendments 12 and 13 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 10—Section 9: interpretation etc Amendment 14 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 12—Offence of operating as a property factor without registration Amendment 32 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to.

I support amendment 15, which ensures parity of treatment between property factors that operate as sole traders and those that operate as corporate bodies. That is important, as the majority of property factors are likely to have corporate or partnership status. Amendment 15 agreed to. Amendments 33 and 34 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. After section 12 Amendment 16 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]. Amendments 16A and 16B moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Amendment 16, as amended, agreed to. Section 13—Code of conduct

I support the amendments. I agree with the assessment of the Subordinate Legislation Committee that any exercise of the power of the Scottish ministers to delegate their functions under the bill would be a significant matter and should, therefore, require approval by the Parliament. Amendment 17 agreed to. Section 16—Application to homeowner housing panel Amendment 18 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 18—Determination by homeowner housing committee Amendment 19 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 21—Appeals

I support the amendments, which relate to the new form of dispute resolution that is established under part 2. Amendment 20 agreed to. Amendments 21 and 22 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 25A—Amendments to Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003

I support the amendments, which are technical in nature. They make important drafting points to clarify the relationship of the bill to the 2003 act and correct the fact that there are two different definitions of homeowner in the bill. Amendment 23 agreed to. Section 26—Delegation of functions Amendments 24 and 25 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 27—Orders and regulations Amendment 26 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 28—Interpretation Amendments 27 to 29 moved—[Patricia Ferguson]—and agreed to. Section 29—Short title and commencement

I support amendment 30, which will allow an additional 12 months until 1 October 2012 for the commencement of parts 1 and 2 of the bill. The establishment of a register of property factors and a new form of dispute resolution between home owners and factors will require careful implementation. Moving the final date for the commencement of the provisions to 1 October 2012 will give the Scottish Government and key stakeholders time to carry out the necessary implementation work. Amendment 30 agreed to.

I welcome the progress that has been made on the bill and all the hard work that has gone in to getting it to stage 3. If I may, I will pay particular tribute to my officials, who have worked closely with Patricia Ferguson, particularly on the final amendments that we have unanimously agreed today. The Scottish Government has always recognised the need for action to improve the residential property and land management industry. At earlier stages of parliamentary scrutiny of the bill, I highlighted a number of issues that I felt should be addressed if the bill is to be as effective as we all want it to be. Many of those issues have been addressed, often as a result of productive collaboration between the member in charge and the Scottish Government. I noted three principal challenges in the bill as it was originally drafted. The first was the definition of a property factor and who is or is not covered by that. The second was the consequences for home owners if a factor is deregistered. The third was the creation of an accessible and effective dispute resolution system. Through dialogue and co-operation, we have fixed most of the problems with the definition to make it clear, for example, that landowning land maintenance companies are included and are covered by the bill’s provisions. That is the clear policy intention of the member in charge of the bill, and the Scottish Government fully supports it. The consequences for home owners if a factor is deregistered might be complicated. Section 9(2)(b) makes some provision for the appointment of new factors. In addition, ministers might have to make ancillary provision using powers under section 26A. Ancillary provision could cover such matters as the consequences of deregistering a landowning land maintenance company, and the interaction between this legislation and the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. Part 2 of the bill deals with dispute resolution, and my original view was that compulsory membership by factors of, for example, an ombudsman system, was a more appropriate means of delivering an accessible form of third-party redress for the consumer. However, during the stage 1 debate, it became obvious that the majority of members were in favour of the home owner housing panel that the bill proposed. I am happy that, at stage 2, the Government was able to introduce an amendment that would allow some of the costs of running the panel to be recovered from the industry rather than the entire burden being placed on the taxpayer. I would like to touch on one further issue that was raised at earlier stages of the bill. The bill requires factors that apply for registration to provide details of the portfolio of properties that they manage. Some industry representatives asked for the information to remain unpublished. Section 1(2) requires the register to be open to public inspection, and the Government supports that transparency. However, there is no requirement in the bill to provide commercially sensitive information, such as the pricing of services. If Parliament votes to pass the bill today, so begins the significant challenge of implementing all its provisions by 1 October 2012. At the bill’s introduction, the member in charge included 29 September 2011 as the date by which all provisions should be in force. Although it is not general practice to provide that an act will commence on a specified date, we sought a solution that would establish a more realistic timescale for implementation of parts 1 and 2 of the bill. Given the work that will be involved, implementation by 1 October 2012 still represents a major challenge—we should not underestimate the scale of it if we want to implement the legislation as effectively and efficiently as possible. The Scottish Government is committed to beginning work immediately on implementing the provisions of the bill, if it is passed. I see four main strands of work as being needed: first, setting up and making operational the registration scheme; secondly, preparing, consulting on, laying before Parliament and bringing into force the new code of conduct; thirdly, preparing secondary legislation; and fourthly—and crucially—preparing the current private rented housing panel to take on its considerably expanded new role as the home owner housing panel. There will be many other tasks as well: although perhaps they will be smaller individually, they will be significant when they are considered in the round. Taken together, those pieces of work will make full implementation by October 2012 no mean feat. A number of people have asked for clarification of how the bill will affect land maintenance companies and, in particular, Greenbelt. It is useful for me to spell out for the record exactly what the position will be. The Government has taken action in relation to land maintenance companies. The work on the Government’s voluntary accreditation scheme included land maintenance companies, and we have worked with the member in charge of the bill to ensure that the definition of property factor properly covers land maintenance companies. We have told companies about the complaints that we have received, and we have asked them to deal with them. Finally, as I have mentioned, we will shortly issue a consultation, which will cover switching of land maintenance companies and will ask whether more information can be provided to prospective home owners on potential land maintenance obligations.

To conclude, I recognise the impact of property management services on so many people’s lives across Scotland. Action to improve industry practice and to raise standards of customer service is to be warmly welcomed. The Government will whole-heartedly support the bill at decision time.

If the bill is passed—I make a guess that it will be—it will be a double whammy for the Butler-Ferguson household tonight. I am sure that Bill Butler and Patricia Ferguson will be proud of each having their bill passed; I congratulate both of them on that. I look forward to the day when Mr McLetchie is serving on the Scottish independence bill committee, rather than just the Scotland Bill Committee. The Government has long recognised that there are concerns about how property management services are delivered in Scotland. That is why we consulted on a voluntary accreditation scheme to drive up standards in the industry and why the Government has supported—and, hopefully, helped to improve—the bill during its passage through Parliament. The bill does not solve all the problems, but it is a good beginning. We need to consider further the issues relating to how owners can, when they are dissatisfied, switch or dismiss and replace their property factor. The Office of Fair Trading market study on property managers in Scotland that was published in February 2009 found that only 1 per cent of people switch. Given the number of complaints that all of us receive, it is clear that the law needs to be changed to facilitate switching by dissatisfied tenants. That must be on the agenda for the new session. As I said earlier, in the next few days we will issue a consultation on switching land maintenance providers. A number of points were made on the issue during summing-up speeches. I will deal with a couple of those. I say to Mary Mulligan that landowning land maintenance companies can be deregistered under the bill, but ancillary provision may be needed on what happens after deregistration. That is another issue with which the new consultation that Fergus Ewing is leading will deal. We have told Greenbelt, in particular, that its invoices should be transparent and clear, so that people know what they are being charged for. As I have said, there will be much to do on implementation. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm that the draft code of conduct and its implementation on a statutory basis are key to the success of the bill’s implementation. I give an undertaking to consult extensively on the draft code before we bring it to the Parliament for approval. We will need to establish, as I said earlier, a new registration service and consider what ancillary provision is required to cover, for example, the interrelationship between the bill and the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. We will need to establish, too, the dispute resolution service. So, there is still much work to be done to implement the bill and to introduce additional legislation that will be required to enhance this area of the law and the housing sector. The bill lays down the framework for registration and dispute resolution in more general terms. We will go into implementation mode after tonight’s vote, I hope. Parliament in the new session will need to consider what we can do on land maintenance companies once the consultation is finished. I have no doubt that additional legislation will be needed to cover land maintenance companies specifically. The bill is a welcome first step. We look forward to working with all the key stakeholders in its implementation and ensuring that it is a success. The litmus test will be whether there is a dramatic decline in future years in the number of people who come to our surgeries to complain about their factors. I hope that there will be a decline because they have found a remedy as outlined in the bill. That is why the Scottish Government is very supportive of the bill. We will do everything that we can to ensure not only that we meet the deadline for implementation, but that we do it earlier, if possible, than is outlined in the bill.

I welcome the debate as the son-in-law and grandson of miners, and as a former director of Cumnock and Doon Enterprise Trust, which was the predecessor to British Coal Enterprise. The trust was set up to regenerate the Cumnock and Doon Valley area, and during my reign there George Foulkes MP—as he was at the time—declared us to be the best-run economic development agency in Britain. I am particularly committed to the future not only of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust, but of the coalfield communities. It is critical that we consider the issue in terms of the communities and not just the trust, despite the fact that the trust is an excellent organisation.

I certainly would not regard the House of Lords as progress. In the first half of my speech I will deal with the general issue of regeneration in Scotland, and in the second half I will address the specifics of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. As members will know, last week I launched our discussion document on the future of regeneration policy in Scotland, “Building a Sustainable Future”. It is as relevant to the coalfield communities as it is to any other community in Scotland that is facing difficulty, such as Clydebank, the east end of Glasgow, the Cowdenbeaths of this world, and areas such as Kilmarnock and Moray that are facing major closures. I hope that we can have a grown-up debate about the future of regeneration policies in Scotland for the 21st century. I believe that we need a step change in regeneration across the country, and I hope that, from the document and the discussion that it ignites, we will end up with an ambitious strategy.

Indeed, and I have very good news for Clydebank this morning if the member will listen for a few more minutes. I agree that regeneration is not something that can be done in a year or two. John Park mentioned in his speech that a number of pits closed during the 18 years when the Tories were in power. He did not mention, however, that the Labour Government closed 39 pits in Scotland, a third of which were in Fife. The reality is that pits have closed under both Tory and Labour Governments. The one thing that the SNP can say is that we have not closed any pits in Scotland. In terms of regeneration in general, we are already committed to record levels of funding to improve the physical and economic fabric of our cities, towns and villages, including the coalfield communities. It is not just about the trust, although it plays an important role. To put things in perspective, the trust’s budget from the Scottish Government is about £1.6 million this year. That is divided among 13 local authority areas, so the average is just over £100,000 per area. I do not think that any of us would argue that that is anywhere near enough to tackle the problems of the coalfield communities, which is why we have put into coalfield community areas more than £25 million through the town centre regeneration fund and another £1.3 million through our wider role fund. That is nearly £27 million that the Labour Party did not deliver.

I am not saying that. I am saying that Labour lacks enough ambition for the coalfield communities. It is talking about £1.6 million, but including the coalfield money this year we are talking about £29 million for the coalfield communities. We are committed not only to the coalfield communities but, as I said, to regeneration to deal, apart from anything else, with the dire consequences of the banking and economic crisis that we inherited from the previous Government. If members will listen, they will hear some news on the urban regeneration companies, including Clydebank Re-built. It will be very good news for Mr McNulty. He wrote in the Clydebank Post that a key litmus test of the SNP’s commitment to Clydebank would be our commitment to the Scottish Enterprise element of the money for regeneration there. After I tell him the news, I look forward to his column next week saying that the SNP has passed the test because it has delivered for Clydebank as well as the other URC areas in Scotland. I am delighted to announce that the final funding allocations for the urban regeneration companies in 2011-12 are as follows: £21.5 million for Clyde Gateway URC; £4 million for Riverside Inverclyde; £4 million for Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company; and £1.6 million for Clydebank Re-built. On top of that, we will use the £50 million joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas holding fund that has been established in partnership with the European Investment Bank to invest in revenue-generating regeneration projects in key regeneration areas, including the URC areas and the coalfield community areas. The 13 local authority areas that qualify for that £50 million JESSICA fund coincide with the coalfield community areas. On top of that, we will invest £10 million in vacant and derelict land in some of our most deprived communities, thereby refocusing the fund’s objectives on stimulating economic growth and job creation in a small number of priority sites, as well as continuing to support the regeneration of our communities through registered social landlords by making available £6 million of funding. On top of that, we will encourage local authorities, working with the Scottish Futures Trust, to bring forward tax increment finance proposals to kick-start economic development.

No, not at the moment. However, we are not only investing our and the taxpayer’s money in those communities for physical and business regeneration. A key issue is ensuring that people are job ready. Employability is a key contributor to raising the employment levels in those areas. While physical regeneration is essential, it is not good enough by itself. Employment rates in Scotland have risen again in recent months. It is good to be able to report that 71.1 per cent of Scots are in employment, which means that we have a higher rate of employment than any of the other home nations in the UK. I am delighted that my colleague John Swinney was able to announce a raft of measures in his budget last week to ensure that young people are not left behind as a result of the recession. His announcements included support for 46,500 training opportunities, which included 25,000 modern apprenticeships next year against the Labour demand for 21,000—we exceeded it by 25 per cent. Last week, John Swinney also announced community jobs Scotland, a new programme that will offer at least six months’ work in the third sector for up to 2,000 young unemployed people who are struggling to get into the labour market. I point out that at no point during the budget negotiations did the Labour Party ask for one penny for the coalfield communities. Indeed, Labour’s record in those communities and in its dealings with the miners down the years is appalling. In particular, when in government, the Labour Party cheated nearly 2,000 miners out of compensation to which they were entitled as a result of lung and related diseases. Labour members should hang their heads in shame at what they have done to mining communities in Scotland.

As my father and grandfather used to say, we could always rely on the Labour Party being loyal to the miners when it was election time. In between elections, it sold them down the river. That is something that the Scottish Government will not do. I move amendment S3M-7992.1, to leave out from second “sustained” to end and insert: “focused on job-creation activities that can contribute to the economic revival of these communities.”

Rubbish.

On housing, we delivered second stage transfer in Glasgow. Labour did not deliver one second stage transfer; we delivered 20,000 homes.

I take the member’s point about the Thatcher Government, but there were 13 years of Labour government after that, at the end of which the level of unemployment in Scotland was much higher than it had been at any point in the previous few years.

What has the member got to say about her big pal Gordon Brown cheating 2,000 Scottish miners out of their compensation for pneumoconiosis?

The debate has been fairly heated, but it has not been bad, in many respects, and some light has been shed, in some speeches. I pick up on the point that I think that Frank McAveety first made, on the importance of tackling youth unemployment. Irrespective of the communities that we are dealing with, some of which we would not describe as deprived, levels of youth unemployment are far too high, not only in Scotland but throughout the UK. That is why I emphasise the high priority that the Scottish Government has given to dealing with youth unemployment, within our remit and the resources that are available to us. As I said, John Swinney announced 25,000 modern apprenticeships for next year, 7,000 flexible training opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises, an extra 1,200 college places and an additional £15 million for college bursaries. We are providing more than 40,000 training opportunities, with a further 34,500 new opportunities committed for 2011-12. On top of that, 86.8 per cent of the young people who left school in the academic year 2009-10 were in a positive destination approximately three months after the end of the academic year, which is the highest-ever proportion of positive destinations. That is especially significant in the challenging circumstances. The proportion of school leavers who enter further or higher education approximately three months after the end of the academic year has risen from 56 per cent in 2007-08 to 62.8 per cent in 2009-10. That is also a record high.

The precise breakdown is to be agreed, but we will send John Park the details when that has happened. I have set out what the Government has done, but I do not think that it is enough. If additional resources were available to us we would do even more. I hope that Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, and George Osborne, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, will provide additional resources specifically to tackle youth unemployment in the budget on 23 March.

I am afraid that I must move on. Some comments about URCs have not been entirely accurate. We have had a positive discussion with the chair and chief executive of the board of Riverside Inverclyde. One reason why the company’s budget is slightly lower than that of other URCs is that the company has advanced spending on projects this year. That partly explains the scale of the year-on-year change in its budget. We must take such matters into consideration, rather than simply look at the crude figures. I have read scaremongering stories in local newspapers about the James Watt dock development and the Greenock Arts Guild theatre, none of which has been accurate. We are doing an enormous amount with the Clyde Gateway project in the east end of Glasgow, not just in relation to the core role of the URC but to secure the legacy from the Commonwealth games in 2014. Unprecedented investment is going into that part of Glasgow. We should not make the mistake of equating the core budgets of URCs or any other development agency, including the Coalfields Regeneration Trust, with the total investment in the areas that they cover. As John Park said, a great advantage of such organisations is that they have the capability to leverage in additional money. Indeed, the money that they leverage in often far exceeds the organisation’s core budget. That is why it has been essential to maintain budgets.

Those decisions will be taken by the new Government, because of the agreement throughout the chamber that whoever is elected on 5 May will prepare a three-year spending programme from next year onwards. However, I anticipate our making that kind of decision to show our continuing commitment to the area. I say to Patricia Ferguson that through the transformational regeneration area approach in Glasgow, including Maryhill, we have agreed substantial investment in housing and other matters, and the framework agreements are now in place. Maryhill, along with Laurieston and Gallowgate, has been picked as one of the three early action priority areas for investment. The Scottish ministers have agreed to waive the disposal clawback agreement for all TRAs, allowing any receipts generated through private sector activity to be recycled into the regeneration programme across all eight areas. So, if we look at the investment in the town centre regeneration fund, the Glasgow Housing Association, the other budgets in housing in Glasgow and all the other budgets under John Swinney’s control, we can see that we are making massive investment in the city of Glasgow and it is right that we should do so. Similarly, in the coalfield areas, if we add up the investment in the communities, we see that it is at an unprecedented level. One of the other points that I want to emphasise—I forget who made it—is that if we are to be successful in regeneration, the role of community empowerment is critical. The community must be actively involved in the decision making, not as consultees but as decision makers.

I do not have time, unfortunately.

Right. I will take the intervention.

They will benefit enormously, because it will bring about investment and will leverage additional funds from Europe and elsewhere into that area. I am happy to explain that in more detail when I have more time—such as in the member’s debate tonight. There is a real dilemma at the heart of Labour’s policy. Irrespective of what the debate is, Labour demands that we keep budgets as they are or increase them—whether in relation to the housing association grant, the total amount spent on housing, the amount spent on the CRT or on a whole panoply of other organisations and programmes—but it has not said how it will fund all that expenditure, given that it will face the same cuts from Westminster that this Government faces.

No. I am sorry, but I have too much to say. Those cuts have totalled more than £2 billion in real terms over this year and next year. If Labour is committed to all the expenditure that it has listed—we have counted at least £1.7 billion additional expenditure—it has to tell us what it will cut. Of course, the secret is that Labour has said that it will not protect the health budget, so the only conclusion that one can reach about the core of Labour’s financial policy is that it will strip the health service of badly needed capital and staffing investment in order to pay for its own pet projects. In other words, Labour’s core strategy is to close accident and emergency units such as Monklands and use that money for GARL and other projects for which the business case is very weak indeed.

This is very relevant to the subject, Presiding Officer.

It is about how the money is spent and where one gets it to spend in all these areas. My officials have had a very constructive dialogue with the CRT. We await its proposal on how it can continue to have an impact in the coalfield areas in future. We have told it that, like everybody else, we need to look at how we can make money go further. I am very keen to ensure that the trust maintains the essential capacity and capability so that it can continue to invest in coalfield communities and, more important, focus that investment on job-creating activity, which is what will ensure the economic survival of those areas. That is our policy. We will support the trust, but we want it to be even more effective in future, to leverage even more investment into the coalfield areas and to give priority to job creation.

I merely point out that we are building twice as many housing association houses as Labour did when Johann Lamont was minister.

Ministers and officials regularly meet organisations that represent people with disabilities to discuss the development and implementation of a range of policies that impact on the lives of disabled people. The most recent cross-Government meeting with disabled people and their organisations, as well as partners in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Directors of Social Work and NHS Health Scotland, was the meeting of the independent living core reference group that was held on 18 January in Edinburgh. The agenda included the independent living programme research; voices of disabled people—the challenge of co-production; the independent living work plan priorities of housing, portability of care, advocacy and inclusive communication; and an update on current co-production pilots.

The plans will be published shortly and certainly before purdah. At that stage, we will give the detailed information that Johann Lamont seeks.

I have a vested interest in the debate because I am the son, the grandson and the brother-in-law of miners and I was brought up in the mining community of Patna in east Ayrshire. A highly enjoyable job that I had in the 1980s was as chief executive of the Cumnock and Doon Enterprise Trust, which was set up by a partnership involving the then Scottish Development Agency, the council and the private sector to bring new jobs and industry into Cumnock and Doon Valley. The problems that afflicted Cumnock and Doon Valley then—which, sadly, still afflict the area today—are typical of the problems that are faced in mining communities throughout Scotland. There are three fundamental problems. First, when the pits shut, there was no big employer to take on the men who had been made redundant. Secondly, the areas in which mining communities are situated are, typically, semi-rural and often have very poor transport and other connections to areas where there are jobs for the young people who grow up in those communities. That has led to high levels of long-term unemployment and, in turn, to high levels of depopulation. Too many of those communities have got into a cycle of depopulation feeding unemployment and unemployment feeding depopulation. The objective of the Government and the Parliament is to do what we can to break that cycle of unemployment and depopulation in the mining communities. If we are to do that, we must ensure that there is substantive investment by the public and private sectors in those mining communities. I see the role of public sector investment as being in helping to generate private sector investment and thereby create new jobs and industry in those areas. That is why, as the minister responsible for the town centre regeneration fund, I ensured that a high proportion of the funds went to coalfield community areas such as Lochgelly, where a new business centre is about to be opened as a result of money that was invested through that fund. That business centre is a good example of how we can create new jobs and industry in the mining areas. As I made absolutely clear in this morning’s debate, the Scottish Government sees the Coalfields Regeneration Trust continuing to have a permanent and major role in helping us to regenerate coalfield communities. Helen Eadie said that we are not committed to the future of the trust. That is absolutely not true. I and my officials have had productive meetings with the Coalfields Regeneration Trust and I have told it that we must give priority to two issues. First, we must maintain the core capacity of the trust, particularly the four staff who work there, so that they can continue to deliver on behalf of the coalfield communities. Secondly, the future focus must be on creating new jobs and industry in those areas, although not to the exclusion of everything else. The trust’s role is to be a partner in levering in funding from the private sector and the public sector, through the range of other available funds, to help the process of job creation. It is also totally untrue that I have decided to impose savage cuts on the trust, as Helen Eadie also said. We have made no decision on the trust’s future budget because we are waiting for the trust to come forward with its business plan. Indeed, in its annual report from 2010, the trust said that it recognised the need for a change of emphasis and focus in its operations and that it wants to focus on dealing with the problems of worklessness and related issues, unemployment and the need to attract new jobs and industry.

I do not have time, I am afraid. The trust has also said that it needs to engage in more spatial targeting that could result in a reduction of 38 per cent of the coalfield wards that it covers. As I said, we are waiting to hear from the Coalfield Regeneration Trust about its business plan for the future. We will continue to hold a positive dialogue with the trust to ensure that its work will continue. I will tell you this, Presiding Officer: the Labour Party needs to learn something. We are having such difficulty with our budget because of the savage budget cuts that London has imposed. Two thirds of those cuts were imposed by Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling; the other third came from the new Con-Dem Government. The reality is that the Labour Government took the decisions and we must face the consequences. As the son, grandson, father-in-law and son-in-law of a miner, what disgusted me more than anything else—and, by God, I was disgusted by the Thatcher years and their impact on the mining communities—was the decision of a Labour Government to take the National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers to court to stop it paying compensation to miners for pneumoconiosis and other diseases. None of us in those mining communities thought that we would live to see such a day. It is high time Helen Eadie got her facts right and fully understood how damaging that decision was.

Two thousand miners in Scotland died before they got their compensation because Labour took the union to court. Labour members should hang their heads in shame. I tell you this, Presiding Officer: as far as this Government is concerned, we will continue to deliver for the coalfield communities in a way that the Labour Government never did.

The debate has been interesting and helpful. The view in the chamber on migration and trafficking has been universal. Like everyone else, I commend the committee—under the first-class convenership of Margaret Mitchell—for the way in which it conducted the inquiry and for conducting its work professionally during the parliamentary session. The debate is a testament to our pride in our migrant populations in Scotland. It is heartening to hear that colleagues from across the political spectrum agree that migrants continue to make positive social, economic and cultural contributions to shaping Scotland. I will pick up on as many points that have been raised as I can. I will start by tackling migration issues. We all agree that migration is a key element of economic growth, which is the Government’s number 1 policy priority and is probably a priority that is shared across the chamber. We believe that the current devolution settlement makes it more challenging for Scotland to address our unique demographic and population issues. Throughout the debate, we have talked about the need for us to provide leadership and strong messages of support to migrant communities and said that we should try to combat overtly negative press and ill-informed attitudes towards migration. I believe that the committee and the Parliament have demonstrated that leadership today as well as the need to raise that awareness. It is particularly challenging for Scotland to disseminate welcoming messages across the world, as it is, when the UK Government is actively discouraging immigration by placing an annual limit on it. We will continue to press the UK Government to consider a more flexible approach that reflects Scotland's needs and, indeed, the needs of the wider UK economy. That position is reflected right across industry and society as a whole. As David Lonsdale, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland’s assistant director, said about migration: “It's important that we get the structure right and that sufficient flexibility is built in so that highly skilled people who are essential to work being done in Scotland can get a work permit more readily”. Also, the Federation of Small Businesses said the cap was the “economics of the sixth form” and claimed that it could stop businesses filling vacancies during times of high demand. On the other side of industry, both the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Unison have commented on the issue. The STUC said that “Migrant workers bring valuable skills and are valuable members of our community” while Unison said that “public services in Scotland would struggle to cope without the skills of migrant workers.” As a number of members said, it was helpful that the committee heard evidence that people and the press in Scotland are more positive towards migrants than is the case in other parts of the UK. The Government agrees that more needs to be done, however. As Elaine Smith highlighted in her speech, sections of press coverage remain overwhelmingly negative. As a Government, we recognise that we have a role to play in pressing home positive messages and tackling racism and misunderstanding where and when we can. For example, the Scottish connections hub in the one Scotland, many cultures anti-racism website celebrates the benefits of migration to Scotland. We are clear that asylum seekers, refugees and migrants must be treated fairly and humanely and must be welcomed and supported. We continue to work with strategic partners such as BEMIS and the Scottish Refugee Council to look at ways to raise awareness and dispel myths about migration in our communities. That work is supported across Scotland. Academics at the University of Stirling have said that the way in which news on immigration issues is framed in Scotland differs from the way in which it is framed in other parts of the UK. They have noted that when Scotland-based media run inaccurate headlines, articles or television pieces on asylum seekers and immigration, they tend to respond more quickly to criticism than do those based in other parts of the UK. That is not to say that everything in Scotland is rosy—far from it—but we need to celebrate the positives as well as challenge and face up to the negatives. There are many other issues that I would like to cover, but unfortunately I do not have time. It is very important that on issues such as migration and trafficking the Parliament speaks with one voice: we all need to say that, on this issue, we will not separate on party-political lines. On that basis, we can all be proud of the debate that has been held today.

This is a rather versatile day of business, Presiding Officer. I welcome today’s opportunity to highlight the benefits of the UK Energy Bill, in particular the green deal policy benefits that can be brought to Scotland. The Energy Bill had its first reading in the House of Lords on 8 December 2010, had its second reading on 22 December and has now completed its committee stage. The report stage will begin on 2 March. I assure the Parliament that the Scottish Government is working closely with UK Government ministers and officials on the content of the bill. We have negotiated a number of changes to ensure that Scottish circumstances have been taken into consideration and written into the text of the bill, and I sit on the green deal ministerial oversight group. Many of the bill’s provisions are reserved to the UK Parliament, and we are principally concerned with those provisions that fall within the devolved competence of this Parliament, particularly those that come under the legislative consent motion that is required to allow the UK Parliament to legislate on these matters. Rest assured that the LCM is not a blank cheque to allow the UK Government to implement the green deal in a manner that disadvantages Scotland. We will be actively involved in the development of the policy at every stage in the future, as we have been recently, and we will ensure that the requirements of Scotland are recognised. I will now give the Parliament a brief overview of those provisions that are devolved and of the Scottish Government’s views on them. First, the green deal and the energy company obligation—the ECO—provide the opportunity for significant investment in sustainable energy measures. We need to ensure that as much of that investment as possible comes to Scotland to top up what we are already doing and will continue to do ourselves. Many of the finer points of the initiatives will be outlined in secondary legislation following the passage of the Energy Bill, so we do not yet have the answers to specific questions about targets and how they will work in rural areas. Members should rest assured that we will continue to work closely with the UK Government as the bill is developed to ensure that its provisions are designed and delivered to recognise issues that are specific to Scotland.

Mr Harvie should listen to what I have to say, as I am sure that I will be able to reassure him on all points. The stakeholder input and the views of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will be extremely valuable to us as we present to the Department of Energy and Climate Change what it is that Scotland wants from the initiatives. DECC held its first stakeholder event on the ECO last week, and it has given a commitment to take away the comments and issues that were raised and to feed them into the development of the policy. The private rented housing sector is key to ensuring that Scottish ministers can influence delivery in respect of key devolved aspects of the policy, including those that affect the private rented sector. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that all Scottish building owners and tenants have full access to UK Government energy efficiency programmes, including the green deal, as well as to our own programmes in Scotland.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. We note the UK Government’s proposals to introduce new powers to regulate private landlords, to ensure that private tenants can access energy efficiency improvements to their homes through the green deal. We note that regulation in that regard would not be in place in England until 2015 at the earliest. The Scottish ministers already have powers to enable the regulation of energy efficiency across all tenures, under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. The new powers that are offered through the LCM would not alter or weaken existing legislation-making powers but would expand the options that are open to us. We will therefore consider the UK Government’s proposals in the context of our powers and the needs of the people of Scotland. We will make a statement on our position in respect of the use of our regulation-making powers in the 2009 act by the end of March. The proposal to deliver the green deal by building on the current system of energy performance certificate assessments is not a barrier to implementation in Scotland. The bill will enable delivery of that intent. The Scottish Government will continue to work with Whitehall to ensure that subsequent framework regulations, which implement the green deal, recognise and accommodate differences in process in Scotland. I confirm that there is scope for looking at improving the information that is presented in, for example, the energy report that the energy performance certificate process produces. However, until the requirements of a green deal assessment are set out in detail, we cannot determine what additional measures might be needed.

I will cover the repeal of the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995 in my closing speech.

I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Energy Bill introduced in the House of Lords on 8 December 2010 relating to the creation of powers to develop a new Green Deal for energy efficiency measures, the repeal of the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995, enabling the Coal Authority to charge for services and to implement additional measures to make improvements to regulatory frameworks for the energy markets, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

In the three minutes that I have, I will try to cover as many points as I possibly can. I take on board Gavin Brown’s point about background papers. We will ensure that what he suggested happens in the future. I make it absolutely clear that it is not just my officials who are in touch regularly with DECC: we have two officials working inside DECC on behalf of Scotland, and I am in regular contact with Chris Huhne, as well as being a member of the oversight group. The level of co-operation between ourselves and London on the issue is therefore unprecedented. Lewis Macdonald said that we have to have HECA or we will have nothing. The reality is that two thirds of the local authority areas in Scotland have nothing, because they have not implemented HECA. Between the UK bill, as it will be adapted for Scotland, as well as the climate change legislation and the fuel poverty measures that we have taken, we have in place a far better system for tackling energy efficiency and fuel poverty than HECA could ever provide.

Unfortunately I have only three minutes, otherwise I would have been delighted to take the member’s intervention. I come to the green deal and the energy company obligation, which basically replaces the CERT system—a Labour measure that has become a dead CERT. The amount of investment that CERT makes in Scotland is substantially less than we anticipate getting through the ECO. That will be a major boost to investment in energy efficiency in Scotland. Similarly, if we did not take advantage of the green deal in Scotland, we would be denying thousands of people the opportunity to get the money that they need at relatively low interest rates so that they can invest in their properties and make them much more energy efficient. The green deal is a good deal for Scotland, and it will create 10,000 new jobs in Scotland. I find it incredible that the Labour Party and the Greens will vote against the motion and try to deny Scotland and unemployed people in Scotland the opportunity to have 10,000 new jobs. When those members go into the election, we will remind them that they voted against those jobs. If Labour’s policy was the pathetic announcement on Monday, which is a tiddlywink approach to energy efficiency in Scotland, it has no case whatsoever. We are well ahead of the game and are, as always, working with our friends in London to deliver for the people of Scotland.

We recently published “Homes Fit for the 21st Century: The Scottish Government’s Strategy and Action Plan for Housing in the Next Decade: 2011-2020” and announced details of a competitive innovation and investment fund to support the delivery of new affordable homes during 2011-12. The investment programme will secure the approval of new affordable council and housing association homes throughout Scotland. The level of activity in West of Scotland will depend on the participation of housing associations, local councils and developers.

Yesterday’s brilliant budget by John Swinney will add £22 million to the housing and regeneration budget. [Interruption.] I will move my phone, but it is actually switched off, Presiding Officer. Of that amount, £16 million will be for investment in housing and another £6 million is for investment in the urban regeneration areas. Clearly, Clydebank and Clydebank Re-built will be major beneficiaries of the additional funding.

We would not, of course, have been able to allocate any money if Mr McNulty had had his way, because he tried to vote down the budget. He would have been voting down £6 million extra for the urban regeneration companies and £16 million extra for housing. It is rather ironic that he demands money for Clydebank that he was not prepared to vote through yesterday. However, I can tell him that we will announce the allocations to the URCs in the near future and that Clydebank will feature in those allocations of funding, because it is a deserving case. The total budget that we are investing in Clydebank and the five other URC areas far exceeds anything that was ever invested in them by the previous Labour and Liberal Administration.

No.

No. Members: No.

I am pleased to open the stage 1 debate on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill, which henceforth I shall refer to as the bill. Before turning to the Equal Opportunities Committee’s stage 1 report, I would like to spell out briefly the Government’s intentions in introducing the bill and the context in which it sits. The Scottish Government believes that all people in Scotland who are eligible to marry or to enter into a civil partnership have a right to do so freely and without coercion. The bill aims to help protect some of the most vulnerable people in our society through the legal process in a very proactive, flexible way. I was heartened by the committee’s comment in its report that, although the number of victims may be relatively low, the detrimental impact of forced marriage is extremely high and cannot be tolerated. In addressing forced marriage, we cannot and should not separate it from the Government’s wider work to address other forms of violence against women. Yes, we know that men are affected by this terrible problem but, predominantly, it is women who are the victims, and the work to tackle it sits in that context. There are clear links with domestic abuse and rape. I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for its scrutiny of the bill. It has listened to evidence from our key stakeholders and has clearly taken on board their concerns in drafting its stage 1 report. I am pleased that there is so much common ground in the report and that the committee supports the general principles of the bill. The Government will respond to the committee’s report, including its recommendations for amendments to the bill, in writing, but I will comment on some of the main points that were raised in the report, many of which related to the bill’s implementation rather than its content. A recurring theme of the evidence sessions that is reflected in the stage 1 report is the need for a clear and effective implementation strategy for the bill that includes guidance, training, awareness raising and education. We know that it is also essential that links are made with existing child and adult protection mechanisms for supporting people who are at risk. We continue to work with stakeholders to shape the implementation of the bill, on the proviso that it successfully makes its way through the parliamentary stages. The forced marriage network is vital to that work, and I thank its members who have been instrumental in driving forward the agenda as well as in shaping the bill. As a first step in that process, the Government will consult widely on the draft statutory guidance that will accompany the legislation, to give public sector bodies an opportunity to shape and inform its contents to ensure that it is an essential tool in their development of informed and effective responses to victims of forced marriage whom their staff may have to support. In addition, the consultation will begin the awareness-raising process among practitioners who may never have come across the issue in their professional life. We appreciate the concerns that the committee raised in its report about the importance of close monitoring of cases to ensure that a victim’s safety is maintained once an order has been obtained, so that it continues to remain valid and in force. Such issues will be explored over the next few months, including during the consultation on the guidance, to ensure that when the bill comes into force, those who deal with cases know what their responsibilities are to ensure that victims and people who are in fear of forced marriage are kept safe. A big part of that process is ensuring that people know about the bill and the issues surrounding forced marriage. We share the committee’s view that significant work is required to raise awareness and understanding of forced marriage in Scotland. We are committed to undertake that work and have established a group of forced marriage network members to develop and take it forward as a matter of priority. The Government will work with the Scottish Court Service, police and other public sector bodies, as well as third sector organisations that are providing direct support to victims of forced marriage, to improve the statistical information that is available about cases of forced marriage. That commitment is reflected in the bill’s equality impact assessment. We know that we need to find out more, especially about lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, male victims and those with physical and learning disabilities who are affected by forced marriage. We hear what stakeholders and the committee said during the evidence gathering about concerns that victims could be trapped in a religious marriage once the civil marriage has been ended. We are committed to continuing to engage with relevant religious authorities on the issue of the nullification of forced marriages and to raise awareness of the bill among all religious organisations and communities. The first of the forums will be with groups that represent the Muslim community in Scotland. We will also look at the links between forced marriage and trafficking. I turn to some of the stage 1 report’s recommendations regarding the content of the bill. I was pleased to see the committee’s comment that the introduction of forced marriage protection orders would provide a simpler procedure, which is in contrast to the current complicated legal recourse of an order or an interdict. I was also pleased to see that committee members welcomed the introduction of FMPOs and felt that they would be an effective, preventive and protective measure in the fight against forced marriage. One of the key elements of the bill enables the Lord Advocate, or local authorities acting as relevant third parties, to make an application for a forced marriage protection order on behalf of a victim. That recognises that, in many cases of forced marriage, victims feel unwilling or unable to take action against perpetrators who might be members of their family. Again, I take on board the committee’s and stakeholders’ concerns about the monitoring of cases following the issue of an FMPO. It is vital that local authorities are supported to establish internal mechanisms that allow practitioners to know who will deal with cases and to ensure that those staff are trained and have access to guidance. We will work closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, as well as with individual local authorities, to ensure that their views are heard, that guidance is as effective as possible, and that local authorities are equipped to fulfil their role as relevant third parties. The Government recognises that the bill is only the start of a journey towards eradicating forced marriage from Scotland forever. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill.

Although this has been a short debate, it has been a high-quality one and there is a great deal of consensus around the chamber. As Sandra White did, I pay tribute to the work of the late Bashir Ahmad, who was keen that we pass such legislation. I also make it absolutely clear that we will respond positively to the committee’s recommendations. If we are unable to accept a recommendation, we will give a detailed explanation as to why and, if appropriate, offer alternatives. We are all singing from the same hymn sheet on forced marriage and we all want to ensure that the bill fits the bill for what we are trying to do. I will give some indication of our current thinking on some of the points that have been raised by all parties, although in the short time that is available I will not be able to cover all the points that were raised. Everybody mentioned the definition of force. I confirm that we will consider the committee’s recommendation on section 1(6). The committee made a fair point and we will give empathetic consideration to it. On the power of arrest, we do not think it necessary to include an express general power of arrest, because such a power already exists. However, we will consider, with the committee, whether the bill ought to include a specific power for a constable to arrest without warrant a person who is reasonably believed to be breaching, or to have breached, an order. We will give genuine consideration to the other points that members made. Sandra White mentioned the letter from the Law Society of Scotland. This relates to a minor amendment, but I am happy to consider the Law Society’s suggestion that section 2(3)(g) be amended to substitute “Scotland” for “United Kingdom”—not for any narrow, nationalist reason but because it is a reasonable suggestion, which will no doubt carry unanimous support in the Parliament. I very much take on board Hugh O’Donnell’s points about resources and the points that Malcolm Chisholm, Sandra White and other members made about implementation and, in particular, the need for education, awareness and training. We will consider our approach to that. We will consider data collection, which a number of members mentioned. I do not want to underestimate the challenge of data collection. However, we think that we can improve data collection, through partnership working and learning from successful work such as the roll-out in the health sector of routine inquiry about gender-based violence. That is an example of an area in which we can improve data collection. We will also take positive steps in relation to the police’s approach to identifying cases of honour-based violence. An objective of the work of the national group to address violence against women and the forced marriage network is to improve statistics, not just on forced marriage but on the agenda across the board. We have written to the chief statistician to seek his support in achieving that objective.

I imagine that that will normally be the case, but there are situations in which the police have discretion to decide what appears on the database. I do not want to interfere in that operational discretion, because part of the issue is protection and we must ensure that we do not do something that has indirect consequences, to which we have not given proper thought. However, the member has made a fair point. Bill Aitken talked about marriages that take place abroad. I dealt with the issue in detail when I appeared before the committee. By passing the bill we will send a clear message to other countries and to people in other countries that forced marriage is not acceptable, and we will join countries that want to end the practice, not just in their countries but worldwide. We will co-operate with Interpol, international organisations and the UK Government as appropriate, to ensure that an individual who attempts to bypass the legislation on forced marriage is brought to justice in Scotland or in another jurisdiction—in some cases, people who have broken the law in Scotland will be brought to justice in other jurisdictions. We will work with other jurisdictions to ensure that that happens. We will seriously consider the suggestions for amendment and improvement to the bill. I am happy to talk to all concerned parties, including the committee, because the Government is keen that we maintain consensus—indeed, unanimity—on the subject. The greater the unanimity, the louder the message that goes out from the Parliament that the days of forced marriage in Scotland are over.

I am pleased to open the debate and I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for its thorough stage 1 scrutiny of the bill. The committee took evidence from many of the key stakeholders and has clearly taken careful account of their concerns in drafting the stage 1 report. I am pleased to see so much common ground in the stage 1 report and that the committee supports the general principles of the bill. I am delighted that the committee has recognised the efforts made to consult on the bill, from its conception and throughout its development and introduction. I am continuing to work with key stakeholders to improve the bill as it progresses through its parliamentary stages, using the sounding board that I established for that purpose. I thank its members and, indeed, the private rented sector strategy group, which has been instrumental in preparing the lead-up to the bill and in acting as a sounding board. I reaffirm the Scottish Government’s support for the private rented sector in Scotland, which accounts for about 8 per cent of all households. There is great room for expansion in the sector, which has a major role to play in the future of Scottish housing. When we publish our white paper on housing next month, members will see that the sector is very much part of the Government’s philosophy and vision for the future of housing in Scotland over the next few years. I acknowledge the excellent work of the many good landlords in the sector. I am keen to support them by ensuring that regulation is proportionate while protecting the rights of tenants and landlords, and by developing a long-term strategy for the growth of the sector. The private rented sector strategy group has been charged by me with developing that strategy, taking into account the various demands on the sector. I am keen to work with others, including the United Kingdom Government, which I hope to persuade to remove barriers to the expansion of the private rented sector and, in particular, of the need for the reform of the stamp duty regime and the real estate investment trust regime. We all want a modern, thriving, high-quality Scottish private rented sector that is responsive to the needs of tenants. The bill plays a key part in the development of the long-term strategy by protecting the reputation of good landlords and tackling the minority of bad landlords who are acting illegally. In that way we believe that we can enhance the reputation and performance of the sector. The bill responds to the concerns raised by a broad range of stakeholders and expert practitioners, as well as the concerns raised in the Parliament, particularly throughout the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010. In the main, the bill’s provisions originate from the strategy group’s recommendations, for which there was broad support. The bill improves the systems for landlord registration and the licensing of houses in multiple occupation, giving local authorities greater powers to tackle bad practice and penalise unlawful operators. The bill gives new powers to tackle overcrowding, which can be a real difficulty in areas where problem landlords act irresponsibly when housing vulnerable tenants, such as migrant workers. It will improve tenants’ and landlords’ awareness of their rights and responsibilities and help landlords to carry out their statutory repairing standard obligations by enabling access to the private rented housing panel. It will crack down on the illegal pre-tenancy premiums that are often charged by unscrupulous agents or landlords, while clarifying the situation for responsible businesses. I will deal in some detail with the key aspects of the bill, beginning with landlord registration and, in particular, the definition of a fit and proper person to be a landlord. I welcome the Local Government and Communities Committee’s support for the expansion of the fit-and-proper person test criteria. It is not an exhaustive list, and local authorities are able to use discretion to look at any material evidence that they consider appropriate. The criteria highlight the specific types of information that we expect to be taken into account as a bare minimum, such as antisocial behaviour by the landlord, or circumstances in which the landlord has not taken reasonable steps to tackle antisocial behaviour in his property, for example by one of his tenants. The bill puts landlord registration guidance on a statutory footing, so that local authorities are required to have regard to it. It is my intention that the guidance will cover, for example, what should be taken into account when applying the fit-and-proper person test, such as how to consider antisocial behaviour. The guidance will outline the benefits of the bill to the regime, along with showcasing the good practice and recommendations highlighted in the outcomes of the current evaluation of registration. It will highlight some of the existing good practice such as that at the local level between housing benefit and landlord registration implementation teams. For example, a number of local authority housing benefit teams are already not processing claims unless they have confirmation of the landlord’s registration number. The guidance will help to generate consistency across local authorities whilst allowing for flexibility in taking account of local issues. The statutory guidance will also cover the use of the new local authority power to obtain information from people who are associated with a house. That will include situations involving vulnerable tenants, which have been a source of concern to date. We are also extending the power to issue guidance on HMO licensing so that it can cover the same issue.

It is more about the local process of how that is done. We already have two or three examples of local authorities where landlord registration teams are working closely with Department for Work and Pensions teams. As long as that happens, how things are done should be a matter for them. There are variations across authorities, including the size and the scale of the private rented sector in the area. The information that I have on places such as Edinburgh—I have visited the Edinburgh teams—is that people are helping each other. The landlord registration team is helping to identify housing benefit scams that the DWP can deal with and the DWP is helping to identify properties that landlords have not registered properly. There is mutual benefit in that system. Flexibility will be the modus operandi in achieving the consistency that we want at the end of the day. One tortuous issue that we discussed with the sounding board and the committee is the registration number in advertisements. There was probably more debate on that subject than on any other aspect of the bill. We must be absolutely clear on the matter: the purpose of putting the registration number on the advert is enforcement—the number is an enforcement tool. If, in so doing, the number can also benefit the tenant, that is all well and good. However, the purpose of putting the registration number on the advert is to make it easier for landlord registration enforcement teams to ensure that whatever property is advertised is registered properly. I know that the committee would like both the registration number and a kitemark to be used. Obviously, we will consider the committee’s point of view before we move to stage 2. Landlords are concerned about the length of the registration number—some may extend to 16 digits—which makes the number expensive to include in adverts. We have found a way of identifying each local authority that is similar to the way in which car registration numbers identify the county from which a registration number emanates. We believe that the Scottish Association of Landlords is now satisfied that registration numbers with fewer digits limit the expense for landlords and can therefore be used in adverts. I have dealt with the issue in a bit more detail than I would normally have done as it has proved to be a controversial aspect of the bill. Houses in multiple occupation provide an invaluable housing solution for many people, not least students. I welcome the committee’s support for the HMO provisions in the bill, which strike a proper balance between tackling the issues that stakeholders raised and maintaining supply in the sector. Clearly, a major part of the bill is the increase in fines, which I think is welcomed in general. We cannot rely entirely on the threat of increased fines to achieve all our objectives, however. The bill contains other measures in that regard. One major benefit of the bill to the consumer is the information pack, which will now be placed on a statutory footing. Landlords will have to provide a pack with essential information on the aspects of the tenancy as well as on health and safety issues, including in relation to electrical appliances and energy systems. The provisions in the bill relating to overcrowding provide other major benefits, without leading to the unintended consequence of a massive increase in homelessness. I take the committee’s point that, in future, we may need to look at whether we should register agents, as well as landlords. Regardless of who is elected on 5 May, the new Administration should address that issue. I recognise that there is probably more to do, but the bill is a major landmark in improving the performance of the private rented sector in Scotland and will help to pave the way for the sector’s further expansion and growth. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill.

Is the member suggesting that local authorities’ discretionary powers in some areas should be made into statutory duties?

Like other members, I think that the debate has been very good. It has been fairly consensual, and several constructive suggestions have come out of it. It is obvious that there are time constraints on us, but in moving from stage 1 to stage 2 after the vote, I will be happy to work with all the parties, if they want to lodge amendments. I will put the Scottish Government’s resources at their disposal and will be happy to see whether we can reach agreements on stage 2 amendments not just between two parties, but ideally between three or four parties, particularly to deal with the higher-priority issues that have been identified during the debate. The bill provides a good example of a subject that is close to the hearts of all of us and on which we can work together as a Parliament. I want to deal with a number of the more important issues that have been raised in the debate and how we can take them forward. It is clear that enforcement is a major concern for all members. I want to make three particular points about that. First, there are in some local authorities resource issues that need to be addressed. I pick the example of Govanhill. Glasgow City Council, with additional funding from the Scottish Government, has identified that the level of resources is not the only issue; the way in which resources are organised is, too. In particular, it identified the need for a more integrated approach by its teams that deal with landlord registration, its environmental health teams and its planning and building control teams. Through the hub in Govanhill, it is creating a unified team to deal with the whole gamut of issues that arise there. I hope that that model will be repeated throughout the rest of Glasgow and elsewhere. The early indications are that a more unified and comprehensive approach is arising from the integrated approach that we have worked on developing with Glasgow City Council and with the help of Frank McAveety and others. The second point is not a matter for the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer agreed to allow the revenue from fines to be recycled to the local authorities to incentivise them, that would at least send a clear message to them.

I have written to the Government more than once about the matter. I am not relying on the proposal and am not saying that it is a magic bullet, but it would send a clear message to the local authorities. Thirdly, the failure of the justice system to follow through adequately where there has been a clear breach of the law has been raised several times in the debate. That issue has to be tackled, and there are two ways of doing so. First, it can be done through amendments at stage 2 to strengthen the bill’s enforcement aspects. We will be happy to discuss that and are open to practical and sensible suggestions. Secondly, I undertake to write to the Lord Advocate as a matter of urgency after the debate to draw to her attention the number of members throughout the chamber who have expressed concern about the judiciary’s failure to follow through and impose fines that match the scale of breaches and the importance and seriousness of offences, where clear breaches have been proven. That will be important. I will be happy to report back at an appropriate time on the discussions about that with the Lord Advocate. I accept that enforcement is the key issue and that, no matter what legislation we pass, if it is not adequately, properly and enthusiastically enforced we are clearly presented with a problem. If the bill is passed at stage 3, we will have powers to deal with any recommendations that are likely to arise from the landlord registration review, and we will, through secondary legislation—the bill will allow us to do so—introduce additional measures that are recommended by that review. I am also of the view that we need a dedicated housing court or tribunal. Lord Gill made that one of his recommendations in the review of the court system last year. My view is that the tribunal method would be better than a court system because it would be much less expensive and could deal with cases much more effectively. All disputes on matters relating to housing could be channelled through it. That is a debate for after the election, but I hope that whoever wins the election will look seriously at introducing legislation to create a much more robust system along those lines. Another major issue about which concerns have been expressed today and in evidence to the committee is the consequences of implementation of the bill’s provisions on overcrowding. In particular, there is a fear that if a local authority issues an overcrowding order without thinking through the consequences, one of the unintended consequences could be a sudden and, in some cases, significant increase in the number of people who present themselves as homeless under homelessness legislation, and who are therefore entitled to a new house from the council, or to a housing association. We have had discussions on the matter, particularly with Glasgow City Council and COSLA, and neither we nor they envisage that implementation of the legislation will operate in that way. Where there is clearly overcrowding, the intention is to manage it down to the point at which there is no longer overcrowding, and while that is happening no additional people will be allowed to reside at the address. The idea is that the relevant housing support services will work with the landlord registration team and the implementation and enforcement team to manage down the number of people in the property so that they can be properly accommodated—in many cases, I suspect, that will be elsewhere in the private rented sector. That will be the approach so that we do not, as an indirect and unintended consequence, end up creating a whole new category of homeless people. It will be important for local authorities to manage overcrowding in that way because, if it looked as though imposed overcrowding orders were going to make a lot of people homeless, there is a danger that that would become a scam. People might deliberately overcrowd as a fast way to get onto the homelessness register, thereby also abusing the homelessness legislation. In detailed discussions with Glasgow City Council and COSLA, we have been clear that the provision should be managed in the way that I have described.

Absolutely. I gave in my evidence to the committee a commitment that that would be the case, and I am happy to reinforce that commitment today. We will work with our local authority partners to ensure that legislation dovetails and that there are no unintended consequences between the homelessness legislation and the private rented sector legislation. I do not have time to cover all the points that were raised in the debate, but I want to mention one point, and I will do so in a consensual tone. I draw members’ attention to the potential unintended consequences of a number of the housing benefit reforms that the UK Government has announced, some of which will come into effect fairly soon and some of which will not come into effect until 2013. We have already done a great deal of work on the matter and we published detailed information today on the potential adverse impact of the reforms. Other organisations, including the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, whose chief executive Robert Aldridge is a councillor in Edinburgh, have also done a lot of detailed work on the potential consequences of some of the changes. Some of them seriously need to be reconsidered because they could have an extremely disadvantageous impact on the private rented sector and the individuals concerned. I make that point in a consensual, rather than accusatory, tone. On that note, I look forward to a unanimous vote this evening to back the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill at stage 1 and I emphasise that, in moving towards and during stage 2, I will work with all the other parties and seriously take on board any new ideas or suggestions for amendments, particularly with regard to how we might further reinforce enforcement.

In 2010-11, we made available £3.5 million pounds for the violence against women fund, which provides grants for a number of local Women's Aid groups, and provided £700,000 for the rape crisis fund, which supports local Rape Crisis centres, and £4.16 million for the children's services-Women's Aid fund, which supports the network of children's workers across Scotland. I was delighted to announce in the Parliament on Thursday 23 December that we will continue to fund all three of those important local services at the same level for 2011-12.

I congratulate Lanarkshire Rape Crisis Centre on its excellent work and agree with all the sentiments that Christina McKelvie expressed. A very good example of interagency work is the work that Strathclyde Police carries out with all those agencies in the run-up to, during and  immediately after old firm games to reduce violence against women, which has resulted in an average decline of 30 per cent in violence against women in the periods around those games. That is an exemplar of interagency working that includes the police.

The Scottish Government works closely with Argyll and Bute Council to deliver affordable housing in line with the priorities that are identified in the council's local housing strategy and strategic housing investment plan. In 2010-11, our planned expenditure of £20.19 million will allow 87 new homes to be approved.

The best way of dealing with that would be for George Osborne to reverse his decision to cut our capital budget by 25 per cent next year. It is a bit ironic that supporters of the Con-Dem Government in London complain about  cuts that we have to impose as a result of the massive cuts that it is imposing on the Scottish Government's budget. I suggest to the member that the best way forward would be to try to get his Prime Minister and chancellor to change course and reverse the daft policies that they are implementing.

We have a total of 11 local authorities, 20 developers and 50 sites engaged in the first round of the national housing trust. Argyll and Bute Council was one of the councils that decided that it was not a high priority. The reason that it gave was the profile of the people who are waiting for new housing in Argyll and Bute. The council reckoned that they would be more appropriately served by the existing housing development programme in the area rather than the national housing trust programme, the first round of which depended on relevant mothballed sites from the private sector being available. Such sites were not available in Argyll and Bute either. For those practical reasons, Argyll and Bute Council has decided so far not to participate in the NHT initiative.

The quality of the debate has shown the Parliament at its best. Perhaps we should all reflect on whether we could learn a lesson or two about being as constructive as we have all been this morning when we deal with such serious subjects. The contributions by members of all parties have been absolutely first class. The first general lesson that we are all agreed on is the point that Johann Lamont made, which was reiterated by a number of members, that major changes in the culture of Scotland are still required. I hope that by making those changes in the not-too-distant future we will not need to have such debates because there is no domestic violence or violence against women in Scotland. There is no doubt that the culture of the macho man who thinks that he can do anything and get away with it still exists in some parts of Scotland, and we must challenge that in every way and at every turn and every opportunity. As Bill Aitken said, a lot of what Malcolm Chisholm said about the research study findings was a bit depressing, not because it was Malcolm who delivered it, but because the findings were depressing. The most depressing part of it was the attitude of too many young people, male and female, who think that domestic abuse and violence against woman is an acceptable part of our culture. That shows that one of the priority areas that we have to work on is educating our young people that domestic abuse, in all its forms, is totally unacceptable. The second dimension was introduced by Sandra White, and as Bill Aitken said, it is important: the international dimension. We are rightly critical about where we are in Scotland and how much more needs to be done here. However, from a Scottish Women's Aid report of a  conference that was held in New York, we can see that we are doing more, and in many respects are further ahead, than many of our counterparts in the UK and internationally. That is not a reason for complacency, but it is worth mentioning how much progress has been made since Scottish Women's Aid was formed 35 years ago. We need to move at a greater pace and on all fronts, but we should not ignore the progress that has been made to date. The third major lesson from today's debate is the multidimensional nature of violence against women. We heard a thoughtful speech from Trish Godman about prostitution in all its evil forms. We also had a thoughtful speech from Anne McLaughlin about refugees. I say to Margaret Mitchell, in her role as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, that I and my colleagues in justice will take seriously the conclusions and recommendations of the Equal Opportunities Committee's excellent report on migration and trafficking. Much of the issue and the legislation around it is reserved, but we will work with our colleagues in Westminster to address the issues that the report highlights. The Government is also supportive of Rhoda Grant's bill. There was a meeting yesterday with Fergus Ewing. I understand that it was productive, and that the Government is working closely with Rhoda Grant on various aspects of her bill. I hope that she agrees that we are trying to be as helpful as possible. During her opening remarks, Johann Lamont asked a valid question about an update on the issue of no recourse to public funds. She will be familiar with the sojourner project, which is administered through the Home Office. It has been running for some time, and I have been informed that funding for it will continue into the new financial year, which is welcome indeed. To date, 40 women in Scotland have been assisted by the sojourner project pilot. However, I have been dealing with two constituency cases, and I have to say that some of the pilot project is restrictive in nature and it needs to be more flexible to help more women. I know that the project's remit and how it goes forward is under review. I should also say that, if the Treasury was more flexible—I am not making a party political point—

I would never do such a thing. Seriously, if the Treasury was more flexible, the Scottish Government would wish to do more to help with funding for women with no recourse to public funding. We will continue to talk to our colleagues at Westminster about that.  We are working on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill, which, if passed, will also mark another advance on the issue. In my opening speech, I paid tribute to the pioneering work of Strathclyde Police on its GPS project, although Johann Lamont made the point that it is a tragedy that we need such a system in the 21st century. Margaret Mitchell also mentioned the pioneering work that Strathclyde Police has been doing in the run up to, during and immediately after old firm games. It is worth pointing out that, since that work was started almost two years ago, the incidence of domestic abuse around old firm games has been reduced by about 30 per cent. That shows that a proactive approach by the police to prevention and to dealing with the problem can be effective. As I have nearly run out of time—although I have much more to say—let me say finally that not only are we united in this chamber about the unacceptability of violence against women but there is a great deal of agreement on how we should move forward to do more to tackle the problem.

When we decide on our new year resolutions, I hope that we will all resolve to do everything that we can to eradicate from Scotland domestic abuse and violence against women.

This is a genuine question, not a politically motivated one. Does the member think that there is a need for any additional legislation to prevent the scenario that he described of people being released on bail with special conditions and then going home to commit the crime again?

Thank you very much indeed, Presiding Officer. It sounded as if you were saying that I had even more than seven minutes. I am very pleased to open this important debate. The subject is one that has united the Parliament since its earliest days. I think that we all agree without equivocation that violence against women, in any form, is not acceptable. I am sure that we also all agree that the issue needs to remain a priority, never more so than in the current economic environment. I know that there has been much speculation about future funding, so I thought it important to inform the Parliament of our plans ahead of the Christmas break. We are simultaneously informing the relevant organisations of the budget decisions that we have taken for next year. Members will be aware that recently, in answer to an oral question from Malcolm Chisholm, I gave an assurance that the violence against women fund, the children's services Women's Aid fund and the Rape Crisis specific fund would remain a top priority for the Scottish Government. I am therefore pleased to confirm to members that we will continue to fund those three important funds at the same level for 2011-12. The violence against women fund will receive £3.5 million, the children's services fund will receive £4.16 million and the Rape Crisis fund will receive £700,000. In addition, we will continue our support for a range of activity, including provision of funding to Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland, the national helplines, including the men's helpline, the ASSIST—advice, support, safety and information services together—project and the Caledonian programme. Our investment from the equality budget in 2011-12 will be £11.58 million. That is a tangible illustration of the high priority that this Government continues to attach to tackling domestic abuse and other forms of violence against women. As we look forward to Christmas and new year, we know that domestic abuse is likely to increase over this period. Indeed, for many, Christmas will  not be a happy time—there will be young people who are too frightened to enjoy opening presents and women who nurse injuries as they sit down to their Christmas meal. That is why I particularly welcome the action of Strathclyde Police in issuing global positioning system tracking devices to repeat victims in a bid to protect them over the festive period.

I have no specific announcement to make in that regard this morning, but I will inform the member when we take any additional budget decisions early in the new year. The GPS pilot will mean that people at risk can activate the tracking devices by touching a button. Satellite technology will give their exact location, so officers could be deployed to help them. The pilot has been designed in consultation with Scottish Women's Aid. Once it has been evaluated, if it proves successful, we hope to roll it out on a permanent basis not just in Strathclyde, but across the country. It could be an extremely useful protection measure for very vulnerable women. It is not just women who are at risk. Some men are at risk of becoming victims of violence and abuse from their partners. Such abuse is no less unacceptable than violence against women. This Government is the first in Scotland to provide funding for services for male victims. We have been working with Abused Men in Scotland to find out more about the experiences of men and the services that they need and we will continue to do so. Violence against women is one of the most heinous crimes in our society. It perpetuates gender inequality. The imperative of tackling it is recognised internationally, as well as by the United Kingdom Government and successive Scottish Governments. In particular, the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women—CEDAW—provides clear direction for us all. The next UK report on CEDAW is due by the end of May 2011 and Scotland will have a very positive contribution to make to that report. As we come to the end of this year, I want to acknowledge a number of anniversaries. First, it is 35 years since Scottish Women's Aid was established. The change that there has been in Scottish society in relation to domestic abuse since then is due in great part to the work of Scottish Women's Aid and local women's aid  groups across Scotland. I am sure that members across the chamber will want to join me in offering to Scottish Women's Aid my sincere congratulations on reaching 35 years and our best wishes for the future. However, another anniversary reminds us that, although much has been achieved, much remains to be done. It is now 10 years since the publication of the "National Strategy to Address Domestic Abuse in Scotland". Of course, that document has now been superseded by "Safer Lives: Changed Lives: A Shared Approach to Tackling Violence Against Women in Scotland", and the expansion of our work to incorporate all forms of violence against women was a very significant development. Partners such as Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and the Women's Support Project have made substantial contributions towards developments at local and national level. I am happy to acknowledge the impact of their support and say that I value their role as critical friends. Another important milestone was the publication in June 2008 of the national domestic abuse delivery plan for children and young people. That three-year programme takes a holistic approach to the needs of all those involved in a family where there is domestic abuse. The delivery plan will be coming to an end next June and we are now working to consolidate its legacy. Work will continue on some of the 13 priorities and it will be mainstreamed into the work of relevant areas of the Scottish Government. One of the most important elements of the delivery plan is the participation priority. We have a group of young experts, aged between 16 and 23, who have personal experience of domestic abuse and who provide us with advice on implementation of the delivery plan. They are called voice against violence and they regularly meet me, Adam Ingram and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to give their views on progress, particularly in areas where they think that we are not doing enough. The members of the voice against violence group are very much on top of the facts and have clear ideas; they are articulate young people. I am grateful to them for giving up so much of their time to help us in our work. They have made a difference and are a very impressive group of young people. It was the mothers of members of voice against violence who experienced domestic abuse. We have asked Abused Men in Scotland to help us to explore the views of young people whose fathers have experienced abuse. Our work with partners is crucial. I thank not only our key external partners, who do so much to support our work in this area, but members across  the chamber who consistently demonstrate their commitment to working with us to make Scotland the country that we all want it to be—a Scotland free from domestic abuse and violence against women.

I congratulate Anne McLaughlin, as other members have done, on bringing the debate to the chamber. Her introductory speech was one of the best that I have heard in almost 12 years in the Parliament. It is deeply shocking that asylum seekers, who are already so vulnerable and often deeply traumatised by their experiences, can be treated so callously by the UKBA. I share the anger that is felt among members in the chamber—and by the elected representatives in other devolved administrations—at the lack of respect that is being shown to the democratic process not only by the UKBA, but by its political masters, who are at present Damian Green, Theresa May, Nick Clegg and David Cameron. The UKBA could not act in that way without the tacit agreement of those ministers. The disrespect is directed not just at those of us who have had the honour of being elected as MSPs to represent our constituents, but at the people of Scotland and those who have fled their own countries in fear and wish to make Scotland their home.  Like the previous Administration, the Scottish Government takes a different view on the treatment of asylum seekers from that of the previous and current UK Governments. We are clear that asylum seekers who are dispersed to Scotland must be treated fairly and humanely and that while they are in Scotland they must be welcomed and supported. We believe that asylum seekers—who are among the most vulnerable people—should be integrated and welcomed into local life on arrival. The Government is clear that asylum seekers should be treated with respect, and we lead by example. Despite its being a reserved issue, the Scottish Government, as far as our devolved powers allow, enables asylum seekers and refugees to integrate into our communities from day 1, as well as having access to health care and education. That is why we have provided nearly £3 million over three years to organisations working with asylum seekers and refugees, including the Scottish Refugee Council, the Bridges Programme, Maryhill Integration Network, Integrating Toryglen Community and others that enable asylum seekers and refugees to access services, information, advice and support. On the fair question that was asked by Johann Lamont, the Scottish Government is clear that all asylum seekers and their children should be treated with respect and should have access to services. Asylum-seeking and refugee children should be given the same rights as all other children to enable them to integrate fully into Scottish society. We welcome this morning's announcement on moves to end the detention of children of asylum seekers. We are working with other projects, such as the family return project and the guardianship pilot, to try to ensure that the support and services are made available. We have given the same access to higher and further education to the children of asylum seekers as we give to other children in Scotland. We are working with Glasgow City Council to ensure that those children have the same access to nursery education as other children in Scotland. The thoughtless treatment by the UKBA of asylum seekers, who have been welcomed to Glasgow and Scotland by their local communities, is repugnant and shocking. The First Minister wrote to the Home Secretary on 18 November to express his concern about the termination of the accommodation contract with Glasgow and to urge that the decision be reconsidered. He stated that "the way this matter has been handled is extremely disturbing and does not appear to have the best interests and welfare of this very vulnerable community at heart. In  particular there appears to have been a complete lack of sensitivity shown toward those seeking asylum". He went on to say: "the text of the letter issued by UKBA to the asylum seekers has caused a considerable level of distress, not just to those receiving the letters and their families, but also to those who have worked hard to care for and welcome asylum seekers into their communities ... On reading the letter I was astonished by the complete lack of consideration shown to asylum seekers of the impact that this decision will have on their lives, and felt that it was totally devoid of any compassion or understanding". I used to work in Romania on behalf of the World Bank, and I heard stories about Ceauşescu's Romania. The action that has been taken by the UKBA reminded me of some of the Ceauşescu Government's worst practices, such as forcing people from their homes. We know that our concern is shared throughout Scotland. I thank again the young people from Lourdes secondary school for their petition asking for the cancellation of the contract to be revoked. Those young people understand the body blow that such a letter caused their asylum-seeking school friends and the importance of maintaining their friends' educational and social networks in supporting their emotional wellbeing. The needs of asylum seekers are at last being considered, and work is under way to transfer Glasgow City Council's housing stock to Ypeople. If that is agreed—the novation process is complex and yet to be finalised—it will mean that the affected asylum seekers can remain in their present accommodation. That will be a huge relief for all concerned, although it does not excuse the alarm and stress that the initial letter caused. As many members have said, the Scottish Government is also extremely disappointed that, unlike other UK Government departments and agencies, the UKBA has not moved with the evolving spirit of devolution and still will not correspond with MSPs—or indeed Scottish ministers—on individual cases. If we took the same attitude to Westminster MPs who regularly write to us on behalf of their constituents on devolved matters, they would be the first to squeal about it. Their silence on this matter is deafening and unacceptable. Over the past couple of years, my officials have regularly raised this issue with their UKBA counterparts and the permanent secretary and his predecessor have done the same with the UKBA's chief executive. When the First Minister met the Prime Minister on 14 May, the Prime Minister committed to an agenda of "mutual respect". It is not for the Scottish Government to decide how the Parliament should respond to Damian Green's letter to all MSPs—that is a matter for the Presiding Officer on behalf of the Parliament—but  I assure the chamber that this Government is using every available avenue to get the UKBA and its ministers to understand the "mutual respect" agenda and that all those who are elected to serve the people of Scotland in this chamber should receive a substantive reply on individual cases, an approach that other UK Government departments have agreed and demonstrated. We hope that the UKBA and its political masters understand and embrace the evolving nature of devolution and practise the respect agenda instead of simply paying it lip service. The First Minister is liaising on this matter with his counterparts in devolved Administrations elsewhere in the UK who share our concern on the substantive issue of the treatment of asylum seekers and the issue of correspondence and respect. If necessary, we will refer the matter to the joint ministerial committee for dispute resolution. I hope that, in my seven minutes, I have been able to give members as complete a picture as possible of the updated position.

The Scottish Government welcomes some aspects of the coalition Government's proposals for welfare reform, such as the simplification of an overly bureaucratic system under the universal credit and the strong links to localism. However, it is important to appreciate the difference between longer-term plans for welfare reform and the severe cuts to the benefits system that the coalition Government made in the June budget and in the comprehensive spending review in October. I think that it is clear that those cuts will have a significant and hugely detrimental impact on vulnerable groups and individuals across Scotland.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I, as well as other members of the Government, have been in touch with Iain Duncan Smith, Lord Freud, Maria Miller and Chris Grayling at the Department for Work and Pensions to make two points. First, we have not been consulted on any of the benefit changes before they have been made and, secondly, we specifically believe that many of the proposed reforms will be extremely damaging, including for people with mental health  problems. I am happy to take up yet again with those ministers—as we are doing—our very real concerns about the damage that the reforms are doing.

We have been heavily involved with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in making joint representations to the UK Government. The most recent meeting that I attended was a joint meeting between Chris Grayling, Keith Brown, who was then the Minister for Schools and Skills, and Councillor Harry McGuigan, COSLA's spokesperson for wellbeing and related matters. I am happy to consider the points that Johann Lamont raises. We are all very concerned about the impact of the changes to—indeed, the abolition of—the independent living fund from London, and we want to ensure in particular that vulnerable people are not unduly affected, unless that is unavoidable.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring, as far as reasonably practicable, that by November 2016 people are not living in fuel poverty in Scotland. The three principal factors contributing to fuel poverty are fuel prices, incomes and the energy efficiency of housing. We are providing support to tackle fuel poverty through the energy assistance package and the home insulation scheme. However, the major challenges to meeting the target are household incomes and rising fuel prices, over which we have no control—yet.

If I may say so, anyone on the Conservative benches has a cheek to complain about the situation, given the savage cuts being imposed on the Scottish Government by the coalition Government in London. Cuts were also imposed by the previous Labour Administration in London. If we consider the capital aspect of our programmes, a 40 per cent cut is planned over the next four years. That makes it extremely difficult for us to achieve any target, particularly when fuel prices are rising so rapidly. No action has been taken on that, either by the previous Labour Government or the current coalition Government.

I agree with every word of Bob Doris's question. In addition, I remind the chamber of two facts: first, 60 per cent of the fuel price for  consumers is determined by the wholesale price; and, secondly, since September, fuel prices have gone up by something like 38 per cent. That is why we welcome the rather overdue inquiry by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets into retail energy prices. I hope that when that report is published, we will see some action from the coalition Government.

We are open to all suggestions but I point out that the practicalities of bulk buying for such a diverse community make such a move very difficult. Nevertheless, we are having on-going negotiations on such matters. Indeed, I chair the carbon emission reduction target strategy steering group, which includes the energy companies, and with regard to fuel poverty we are looking at every possible way of relieving the pressure on our most vulnerable citizens.

Since its start, the energy assistance package has provided energy savings advice to more then 134,000 households. The categories of people who are able to access help who did not benefit under the central heating programme, such as families on low incomes, have been widened. We are making Scotland's homes more sustainable and are able to reach all parts of Scotland with solutions suited to the local environment. Moreover, at a time when the private sector is facing difficulties, we are creating jobs—for example, the new contract with Scottish Gas will support more than 370 jobs throughout Scotland—and providing opportunities to grow the green economy. By creating home energy Scotland, we have also made it easier for the public to apply for assistance under the package and our other energy efficiency schemes. This one-stop shop offers free energy saving advice and assistance across Scotland and I urge anyone with concerns to phone 0800 512 012.

The decisions to cut budgets were originally made by Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown, and the situation has been exacerbated by the Liberal Democrat and Tory coalition. [ Interruption .]

It is a bit cheeky, to say the least, for anyone on any of the unionist benches to complain about budget cuts. We are doing everything we possibly can to help the most vulnerable members of our community—and we should bear in mind that, under Labour, poverty in the United Kingdom got worse, not better.

We are making substantial progress throughout Scotland, including in the Western Isles, and we have dramatically reduced the turnaround time from what it was under the old central heating programme to under three months under the energy assistance programme. I believe that we will reach a substantial installation figure by the end of the financial year. Of course, demand is rising because of the inclement weather, which is probably the best advert for the line whose number I quoted. In the first week of the inclement weather, the number of calls throughout Scotland totalled more than 7,000, which directly resulted in 1,600 families being helped that week through the home energy hotline.

This debate on the principles of the bill and the issues that are to be addressed at stage 2 has been good and consensual. I congratulate Patricia Ferguson and The Herald and the Evening Times on their campaign. I will begin by addressing an issue that clearly needs to be addressed at stage 2: the dispute resolution mechanism. Costs are a relevant factor, particularly these days—Duncan McNeil mentioned that on behalf of the committee. There are three relevant points about costs. I will give members some facts that will obviously be included in the consideration of the best way forward. First, the cost per private rented housing panel case is running at just over £2,000. Under the ombudsman system that is run by Ombudsman Services: Property, which used to be called the Surveyors Ombudsman Service, the costs are an annual subscription fee per member—which is the factor—of £150 plus VAT and a fee of £335 plus VAT for each case that is investigated. There is a wide difference in costs between the panel approach and the ombudsman approach. The second point about costs relates to who pays. Under the current arrangements, the Scottish Government—that is, the taxpayer—picks up the costs associated with the housing panel. If those arrangements continued, I imagine that there would be similar costs for dispute resolution in relation to factors. At the moment, the cost for the current panel is running at £440,000 per year. Under the ombudsman system, as things are at present, the taxpayer does not pay any of the costs, which are entirely levied on the factor, and  the factor would be liable to pay each time a case is raised against them. It seems to me that, whether we go down the panel route or the ombudsman route, it would be very unfair for the taxpayer to pick up the cost for errant factors. The third point about costs relates to the overall budget. As I said, the current budget for the existing panel is £440,000, and it deals with around 220 cases per year. I would imagine that, particularly in the early years after implementation of the bill, there might well be more than 220 cases per year. If the taxpayer has to pick up the bill, we need to factor in the additional cost that would be involved in doing so. As Duncan McNeil highlighted, in considering the way in which we handle dispute resolution, the cost of the alternatives needs to be examined in detail.

The reality is that it is quasi-judicial. As Mr McLetchie will know, anything that is judicial, and particularly anything that involves lawyers, can be extremely expensive. I agree with Mr McLetchie that it is not always value for money.

Of course, from another lawyer. Are they going to declare an interest, Presiding Officer?

The enforceable order would be the responsibility of other authorities and not necessarily the panel or ombudsman. My point is that there are a great deal of detailed issues to be addressed in part 2. I agree with Mary Mulligan that Robert Brown makes a valid point that we need to consider enforcement, including who does the enforcement, what it costs, and whether that cost is passed on to an errant factor. All those matters need to be addressed in the bill but, in its current form, it does not do so. I am highlighting that those issues need to be rectified. Whichever model members prefer, we are all agreed that those matters need to be addressed and resolved at stages 2 and 3.  Sandra White made relevant points about the composition of the panel and other matters. Another relevant point is the expertise that is required, either for an ombudsman or a panel. A lot of careful consideration is required, given the importance of dispute resolution to the effective functioning of the bill. Another general point relates to switching. Although that matter is not covered by the bill, our plans for the future on switching are important. The issue of switching, whether in relation to traditional property factors or land maintenance companies, has featured heavily in the debate and in the evidence to the committee. The committee said that the ability of consumers to switch their factors or land maintenance companies is a major issue, and I agree with that. An ability to switch providers more easily would help to improve many of the issues that consumers face when dealing with the industry. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 contains provisions that enable managers of property to be dismissed and replaced. However, as members have said, it can be difficult to dismiss and replace property factors, in part because a high level of agreement among the residents is required, as Robert Brown pointed out. There is nothing in the bill on switching by residents, but the committee suggested that the Government should carry out research on that. We recognise the need to do that research and we will do it. We are considering whether it would be useful to issue a consultation paper on potential changes to the 2003 act to lay down clear procedures on the switching of land maintenance companies by residents. The fundamental aim would be to ensure that switching can take place when two thirds of residents wish to dismiss and replace a land maintenance company. We must also consider the more traditional factors and how they can be more easily switched. I stress that the Government agrees entirely with the committee when it describes the matter as a "very complex issue". My colleague Fergus Ewing and I will keep the Local Government and Communities Committee and the Justice Committee informed of the Government's thinking on the matter. Many issues remain to be resolved at stage 2. I again offer the Government's services to assist the member in charge of the bill to ensure that we get it right at stages 2 and 3 so that the bill achieves everything we all wish it to.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced to the Parliament by Patricia Ferguson. The Government recognises the need for action to improve standards in residential property management, or factoring services, in Scotland. Improving the condition of the common parts of housing in the private sector is one of our key priorities, and it is clear that property managers have a crucial role to play in that. The quality of service that some residential property managers provide is a matter of concern to the Parliament and the Government. Duncan McNeil and Patricia Ferguson have already expressed concern about that quality, and I know that previous Administrations over the past seven years felt that that was a problem. Back in 2003, the housing improvement task force recommended that a national voluntary accreditation scheme for property managers should be set up. More recently, in 2009, the Office of Fair Trading published a report that concluded that some form of self-regulation of the  industry should be introduced in order to improve the quality of services that are available to home owners. As members will be aware, the Scottish Government has acted on those recommendations to develop a voluntary accreditation scheme for property managers and land maintenance companies, but we now accept that a statutory approach is appropriate. As I have said to both Patricia Ferguson and the committee, we support the aims and general principles of the bill. Consensus is growing both within the chamber and outside it on a statutory approach to the regulation of the property management and land maintenance industry being required, and we are comfortable with that. Although the Government, like the committee, supports the general principles of the bill, we believe that there are a number of issues that require greater clarity. Duncan McNeil made points about many of those issues on behalf of the committee. We believe that drafting improvements are required to make the bill more effective and to avoid unintended consequences, and that there are provisions in the bill that, if they are unaltered, are likely to be unworkable and run the risk of failing to live up to the consumer's reasonable expectations for effective action. Since the Government submitted its evidence to the committee in June, I have been consistent on the areas in the bill that require further consideration. Since then, I have set out in more detail to the committee and the member in charge of the bill the issues that require further consideration. I have already offered Patricia Ferguson the advice and support that my officials and I can provide to help her to make the bill as effective as possible and to achieve the aims that we all want to see achieved. A wide range of stakeholders have also offered their views and suggestions at stage 1 on how the bill could be improved. I am interested in hearing about the amendments that Patricia Ferguson proposes to lodge in light of all the input that she and the committee has received. Amendments are required to a number of the bill's provisions. The three principal challenges are: issues relating to the definition of "property factor"; the consequences of deregistration for both the factor and the consumer; and the means of dispute resolution, which Patricia Ferguson and Duncan McNeil have referred to. We believe that the definition of "property factor" in the bill fails to cover all the organisations that it should cover. For example, the current definition does not cover cases in which land maintenance companies own the land but home owners are obliged to pay for its upkeep. During stage 1, there seemed to be almost complete consensus that the bill should cover those land maintenance models,  but it appears that they are not covered in the current drafting. If a factor or land maintenance company were removed from the register, unintended consequences would arise from section 9 in particular, if it stays as it is drafted. Some of the points are legal and some are practical. I know that many of the issues were raised in evidence to the committee, and Duncan McNeil mentioned some of them in his speech. On the legal side, if a factor or land maintenance company were deregistered, there might still be obligations in the title deeds for residents to use and pay that factor. Surely the bill should say that any such obligations would cease to have effect. I have been advised that there are difficulties in the interactions between the bill and the terms of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. I have written to Patricia Ferguson on that, and I hope that we can agree amendments at stage 2. On the practical side, I will give one example of an issue that could arise if a factor were deregistered. If the body being deregistered were a land-owning land maintenance company, it is not clear what would happen to the ownership of the land and whether the residents would be entitled to appoint a new factor. The third major issue about which we have concerns relates to dispute resolution. Many of the points have already been covered by Patricia Ferguson and Duncan McNeil. I will try to go into them in more detail in my wind-up speech but, generally speaking, we would prefer the adoption of an ombudsman system, such as the existing property ombudsman, rather than the proposal in the bill. We are supportive of the bill in general terms. If the issues are addressed properly at stage 2, the bill can be improved dramatically and made much more effective. At the same time, we can proceed consensually with the aim of achieving the intended consequences of the provisions, rather than, as has happened too often in the past, unintended consequences that the Parliament subsequently has to correct. I agree with the committee that we should agree to the general principles of the bill, but let us work together to improve it substantially at stage 2.

The bill is part of my strategic approach to enabling the private rented sector to play its full part in building mixed, sustainable communities and offering flexibility and choice in housing options. By strengthening the enforcement of regulation, the bill will assist local authorities to identify and target landlords who cannot meet acceptable standards. Improving the standards and reputation of the sector will enhance its standing as a housing option and increase the confidence of landlords and potential investors, thus creating the conditions that will encourage future growth and the supply of quality homes to rent.

I hope that Mr Harvie noted our announcement with Shelter last week. We have funded a secondment to Shelter to deal specifically with the issue of empty homes and to engage in the activity that he validly points out is needed. The rate of vacancies and empty homes in the private sector is about seven times that in the social sector. Mobilising the use of empty homes in the private sector is much more difficult than doing so in the social sector, but we are determined to try every possible way of making greater use of empty homes in Scotland.

Unlike the plans that were set out by the United Kingdom Government, we are committed to the future of social housing in Scotland, which includes building new social homes with affordable rents. We will continue to have a social rented sector with security of tenure for tenants at its core. This summer we launched a discussion on the future of housing policy. As part of the debate, some stakeholders have pointed out that additional flexibilities would be beneficial—for example, removing the restrictions on social landlords that prevent them from providing properties for mid-market rent. We will publish a paper on the future of housing policy early in the new year.

I can guarantee that we will continue with security of tenure. The two main aspects of the new English housing policy are to increase rents to 80 per cent of the market value and to restrict tenancies to a minimum of two years. I believe that both measures will be very unfair, will hit the most vulnerable members of the community most and will lead to the destabilisation of the housing system and communities south of the border. We have no intention of going down that Conservative-Liberal Democrat route.

I have in my file a copy of the statement that was made by Caroline Flint when she was housing minister in which she first mooted the idea that the Tories and the Liberal Democrats are now implementing. It is interesting that we have no input or ideas from the Labour Party in response to the discussion paper that we published six months ago. Perhaps we should ask it whether it will still adhere to Caroline Flint's Tory policy.

Funding for work to tackle violence against women remains a top priority for the Scottish Government. The equality budget for 2011-12, from which violence against women funding is allocated, has been retained at its 2010-11 level. We have done that because we believe that in the current economic climate, it is crucial to continue to promote equality, protect front-line services and support our families and communities. We will continue to support work to tackle violence against women, but we have not yet made decisions about the precise allocation of the equality budget. We will do so as soon as possible.

As I said, we are still to take decisions on the precise allocation, but we will be maintaining the overall budget in respect of violence against women, which of course incorporates a number of programmes. As I said,  there is no cash cut in the budget for equalities and we intend to maintain our commitment to tackling violence against women and to the programmes, funding for which has been doubled in the past three years or so. We are in constant touch with local authorities and, through the national violence against women group, which I chair, we are discussing how to ensure that throughout Scotland the right levels of support and funding are made available for services.

We do not have a precise date at the moment, but there is usually a Government-sponsored debate on violence against women at about this time of year. If we are not able to hold such a debate before Christmas, we will suggest to the Parliamentary Bureau, which schedules these matters, that we should do so early in the new year. It would be helpful if the debate was held once we know what the precise budgets are for each of the programmes under the banner of violence against women.

First, I was hoping to get congratulations for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, because he  published an equality statement simultaneously with the budget for the first time ever—that was never achieved in the first 11 years of the Parliament. I am sure that everybody will want to join me in welcoming that. Secondly, I absolutely confirm that we will continue with our dedicated funding and that it will not be incorporated into the local government settlement. It remains within the direct control of the Scottish Government. Thirdly, there is no specific reference to the area of work in some of the single outcome agreements, but the agreements do not cover every area of work that is done by local authorities, so that in no way suggests that local authorities are not committed to what we are trying to achieve. Through the national group, we are looking at the picture across Scotland to ensure that the requisite levels of services and support are being provided.

The Scottish Government launched a consultation on a draft social housing allocations practice guide for social landlords in August. The guide does not introduce a new allocations policy, but clearly sets out the legal framework and the flexibility that landlords have when allocating their houses. We expect to issue the final practice guide in early 2011. In February 2002, the Scottish Government also provided a guide on the statutory provisions for housing lists and allocations under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001.

I have two responses to make, the first of which is on the framework that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government set for housing allocations. Under the framework, priority must be given to categories of people such as those who live in below-tolerable-standard housing or overcrowded conditions. Beyond that, it is the responsibility of the local authority to set the allocations policy. The second response is on rural areas, about which Nanette Milne raises a very fair point. If they so wish, local authorities in rural areas are entitled to use local lettings initiatives—effectively, separate allocations policies. I suggest that she takes up the matter with the local authority, which can apply a policy to tackle the situation.

Angela Constance raises a very valid issue. I have two responses to make. First, as I have just outlined to Nanette Milne, local authorities have very wide flexibility in their allocation policies. For example, I think that I am right in saying that West Lothian Council has an allocations policy of 50 per cent to homeless people and 50 per cent to other categories. The second response is on the supply of housing. We recognise that there will be increased demand as a result of the difficulties in the mortgage market. Initiatives such as the national housing trust will provide some housing at mid-market rent. Many of the people who previously would have been in the  first-time-buyer market, but who cannot get a deposit to get a mortgage, may well now end up in the mid-market rental market. I accept that a sector of people will find it difficult to get high up the social housing allocation list. Nevertheless, there are mid-market properties in both the private rented sector and the social sector that may be more appropriate for some of them.

I, too, congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing a debate on an issue on which there is widespread consensus in the Parliament, even if attendance is depleted because of the late finishing of the main business. Across the Parliament, members are determined to do what we can, within the powers and resources that are available to us, to help veterans and the wider veteran community. Before I deal with the idea of a charter, I will take the opportunity to update Angela Constance on the point that she raised, given that I gave an undertaking in a previous members' business debate to pursue the issue of veterans in prison. Discussions are well under way with the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Justice to progress the matching of the Scottish Prison Service prisoner database with the MOD database of known service leavers. A number of detailed  protocols require to be agreed between the SPS and the MOD's Defence Analytical Services and Advice, and the SPS is working towards securing them. However, it has proved impossible simply to transfer the SPS database, as that would breach data protection legislation. Other steps to circumvent that problem are being investigated. In addition, a targeted survey of self-reported veterans in custody is being developed to explore post-service issues and offending behaviour with a view to getting a better understanding of veterans' characteristics and precipitating factors that lead to imprisonment. The survey questionnaire is being designed and content will cover: demographic characteristics; service and post-service history; offending behaviour and criminal history; substance misuse issues; mental health functioning; employment status; accommodation and homelessness; access to services in the SPS; access to services that are provided by specialist veterans associations; and other ancillary topics. In October, the process began of distributing it to those ex-service personnel who can be identified through the prisoner record system. Responses will be anonymised and confidential, and a report will be available in December, so I hope that Angela Constance will accept that we have pursued that issue vigorously. Jeremy Purvis makes a strong case for a veterans charter. As he makes clear in his motion, a charter would ensure that public bodies recognised their duties and responsibilities in providing support to veterans. It would be a tangible commitment to veterans that I have no doubt would be well received. As members will be aware and as Jeremy Purvis mentioned, the UK Government has reached a fairly advanced stage in the development of an armed forces covenant, which will provide a framework for communication with military personnel and veterans, as well as the public and service providers. It is expected to be ready early in the new year. The aim, direction and even the wording of the armed forces covenant will be informed by a report by a task force chaired by a Scot—Professor Hew Strachan of the University of Oxford. That report will be published later this month, and the UK Government will make a formal response to it early next year, in advance of the issuing of the covenant. Naturally, the Scottish Government has been and will continue to be fully involved in the process of bringing the covenant into the public domain. Indeed, we have already had a significant input into the work of the task force. In October, I met Professor Strachan to discuss his work and to give a Scottish Government perspective. The professor also met Dr Kevin Woods, our lead civil servant at  the time and the Scottish Government's armed forces and veterans champion, and policy officials have fed into the consultation process around the report. I can reveal that, in his discussions with us, the professor made it clear that the Scottish Government had made significant progress in tailoring public services for the armed forces community and that Scotland was in a much stronger position than other parts of the UK in that regard. Although the task force report is not yet in the public domain, I can say that it will make a range of recommendations in respect of veterans, many of which will coincide with the motion's proposals on a veterans charter. At this stage, it would not be appropriate for me to go into further detail on a report that has not yet been published, but I can assure members that the call for a charter sits well with what the report is likely to say. My only cautionary note is that it is important to develop work on that front in a way that is predicated on the removal of disadvantage from, not the provision of advantage for the veterans community in accessing public services. That is also the view of Veterans Scotland. I give an undertaking today that we will consider the scope of the veterans charter as part of our implementation of the armed forces covenant as it applies to Scotland, although it will obviously take time to put that in place. We will also consult on it. There will be many issues to consider, but I can tell members that we will wish to draw into that work the views and ideas of all interested parties, and we will do that on a cross-party basis. This is not a party political issue; we want to maximise consensus in all aspects of the covenant and in relation to a possible charter. In the meantime, we cannot sit back and wait for the covenant. We must continue to develop our work in meeting the needs of veterans and influencing policy and the delivery of services by public bodies. As the minister responsible for housing, I am pleased to say that the Housing (Scotland) Bill will receive royal assent by Christmas, and it contains the specific commitment to remove the disadvantage faced by veterans who are trying to get on to waiting lists for council and housing association houses in Scotland. We as a Parliament, not just as a Government, are committed to those who have fought for our country and offered to make the ultimate sacrifice. A great deal of detail has to be worked out on all aspects of the issue, including housing, education and health, and in a range of other services. I can also confirm that we will be able to implement our policy of extending the concessionary bus fare scheme to disabled veterans from 1 April next year. We will continue to work with our colleagues  and the various agencies in London, as well as with all the relevant organisations in Scotland to progress with the work. When the armed forces covenant and the task force report are published, we will act with speed to examine the recommendations and take them on with a view to action, not words.  Meeting closed at 18:37.

The Scottish Government launched the community empowerment action plan jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in March 2009. I am pleased with the progress that has been made during the past year and a half. We have much to build on as we go forward, such as the work that is being done to support the transfer of assets from councils to community groups, programmes to improve how agencies work with communities, and a range of examples, from across the country, of what can be achieved by communities doing things for themselves.

I am delighted that an event celebrating creative approaches to regeneration will be held in Govan, and I am pleased to say that a senior Scottish Government official will be a key speaker at that event. I agree that, in the right circumstances, community organisations owning assets can be a powerful way to develop communities. I was pleased to speak at the first of the Development Trusts Association Scotland seminars, and I understand that the programme is progressing well, with increasing interest being shown by local authorities in the possible benefits of community asset ownership. I look forward to seeing the programme's final report next year.

I will try to answer some of the points that were raised in the debate. I turn first to genuine points of inquiry. Patricia Ferguson raised two points about our policy on housing association mergers. On her first point, I make it absolutely clear that we have no policy of forced merger. We have never forced mergers on housing associations and we will never do so. As far as we are concerned, the way in which housing associations are structured is primarily a matter for them. That is decided by their boards, members and tenants; it is not decided in Edinburgh by Government ministers. Patricia Ferguson's second point was a reasonable point of inquiry on the provisions in relation to the pre-action protocol. I make it clear that I share her view that we should not in any way allow people who are guilty of antisocial behaviour to get away with using any law to escape eviction where eviction is justified. As a result of the manuscript amendments that she lodged yesterday, we double checked the legal position, which is as I outlined at stage 2. If someone is being evicted for rent arrears, the pre-action protocol applies. If they are being evicted for rent arrears and antisocial behaviour, the pre-action protocol applies. However, if they are being evicted only for antisocial behaviour, the pre-action protocol does not apply—it absolutely does not apply.

I need to move on I am afraid. I turn to other points that were raised in the debate. Johann Lamont raised the situation in Glasgow. In fact, when we took over, the Glasgow Housing Association situation could be described only as an unholy mess. The core element of the promise that Labour made to the people of Glasgow was that second-stage transfer would happen, yet the GHA had transferred not one house to local community associations. By next  Christmas, 20,000 houses will have been transferred under second-stage transfer. Mary Mulligan made a much more moderate speech than Johann Lamont did, which would not have been difficult. However, Mary Mulligan got into difficulty when she spoke about the number of council houses. What she said stimulated me to do some research. I have the facts before me. I looked at Labour's record on council house building during the eight years that it was in office and, just for the record and in the interests of transparency, I can tell the chamber that—[ Interruption .]

—in the eight years of the Labour/Liberal coalition, the total number of council houses built in Scotland was 497. We will build seven times that number over the next two years. We have made substantial progress. In her fairly moderate speech, Mary Mulligan said that there was much more to be done in housing and that we should have done much more in the bill. I have been looking at Labour's leaked policy document for its new ideas on housing, but I struggled to find one new idea. Before Labour criticises others, it should look at the state of its own policies. As far as housing is concerned, it is a bare cupboard. I say to Mr McLetchie, who is in opposition to these measures, that the bill that I hope the chamber will pass today is a major step forward. It will keep in the rented sector up to 18,000 houses that would otherwise have been sold under the right to buy. When we took over, we inherited one of the longest-ever waiting lists and a 50-year low in the availability of rented stock. We have been building at a record level, but we have still had to take other measures to ensure that housing stock is available for people who need and deserve it. The bill is a major advance. On top of it, we are already firing ahead with our new ideas, such as the national housing trust initiative, under which more than 1,000 additional houses will be built in Scotland over the next two years. In pressing members to pass the bill, I say that we are proud of our housing record. We have a far better record than any previous Government. The Housing (Scotland) Bill is an historic bill for the people of Scotland, and it should be passed unanimously.

Will the member give way?

At stage 2, I lodged an amendment to avoid forced mergers. The approval of the tenants will now be required before any merger or takeover happens.

I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee, under the chairmanship of Duncan McNeil, for its detailed consideration of the bill, which was informed by evidence from a wide range of stakeholders. I appreciate the time that the committee took to seek the views of tenants and service users. The bill has benefited greatly from the debate in the committee. I thank the clerks to the committee for their help and co-operation throughout the progress of the bill. I give particular thanks to my bill team, who provided excellent advice and back-up support. The bill introduces important measures that will safeguard social housing for future generations and ensure that social housing is used to deliver good-quality housing and services to those generations. It demonstrates our willingness to seek radical solutions to the problems of inadequate supply and poor quality in housing, as does the discussion document that we published earlier this year, "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas", which will be followed by the publication of a policy paper in the new year. The Housing (Scotland) Bill will safeguard and improve the supply of housing through reforms to the right to buy, and it will improve the value of social housing to tenants and taxpayers by modernising the regulation of social housing and introducing a Scottish social housing charter. In the week before we take time to remember those who fought and died for our country, the bill will give to our servicemen and women the same rights to be housed where they have lived and worked that are afforded to everyone else in our communities. I established a stakeholder sounding board to bring together all those with an interest in the bill so that we could benefit from their views on how it could be improved. I am pleased to say that I was able to incorporate some of their ideas in the bill. For example, tenants told me that it was important that they should be involved in the self-assessment of their landlord's performance, and that charging fees for regulation would impact negatively on tenants. They also told me that the bill should strengthen the protection for tenants  who are threatened with legal action for rent arrears. I pay tribute to the work of Shelter for persuading us to introduce the pre-action requirements. The Glasgow and West of Scotland Forum of Housing Associations was concerned that the regulator's modernised powers would not allow it to take account of the unique characteristics of community-based housing associations, so I introduced an amendment providing for the regulator to take account of the size and governance of landlords in carrying out its functions.

Landlords will not have the sole opinion. We have introduced a balanced provision. Finally, registered social landlords and rural housing bodies were concerned about the impact of the 20-year rules for leases and standard securities. Abolishing 20-year leases is a major advance and will allow us to mobilise new sources of capital for investment in social housing. There is no better time to do that than now, given the financial climate in which we are living. The main reforms in the bill relate to the right to buy—they end that right for new tenants and for new houses. Some committee members and stakeholders argued that the reforms could go further. Although I respect their views, the Government gave a manifesto commitment not to affect existing tenants' rights, and our reforms were shaped to keep that promise. However, over a 10-year period, the reforms may save between 10,000 and 18,000 houses from being sold off under the right to buy. Our reforms provide reassurance to those local authorities that are building council houses for the first time in many years. The Government has provided £80 million to kick-start that programme of new-build council housing, which will deliver nearly 3,500 much-needed new homes. Councils have been willing to start building again because they know that those houses will continue to be available to future generations as affordable houses to rent. It is critical that we continue to find ways of increasing the supply of housing and encouraging new and different types of investment to deliver that. One in four people in Scotland live in social housing. We need to ensure that they live in a decent standard of housing and receive good-quality services. We also need to ensure that  those who find themselves homeless or threatened with homelessness are treated fairly, and that adequate consideration is given to the needs of people on waiting lists. The modernised framework for regulation establishes the independent Scottish housing regulator, with the statutory objective of safeguarding and promoting the interests of current and future tenants, as well as homeless persons and others who use the services of local authority landlords, registered social landlords and co-operatives. I was happy to improve those provisions further on the committee's suggestion. The establishment of a Scottish social housing charter is an important part of the bill. We will take that forward in consultation with the Parliament and key stakeholders. It is a human right to have a decent roof over one's head. Too many people in Scotland today do not yet have access to the accessible, warm, affordable, comfortable home to which they are entitled. The moral purpose of the bill is to take the additional steps that are needed to ensure that we increase access to social housing and rented accommodation. We will do so by making supply much more stable than it is at present and giving people on the waiting list greater access and a fairer chance of getting a decent home in the future. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

When the whole Parliament unites in consensus, up comes Johann Lamont to destroy it in a oner. It is obvious from her comments—anyone could guess—that she was not at the  committee meeting at which the stage 2 amendment 180 was discussed. Her view is at odds with reality. Had she been interested enough in the subject, she could have been at that meeting. I will answer Mary Mulligan's points. The regulations will give strong and clear guidance on what needs to be done and when, in order to ensure the highest-quality housing support. We will consult Parliament, the committee and key external stakeholders on the regulations. Subject to that consultation, the regulations will be commenced at the earliest possible opportunity. We are all on the same page. The only debate was about whether the provisions should be in the bill and, if so, what the bill should say. The need for a good-quality housing support service that meets a minimum standard for homeless people throughout Scotland has never been disputed. If amendment 55 is agreed to, we will move forward in the spirit in which we have reached agreement with Shelter and in the spirit of the unanimity that I hope has been shown in the chamber. We will move forward as quickly as possible, because we want to ensure that homeless people have the rights and the services to which they are properly entitled.  Amendment 55 agreed to.  Amendment 14 not moved.

I understand where Margo MacDonald is coming from, but she has to take the issue in the context of the whole of section 142C, which has been drafted to ensure a proper balance between the rights and responsibilities of landlords and those of tenants. As I said, my main concern about amendments 11 to 13 is about the possibility of unintended consequences, which  could damage the interests of the tenant as much as they could damage the interests of the landlord. We could end up with far more disputes, and far more disputes going to court, which would not be in anybody's interest. I therefore invite Margo MacDonald not to move her amendments.

The Government retains a firm commitment to the provision of good-quality housing support for homeless households. That is a key component in preventing homelessness and in meeting the target of ensuring that all unintentionally homeless households have the right to settled accommodation by 2012. I gave my qualified support to Mary Mulligan's amendment at stage 2, but I was mindful that both Mary Mulligan and Jim Tolson spoke of the importance of a cost-benefit analysis of the impact of the amendment on local authorities. Jim Tolson, in particular, raised concerns about the cost implications for local authorities. That is why I indicated my support for amendments 14 and 15 after they had been lodged. However, following consultation of key stakeholders, in particular Shelter, I have brought forward an alternative, which is amendment 55. It will give ministers the power to make regulations about the assessment of housing support needs and the provision of housing support services. Shelter has urged all members to unite behind amendment 55 on a consensual basis. Amendment 55 also requires ministers to consult bodies that represent local authorities, bodies that represent the interests of homeless persons and other appropriate persons. The regulations will be laid before Parliament for scrutiny and approval. I believe that amendment 55 offers a constructive way to ensure that homeless people are well supported, while acknowledging concerns about the possible cost implications for local authorities and the support needs of other vulnerable groups. The amendment provides the opportunity for stakeholders to work together in a flexible and collaborative way. I believe that it is prudent to take time to ensure that we develop regulations that achieve the desired outcome, which is high-quality housing support services for homeless people who need them. It is important to note that not all homeless households will need housing support, because for some the answer to homelessness is the provision of settled accommodation. I am firmly of the view  that partnership working is the way to deliver on the 2012 target and the prevention of homelessness. We will develop the regulations with stakeholders in that spirit of partnership. Amendment 55 represents a constructive way to make progress on an important issue. I look forward to hearing what Jim Tolson and others have to say on the balance that we are aiming to strike with amendment 55, and I hope that the whole Parliament can support it. I ask Jim Tolson not to move amendments 14 and 15 and I urge Parliament to support amendment 55. I move amendment 55.

The Scottish Court Service requested a slight technical amendment to section 142C to make it more precise on the stage at which a social landlord should confirm to the court that it has complied with the pre-action requirements for eviction. The amendment clarifies that eviction proceedings may not be raised until the landlord has confirmed to the court in such form as Scottish ministers may prescribe by regulations that pre-action requirements have been met. At stage 2, the committee agreed to a Government amendment to introduce pre-action requirements.

I turn to amendments 11 to 13. I sympathise with what Margo MacDonald is trying to achieve. She is trying to provide maximum protection for tenants who face eviction for rent arrears, but I fear that her amendments could, in practice, make matters worse and not better for tenants. The Government has consulted the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and the Scottish Court Service on the possibility of introducing provisions along the lines of Margo MacDonald's amendments. They all raised concerns that such provisions would result in more cases going to court. The amendments seek to give tenants enormous scope to dispute with their landlord whether pre-action requirements have been met correctly. That would be a diversion from the purpose of the pre-action requirements, which require meaningful dialogue before an action is ever raised. It would be a bad outcome for tenants and would lead to a negative outcome in terms of the level of rent arrears. It would also be a bad outcome for landlords who would be denied reasonable discretion and would face additional legal costs at a time when we want them to direct all their scarce resources to providing more and better housing for tenants. The proposed provision would also be bad for the courts. It would add pressure to already-busy court programmes.  Those are well founded and significant concerns. We must heed them. The provisions in the bill on pre-action requirements were carefully drafted to provide a subjective test for landlords when considering tenants' proposals on steps being taken to reduce rent arrears. Their purpose is to avoid delaying tactics by tenants, which would make matters worse for them, and to prevent potentially large numbers of disputes about compliance from impacting on the courts. I ask members to consider the significant tenant protections that are already in the bill. For instance, subsection (5) of proposed new section 14A of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 will require a landlord to make reasonable efforts to agree a plan for reduction of rent arrears before an action is raised. A test of reasonableness in rent arrears cases is already applied in each case by sheriffs when they consider whether eviction action is appropriate. Before the existing provisions for pre-action requirements commence, we will work closely with all key stakeholders to develop the secondary legislation and guidance. That will specify further and, where appropriate, the particular steps to be taken, or not to be taken, by a landlord in complying with any requirement, and will therefore further strengthen protection for tenants. In view of that and the risks for tenants, landlords and the courts that Margo MacDonald's amendments 11, 12 and 13 would cause, I invite her not to move the amendments, and ask members to support amendment 44. I move amendment 44.

There might well be different circumstances in different areas. That is why we are retaining the flexibility of the current legislation rather than introducing a blanket measure of the type that Jim Tolson proposes. Jim Tolson lodged a similar amendment at stage 2. As he said, the only difference was that the period of suspension was to be 40 years. That amendment was rejected by the committee. Both parts of amendment 10 would interfere with tenants' existing rights, which the Government has said consistently it will not do. I therefore ask Jim Tolson to withdraw amendment 10.

Amendments 38 to 43 are all Government amendments. Amendments 38 to 42 seek to remove from the bill sections 132 to 136, which amend the landlord registration regime in part 8 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Equivalent provisions are contained in part 1 of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced on 4 October. The equivalent sections in that bill have been enhanced and extended to take account of concerns that MSPs and stakeholders have expressed. Amendment 43 seeks to remove from the bill section 141, which amends the houses in multiple occupation licensing regime in part 5 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006. That section is replicated in section 13 of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. As I explained at stage 2, I believe that all the private rented sector issues that the bill deals with would best be considered as part of the integrated package that we have presented in the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill, as the committee recommended. I made it clear to the committee that I intended to seek to remove the private rented sector provisions from the bill at stage 3, and that is what amendments 39 to 43 seek to do. That approach accords with the view that the committee expressed in its stage 1 report on the bill, in which it said that it "would have preferred to consider changes to the existing legislation in their totality". I responded to that by bringing forward an integrated package in the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. Taken together, the measures in that bill provide a substantial and more effective package of improvements to the legislation on the private rented sector, including further improvements to the landlord registration and HMO licensing systems. It also contains provisions to give local authorities powers to tackle overcrowding in vulnerable communities and changes to the tenancy regime. I believe that those proposals are best considered as a unified approach. It is right to give the whole package  proper parliamentary scrutiny and to provide time for stage 1 consideration. Amendments 2 and 16 relate to the coming into force of section 141 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which I have explained should be removed from the bill and considered as part of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. Consequently, I do not believe that the amendments in the name of Pauline McNeill are necessary. I urge the Parliament to resist amendments 2 and 16 and ask Pauline McNeill not to move them. I ask Parliament to support amendments 38 to 43. I move amendment 38.

I will deal first with Sarah Boyack's specific question on the order in relation to party flats. We are bringing that forward, and I anticipate that it will be implemented early in 2011. We are committed to progressing that legislation, as I have agreed with Sarah Boyack in the past. I have had numerous discussions with Pauline McNeill and others, such as Ted Brocklebank, on the legislation on HMOs. Like those members, I am anxious to ensure that we get it right, and that the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill is passed before the end of the current parliamentary session in March 2011. The bill has already reached stage 1 in committee, which I anticipate will be completed  some time in January, with a view to holding stage 2 proceedings in February and stage 3 in March. I take Pauline McNeill's point about the timetable for the implementation of part 5 of the 2006 act. The order in that regard has already been approved by Parliament and the implementation date for that part of the legislation has been approved as August 2011. We will shortly consult on the implementation of the order that has been agreed by the Parliament. I hope that I have reassured all members who have spoken on these amendments. In response to Mary Mulligan's comments, I point out that I had an informal meeting with the committee, which gave me the clear message that it wanted the measures to be consolidated in one bill. Only Labour members appeared to dissent from that view. I certainly interpreted from the correspondence that I received from the committee that it required such an approach. However, that is now history; it is water under the bridge. The important thing is that we consolidate the private sector measures in the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill, and complete the process for this bill on the public sector. As Robert Brown said, there is a tradition of dealing with such matters in that way, and it is the sensible way to proceed.

Amendments 7, 8 and 9, in Mr McLetchie's name, would require the Government annually to collect and publish information on the right to buy. Much of the information that Mr McLetchie is requesting is already published. For example, information is published on the number of houses sold under right to buy by local authorities, the number of houses sold under right to buy by RSLs and the outstanding housing debt. However, like Mary Mulligan, I accept Mr McLetchie's argument about placing publication on a statutory footing and providing the additional information that is not currently published. I do so for two reasons. First, the Government has always championed freedom of information and transparency, which the proposed approach will advance in the RSL sector. Secondly, the publication of the information will perhaps convince even some backbenchers in Mr McLetchie's party that we have got it right and he has got it wrong on the right to buy. Information is power and I hope that in this case it will be persuasive and make him realise the error of his ways.

Jim Tolson was one of the committee members who thought that the Government could go further in its reforms of the right to buy. I respect his position, and I believe that he understands mine. The intention behind the first part of amendment 10 is to exempt all charitable RSLs from the right to buy, including those registered after 18 July 2001, which of course includes the six housing stock transfer housing associations. That would interfere with tenants' existing right-to-buy entitlements because all tenants of charitable RSLs who have an existing right to buy would lose that right. Although we appreciate Jim Tolson's position, the Government cannot support the proposal. There has been no consultation with the RSLs and tenants who would be affected by the amendment. They may also share my concerns about how the amendment is drafted, which could produce the opposite effect to that intended by Jim Tolson. Amending the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 in a way that refers to current registration under what is now repealed legislation would introduce the significant risk that the amendment could be  interpreted as meaning that no charitable RSLs are exempt from the right to buy. Whether all or no charitable RSLs are made exempt, I do not believe that it would be right to make such a significant change by amendment at this late stage in proceedings. The second part of amendment 10 would suspend the right to buy for non-charitable RSLs for 20 years instead of the current 10-year period, which runs from 2002 to 2012. Again, that would interfere with the existing right-to-buy entitlements of tenants, so the Government cannot support it. We have a manifesto commitment not to interfere with the existing rights of tenants. There is already provision in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to extend the 10-year suspension of right to buy if RSLs apply for it. Applications will be assessed against criteria developed in consultation with stakeholders and will be in place 12 months before the current suspension expires. Applications for subsequent 10-year extensions can also be granted. That can all be done without affecting existing tenants' rights. We should also bear it in mind that not all RSLs may require or desire a blanket exemption. Our solution gives them flexibility to apply to opt in or opt out of the right to buy, depending on local circumstances. The committee's stage 1 report supported our position, recognising the need for flexibility so that landlords can respond to local circumstances.

At stage 2, Mr McLetchie complained that the rest of us were obsessed with the issue of ownership. Clearly, it is a disease that he has caught. The big difference between right to buy and programmes such as shared equity is that with shared equity, people pay their way and the assets of the housing sector are not stripped through a huge discount. Tenants who are left have to pick up the bill for the outstanding debt, both capital repayment and interest. At the moment, 3,300 new council houses are being built in Scotland. If Mr McLetchie's amendments are agreed to, that would not happen. I remind Mr McLetchie that in 1980, when the right to buy was introduced by Mrs Thatcher, more than 5,000 new council houses were built in Scotland. The number declined year upon year until 1997—the last year of the previous Conservative Government—when councils built 177 new houses in Scotland. If that is not living proof that the right to buy destroyed the council house building programme in Scotland, I do not know what is. The Government has been balanced and moderate in its approach in the bill. Mr McLetchie has achieved something unique in the Parliament: thanks to him, I am going to agree with Mary Mulligan, in saying that we have the balance about right. By the end of stage 2, all members of the Local Government and Communities Committee except Mr McLetchie had agreed that the bill gets the balance right. I remind members of the Government's intention, which is to safeguard the existing stock of social housing. Up to 18,000 houses will be kept in the social rented sector that otherwise would be sold under the right to buy, while we continue to respect existing entitlements and encourage new social housing, particularly new council housing. The provisions command the support of members of all parties, apart from the Conservatives, and of those who work in the sector. The Government's response to Mr McLetchie's amendments reflects the broad consensus in Parliament and beyond on the issue.  On the detail of the amendments, as Mary Mulligan said, the provisions in amendment 4 were considered and rejected at stage 2. Removing the limitation on the right to buy for new tenants would strike out one of the most significant measures that the bill introduces to reduce right-to-buy sales. It is completely at odds with the action needed now and with the bill's approach to the right to buy. Amendment 6 would remove the provision to restrict the right to buy on new supply social housing. The same amendment was debated and rejected by the committee at stage 2. It would strike out the other significant measure that the bill introduces to limit the right to buy—a measure that, again, is supported by the majority of committee members and by all the stakeholders. Therefore, the Government's response to amendments 4 and 6 reflects the broad consensus among all, with the exception of the Scottish Conservatives. I invite Mr McLetchie to withdraw amendment 4 and not to move amendment 6, and by doing so to bring himself in line with the realities of life in the 21st century rather than in the first part of the 20th century.

Just for clarification, I am sure that it was a slip of the tongue, but Mr McLetchie is wrong to say that the bill applies to new tenancies—it applies to new tenants, and there is a big difference.

Amendment 35 makes it clear that a disposal of land by a registered social landlord would be void if it did not seek the regulator's consent before the disposal is made. Section 107 provides that a disposal of land by an RSL without the regulator's consent, where that consent is required, is void. That means that such a disposal would be treated for all legal purposes as invalid and the RSL would not be able to seek consent retrospectively. Amendment 35 is intended to put that position beyond doubt, and I invite Parliament to support it. I move amendment 35.  Amendment 35 agreed to.

Amendments 36 and 37 extend exemptions to the 20-year lease and standard security rules to rural housing bodies. I pay tribute to my colleague Alasdair Morgan for raising the issue at stage 2 and to other members, such as Fergus Ewing, who has worked tirelessly on behalf of, in his case, rural housing bodies in the Highlands, to bring back the issue at stage 3. The Government is supportive of widening the options for affordable housing in rural and in urban areas. I am very sympathetic to the difficulties that are faced by many rural communities and organisations, such as Dumfries and Galloway Small Communities Housing Trust—I mention that just in case amendment 35 also goes to the  casting vote, Presiding Officer—as they try to address the shortage of affordable housing in their areas. The Government agrees with the view that rural housing bodies should be included in the exemptions from the 20-year rules, which have already been accepted for social landlords. Amendment 36 allows rural housing bodies to lease property from other organisations for 20 years or more for residential purposes. Amendment 37 gives rural housing bodies the option to give up their right to redeem long-term debt early if they wish to do so. Together, the amendments should enable rural housing bodies and rural landlords to work together to provide much-needed affordable housing in our rural areas. I ask Parliament to support amendments 36 and 37. I move amendment 36.

Mr McLetchie should read the rest of the bill, because one of the amendments that I lodged at stage 2 provided that tenants had to approve by ballot any change in the ownership of the housing association. That means that any transfer of ownership or any takeover has to be approved by the tenants. So, although Mr McLetchie gave an ingenious and very funny speech, the primary objective of amendments 36 and 37 is to allow us—as Glasgow City Council wishes to do immediately that the bill becomes law—to raise private capital for the funding of social housing. At a time when the coalition Government is slashing investment in housing south of the border, we are trying to maintain that level of investment by innovative financial engineering to ensure that the housing remains in social ownership as it is at present. Glasgow is a very good example of what amendments 36 and 37 will do. They will allow us to get the investment needed to build many more houses—in Glasgow's case, particularly in the transformational areas—to try to overcome the impact of the cuts that the coalition Government is imposing from London.  Amendment 36 agreed to.

After last Thursday, Presiding Officer, I have checked that my mobile phone is indeed off. I am puzzled that Patricia Ferguson has lodged these amendments. When provisions to allow the regulator to set financial management and governance targets were discussed at stage 2, they met no resistance from the committee. I remind members of the principle here: the role of the regulator is to safeguard and promote the interests of tenants as well as homeless persons and others who receive services from social landlords. For RSLs, strong financial management and governance are critical not only to the delivery  of good services for tenants, but to their viability. Private lenders set great store by the regulator's ability to step in to take action as quickly as possible where concerns about financial management and governance arise. These powers allow the regulator to take early action—

I would like to make some progress before I let the member in. As I said at stage 2, the power to set improvement targets for financial management and governance is similar to the section 34 power allowing the regulator to set performance improvement targets for housing activities. These powers are some of the lower-level powers that are available to the regulator to protect tenants. At stage 2, the committee discussed and agreed the provisions; Patricia Ferguson's amendments seek to remove them and, as a result, to remove some of the safeguards for tenants. I am not sure that the amendments will be welcomed by all RSLs, given that they seek to replace assessment and regulation based on specific targets set by the regulator with regulation based on broader matters such as those that are set out in the section 36 code of conduct or other aspects of financial management and governance that the regulator considers relevant. That could undermine the regulator's objective of being transparent in carrying out its functions.

In the consultation prior to stage 1, and indeed during stage 1, we had representations on the need for this approach and, having listened to the committee and various other representations, we decided to introduce the provisions. The financial management and governance targets in the bill should be seen in the context of the protections and balances on the regulator's powers that are provided for elsewhere in the bill. They ensure that there are clear parameters within which the regulator must work. For example, there is the section 3(2) requirement for the regulator to be "proportionate, accountable and transparent" and the section 51 requirement for the regulator to prepare and consult on a code of practice that sets out whether and how it will intervene. Because the bill gives greater definition and clarity to everybody, I invite Patricia Ferguson not to press her amendments.

These amendments deal with the performance of the Scottish Housing Regulator's functions, and respond to concerns that members of the Local Government and Communities Committee raised during stage 2. Amendment 17 requires the regulator to prepare, consult on and publish a statement that explains how it will discharge its functions in respect of its section 2 objective, and how it will do so in a proportionate, targeted and transparent way. The regulator's objective under section 2 is to safeguard and promote the interests of those who are or may become homeless, tenants or recipients of housing services that are provided by social landlords. Section 3(2) requires the regulator to perform its functions in a proportionate, targeted, accountable and transparent way, which will in effect provide the framework for the exercise of all its functions. Amendment 17 responds to concerns that committee members raised about how the regulator would achieve its objective in respect of homeless people and those on waiting lists, and how it would ensure that its regulation of different types of landlord, particularly smaller landlords, would be proportionate. The additional duty under amendment 17 requires the regulator to consult on and issue a broad statement of its policy and principles—in effect, a statement of intent. That would set the context for its more detailed codes of practice and statements on specific functions, such as the code of practice on inquiries. I would expect the statement to reflect the differences in approach that the regulator will need to take in protecting and promoting the interests of different groups,  and to explain how the regulator will take account of the different circumstances and resources of social landlords and avoid imposing unnecessary burdens or bureaucracy. Amendment 26 removes the regulator's power to charge a fee to bodies that apply for inclusion in the register of social landlords. It is a technical amendment to ensure consistency with the amendment that was made at stage 2, which removed the power for the regulator to charge fees in respect of its functions. Amendment 27 and the remaining amendments in the group add prospective tenants, people who are homeless and those who receive housing services from a social landlord to the list of those to whom the ministers and the regulator must have regard, or whom they must consult on their different functions under the bill. Under its section 2 objective, the regulator must safeguard and promote the interests of those groups along with the interests of tenants and homeless persons. The amendments ensure that the views of interested parties on relevant matters are considered, and that the consultation requirements throughout the bill are consistent. I invite Parliament to support amendment 17 and the other amendments in the group. I move amendment 17.  Amendment 17 agreed to.

The amendments relate to the Scottish Housing Regulator's constitution. Amendment 18 removes the provision for the chief executive to be a member of the board, and the concept of ordinary members appointed by ministers as distinct from the chief executive, as that is no longer relevant. The other amendments in the group are consequential. The chief executive will be a member of the regulator's staff, and as the senior official they will be its accountable officer. The amendments are intended to avoid any potential for or perception of conflict of interest. They are based on the principle that the accountable officer's duty to ensure the regularity and propriety of expenditure by the board is not compromised by their being a member of the board. Accordingly, I invite the Parliament to support amendment 18 and the related amendments. I move amendment 18.  Amendment 18 agreed to.   Amendment 19 moved—[Alex Neil]—and agreed to.

Does the member agree that the fossil fuel levy would be far more valuable if the same amount of money did not have to be deducted from another budget if we take it up?

A wide range of actions is being undertaken by the Scottish Government and partners to reduce poverty in Scotland. Our approach is set out in the three interlinked policy frameworks "Achieving Our Potential", "The Early Years Framework", and "Equally Well", which we have published jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We are taking steps to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland through measures such as our energy assistance programme, the provision of free school meals and the abolition of prescription charges. We also invest in income maximisation projects and the promotion of supported employment for people with multiple and complex needs. Those actions link with other relevant policy frameworks that promote the employability, education and life chances of adults and young people, such as workforce plus, more choices more chances and curriculum for excellence. We ensured that Scotland was covered by the United Kingdom Child Poverty Act 2010 and we are developing a child poverty strategy in line with that act that will be published in spring 2011.

I entirely agree with Joe FitzPatrick's analysis. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report pointed out that the main contributing factors to poverty and deprivation in Scotland are caused by policies for which we have no responsibility. One would expect poverty in Scotland and in the rest of the United Kingdom to be much lower at the end of 13 years of a Labour Government at Westminster than it was at the beginning of that time. However, as we all know, Labour presided over a set of Tory policies that made poverty and inequality worse in this country and in the rest of the UK.

Local authorities are subject to the public sector equality duties. They must have due regard to the need to promote race, disability and gender equality across all their functions.

I am aware of the Fawcett Society's challenge to the emergency budget south of the border. There is no doubt at all that local authorities, like every other public body, must adhere to the law, which states that we must have due regard to our specific and general equality duties. The new Equality Act 2010 will start to come into force next month, and the full new public sector duty will come into force no earlier than April 2011.

I am very much aware of the toenail issue in Lanarkshire, as I am dealing with several constituents who have raised the matter. Like all health boards and other public bodies, NHS Lanarkshire must abide by the equalities legislation. Whether to undertake an equality impact assessment of any decision is a matter for the health board.

We have real concerns about the impact that the proposals might have and we are taking steps to ensure that the views of the people of Scotland are heard in Whitehall. It is essential that any changes do not affect the most vulnerable households, which simply cannot afford a reduction in their housing benefit. Officials are in regular contact with their counterparts in the Department for Work and Pensions. I have stressed to UK ministers, both in correspondence and in person, the importance of genuine and extensive consultation on their welfare reform proposals.

No, we certainly do not. We see it as an absolutely essential source of income for many tenants in the private rented sector, which makes up 8 per cent of the total housing stock in Scotland. Many of the people who live in the private rented sector are among the most vulnerable members of our community who have low levels of income. It is absolutely essential that those people continue to get access to a reasonable level of housing benefit that covers their housing costs while they rely on welfare benefits until they can get a job, if they are fit and able to work. Housing benefit is not a subsidy to private landlords; it is clearly a way of supporting some of our more vulnerable people who happen to be living in the private rented sector.

Sandra White has expressed some of my concerns, and I agree with her latter point. This week, apparently, the DWP sent out a letter to 200,000 people across the UK who rely on mortgage interest payment support from the DWP. They were informed that, within two weeks, they will suffer up to a 40 per cent reduction in those mortgage interest payments. It is bad enough that they will suffer such a reduction, but to get only two weeks' notice of it is totally inhumane and unacceptable.

I agree with the councillor.

The Scottish Government includes community benefit clauses at the heart of a number of its policies. They feature in our economic recovery plan and in policies ranging from the energy assistance package to their use across public sector procurement, including social housing developments.

We are conscious of the need to ensure maximum opportunities for everyone, irrespective of their age group. I draw the member's attention to what will happen with the energy assistance package in the coming months, when we will ensure that people of all ages benefit from new training, apprenticeship and accreditation schemes for the installation of central heating systems and related skills. I also draw the chamber's attention to what is happening through the Cordale Housing Association, in Dunbartonshire. Not only has it developed a community benefit system relating to apprenticeships, it has developed a comprehensive local supply network and is making maximum use of the benefits of the substantial investment that it is making in social housing in that area, to the benefit of not only local businesses, but local people.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I want to cover three specific points that members made in their contributions. In response to Linda Fabiani's worthwhile and interesting contribution, I confirm that we are committed to looking at how we can further develop the co-operative principle in the housing sector. I am happy to take forward any new ideas that we think are achievable.

I absolutely agree with Linda Fabiani. We will do what we can to rectify as much as we can in the future. Housing support is a valid concern of everyone in the chamber and we are addressing it through the joint working party that we have with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and, in relation to homelessness, with the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. It is not just about homelessness, however; people who are not facing homelessness sometimes require housing support, too. There is no doubt that the quality and range of services available can be variable. We need to look at that in depth for the future. I also want to clarify that we have no ideological objection to stock transfer per se. What Mr McLetchie fails to understand is that in most cases in which the proposal was put to the people in a ballot—not least in Edinburgh—they rejected it. I should point out that, having picked up the mess left by our predecessors at Glasgow Housing  Association, which had not approved any second-stage transfers, we have in the pipeline and are making substantial progress with 20,000 second-stage transfers that will be achieved a year at Christmas. That was never achieved under the previous Administration, so our record on transfers is a very good one. I agree with Ross Finnie on the wider issues of the sustainable model. We have addressed that in the document. Before the recession and the credit crunch hit, we had the ridiculous position whereby organisations such as Northern Rock were offering people mortgages that were equivalent to 125 per cent of the value of the house and up to seven times the joint income of the applicants. That bubble was always going to burst and it burst spectacularly. The bubble was, of course, built up on Gordon Brown's watch. As Chancellor of the Exchequer, he deregulated many of these issues, to much ill effect on the whole economy. I want to make it absolutely clear that housing policy is not only about the rented sector—extremely important though it is—but the owner-occupied sector. I want to see growth in that sector and in the whole private rented sector—indeed, I see big growth potential in the shared equity and shared ownership sector of the market. We also need councils and RSLs to build houses and maintain them to a good standard. Ross Finnie is absolutely right in what he said in that regard. There should be no competition between RSLs and councils; they should be complementary in what they do. In terms of the finance regime, we are working towards that. There is a great deal of myth around the HAG. We have heard about the terrible impact that our changes to the HAG will have on construction. The reality is that we have the highest level of housing association house building for 10 years. The figure is the highest since the Parliament was set up. The argument that our changes to the HAG have been detrimental to the building programme is not substantiated by the facts. The position is similar for council housing. At present, 3,500 council houses will be built and are in the process of being built in Scotland. The number of council house starts that we have initiated over the past three years is equivalent to that of the previous 11 years. In three years, we have done what Labour took 11 years to do.

I will in a minute. The figure for completions shows that we are building houses faster than was the case in the past. If the figure on starts took us three years, that for completions has taken us only two years. In only two years, we have achieved what Labour took 11 years to do.  I listened in particular to speeches from the Labour benches. Labour members told the Government to spend more on the HAG and more on building more houses—it was all more money on this and more money on that—but we know that, by the end of the next four-year period of the comprehensive spending review, the annual reduction in UK public expenditure will be £80 billion a year.

I will come to the member. We know that £50 billion of the £80 billion reduction was imposed by the Labour Government and that the other £30 billion is being imposed by the coalition between the Tories and the Liberal party. Equally important, Alistair Darling cut to ribbons the capital budget. He planned to make a 60 per cent reduction in the capital budget. To be fair to the Tories and Danny Alexander, they have decided not to make any further cuts in that budget because it was cut so deeply by Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown.

It is therefore sheer hypocrisy for Labour members to argue for more money on this, that and the next thing. They should not criticise us when they have made the bulk of the cuts. I will take Margo MacDonald.

I was told that I had eight and a half minutes, Presiding Officer.

Okay. I am sorry that I cannot take the interventions. What about the stuff that Labour announced on repossessions, tenancy deposits and party flats? The Labour Party had 13 years to sort all that; we are doing it all. Labour members say that they campaigned on all that. If they did, they were not very successful in persuading their leadership. In 13 years, the Labour leadership did nothing about any of that. I am the very one who is in favour of action not words. We have taken action: we are building council houses when Labour did not. We have a new supply shared equity programme, which Labour did not. Indeed, we are working jointly with Homes for Scotland and developers on that new supply shared equity programme. We have the  national housing trust—a concept that is totally alien to Labour—that can build up to 1,700 new houses. We will take no lessons from the Labour party as far as housing is concerned. Labour's track record on housing is a disgrace; ours is a record to be proud of.

Can the member confirm the rumours that the Treasury under George Osborne will no longer facilitate that kind of stock transfer?

Is the member aware that we have introduced a separate set of calculations for rural areas that take account of the affordability of rents in rural areas and the lower incomes in many rural areas compared with the Scottish average? We are already addressing that issue.

I am sure that Des McNulty will welcome the amendments that the Government will lodge at stage 2 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill to introduce pre-eviction protocol for people in rent arrears. That is partly to ensure that the support goes in first, so that we have a strategy of prevention rather than waiting until the problem becomes very difficult.

I agree with the need to tackle antisocial behaviour, but can I get rid of the myth that councils have to rehouse people who have been evicted because of antisocial behaviour? If  the council deems that someone has intentionally made themselves homeless through antisocial behaviour, there is no requirement under the homelessness legislation to rehouse them.

It is not glossy.

As this is an open-ended debate, I thought that I would take the opportunity to update the chamber on where we are with discussions on our document "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas". It is important that we take a longer-term perspective on housing policy, which means looking not at next year and the year after but at the next 10 years. As we have never totally broken the back of the housing shortage that Scotland has had almost since the 19th century, we should see whether in the next 10 years—and, I should add, against the very difficult background of public sector squeeze—we can do much more than has been achieved in past generations. We face 10 major challenges in housing, the first and most obvious of which is the budget. As the Scottish Government's chief economic adviser, Andrew Goudie, has indicated, the Government will over the next 16 years lose about £42 billion in real terms from what it would have had if its budget had remained the same as this year's. That is by any stretch of the imagination a very substantial amount of money and the cuts will inevitably affect key services that the Scottish Government delivers. The next challenges facing housing over the next decade are what I call the population challenges. Scotland's population is going to rise—indeed, the registrar general has estimated that between now and 2033 our population will increase by around 375,000—and although that is very good news for the country it means that over the next 20 years or so an additional 375,000 people are going to require a roof over their heads. Secondly, household formation in Scotland is currently running at a net rate of 19,000 new households a year. That is not only because of the rising population but because of the long-term trend towards more people living on their own; in any case, the demand created by that 19,000  increase in new households each year must also be met. The third major population challenge is the ageing population. The registrar general has estimated that in Scotland over the next 20 years or so there will be an 81 per cent increase in those over 75, which requires a special response not just from housing but from the allied services that our older generation requires. It is clear that those three major population developments require significant additions to the housing stock. The next four challenges are the four targets that the chamber has set over a number of years and on which, I think, we are all agreed. First, there is the homelessness target, under which, by 2012, everyone who is classified as genuinely homeless must be offered secure and permanent housing. Secondly, there is the 2015 Scottish housing quality standard. Nearly 40 per cent of Scotland's social housing is already up to that standard, but that leaves about 60 per cent that still has to be brought up to the same standard, which will require investment of about £2 billion a year over the next five years or so. Thirdly, there is the target to eliminate fuel poverty in Scotland by 2016. As we know, fuel poverty is determined by three major factors: income; the price of fuel and energy; and housing conditions. Of course, the Scottish Government has most direct influence over housing conditions and by 2016 we have to ensure not only that no one is living in fuel poverty but that no one is in such poverty because of the state of their house, a lack of insulation or warm central heating and so on. Fourthly, there is the target to reduce carbon emissions in Scotland by 42 per cent from the 1990 figure by 2020. Housing accounts for about 30 per cent of energy consumption and carbon emissions, ergo the housing sector will have to make a very significant contribution if we are to achieve the overall target. Indeed, as our energy efficiency action plan states, work carried out by the University of Cambridge for the Scottish Government estimates that £16 billion will be required to be spent on housing stock to achieve our share of that 42 per cent reduction over the next 10 years. The 2012 target, the 2015 target, the 2016 target and the 2020 target are all huge targets to meet.

We have already outlined that in our energy efficiency action plan. Moreover, building regulations will be further improved by new regulations that will come in in October. I should also point out that the 2016 target will be largely driven by European directives and that, as a result, we will be obliged to improve building standards further at that time. Aside from the budget challenge, the three population challenges and the four targets that we have set ourselves, the two other housing challenges that we face can be jointly described as the waiting list challenge. In Scotland's 32 local authority areas, about 200,000 people are currently on the waiting list for a social rented house. We believe that, once duplication, overlap and the transfer element are stripped out, the real figure is that somewhere between 80,000 and 100,000 new houses are required. However, the waiting list is going to come under enormous additional pressure not just because of the population challenges that I mentioned but because of the 10th challenge, which I have termed the affordability challenge. Before the recession and the credit crunch, first-time buyers in Scotland required an average 11 per cent deposit to get a mortgage; the average is now around 25 per cent. Indeed, in London the regulators, the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority, are seriously discussing the introduction of loan-to-value rules that would not allow financial institutions to lend on a mortgage without a very substantial—possibly a minimum 20 per cent—deposit. Such a move will have two consequences. First, those who previously would have been first-time buyers will no longer be able to buy because they will be unable to raise the deposit. Many of them will go on the waiting list for a rented house, at least until they can save up the money. In other words, the pressure on first-time buyers will make the waiting list longer. The second consequence, which we have seen in the past two years, is that the lack of demand from first-time buyers as their number in the marketplace declines causes the rate of new-build construction in the private sector to reduce significantly. Before the recession hit and before the credit crunch, we relied for about 12.5 per cent of the funding and support for our social housing programme on section 75 agreements with the private sector. That support has pretty well dried up in the past couple of years and is unlikely to return en masse on a reasonable scale for a significant number of years. While we have large waiting lists, additional pressures will be applied, because of the new  affordability rules and the market situation for first-time buyers. As we all know—Mr McLetchie might dispute it—primarily as a result of the impact of the right to buy, the stock of rented housing in Scotland is at its lowest level since 1959, although we have the biggest building programme for the past 10 years. We face 10 major challenges. It is clear that, no matter who wins the election next year, we must come together as a Parliament to face up to those challenges and do what we can. I will outline activities that we are proactively pursuing. In the overall strategy, our number 1 priority is new build in the private and rented sectors. The private rented sector has a bigger contribution to make. I hope that my colleagues to the right—both Mr Finnie and Mr Johnstone—will join me in trying to persuade the current United Kingdom Government to do what the previous Government refused to do, which is to extend to the housing sector the tax incentives in the real estate investment trust regime and the venture capital regime that are available to commercial property developers. That could bring significant additional investment into the rented housing sector in Scotland. We are considering other possibilities. We must do two fundamental things.

The new UK Government has already started to do that by increasing capital gains tax to 28 per cent, which has a direct impact on private sector housing investment throughout the UK. It is obvious that Mr McLetchie must support—

I am sorry—I am running out of time; I have only 10 seconds left.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Our strategy must be to make the maximum use of the money that will be available to us, to make it  go further. We must also consider bringing other sources of capital into all aspects of housing. Last year, eight housing associations received a major injection of low-cost loan capital from the European Investment Bank that totalled £70 million. This year, next year and the year after, we will go back to that bank for such relatively cheap loan capital with good conditions. We are also talking to pension funds, because my strong view is that we all contribute to pension funds. Strathclyde pension fund is one of the biggest pension funds in the country. If we persuade the pension funds to provide the capital that we need to build social housing, we will be able both to build such housing without charging excessive rents and to give the funds a reasonable return over a long period. That would bring significant new sources of capital into the system.

We are taking a range of other measures to make the existing money go further and to bring in new sources of capital. I will be happy to elaborate on that in the debate.

As the First Minister announced yesterday, we will introduce the private rented housing bill this autumn. The bill will help to develop further the private rented sector in Scotland, while taking measures to target rogue landlords and unscrupulous agents who act on their behalf. The bill will make improvements to the systems of landlord registration and houses in multiple occupation licensing and give local authorities greater powers to tackle overcrowding.

I had a very successful meeting yesterday with the private rented sector strategy group, which I have asked to prepare a comprehensive strategy for the development of the private rented sector, including considering whether any additional regulatory measures are required. On the basis of that strategy, when it comes forward, we will propose an action plan,  which we will implement when we return to government next May.

I last met the Scottish Housing Regulator on Tuesday 1 June as part of one of my regular liaison meetings with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We discussed progress among landlords towards meeting the Scottish housing quality standard.

Like me, the Scottish Housing Regulator is concerned about the high number of evictions in certain parts of Scotland, and about the process and cost. We are discussing the issues in the Scottish Government, as part of our examination of the Local Government and Communities Committee's stage 1 report on the Housing (Scotland) Bill and the evidence that was presented to the committee with respect to the new proposals on how to handle evictions. We will announce our response in due course, when we will define the role of the regulator in relation to such matters.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have been in a similar position before, when a Presiding Officer did not hear and was about to move on but then took the vote. I suggest that we follow precedent.

I join others in congratulating Bill Kidd on bringing such an important subject to the Parliament's attention. I pay tribute to Julie McElroy, whom I congratulate on the DVD that she made on behalf of the Hearing Company and on featuring in this week's Big Issue supplement on independent living, about which I will say more later. We welcome deaf awareness week, which we think is a much-needed event in raising awareness among the broader community of the challenges that people who are hard of hearing, deaf or deafblind face, and what we need to do about those issues. I also I acknowledge the many organisations in Scotland that help to raise awareness of the different types of deafness and which promote understanding of different communication methods. Since 2000 and under successive Administrations, the Scottish Government equality unit has chaired the British Sign Language and linguistic access working group, working to improve linguistic access for people who are born deaf, who acquire a hearing loss or who are deafblind. The group produced a road map for linguistic access, which the Scottish Government published in 2009. We also provide funding to the Scottish Council on Deafness to increase our engagement with deaf people. Our additional work involves quite a commitment of resources, although I agree that more needs to be done. In providing a funding package to support different forms of communication for deaf people, we recognise the importance of people with the right training and  skills in communication, such as BSL interpreters. Over a three-year period that will end next year, we will have provided £1.5 million to support the building bridges project, which includes a new work-based route for training BSL to English interpreters and work on training the trainers, which is designed to increase the number of deaf tutors who can teach BSL at advanced levels. Different forms of communication suit different deaf people; for example, those who have acquired hearing loss are unlikely to use BSL, although they may learn to lip-read. We are currently looking at the place of lip-reading within a rehabilitation framework through the Scottish Government's audiology services advisory group. We also believe that new technology has a major role to play in improved communication for deaf people.

I am certainly happy to look at that issue—of that there is no doubt. In terms of new technology, we are funding a pilot of online interpreting, which involves an organisation that is supported by Social Enterprise, and we have three separate pilots within the national health service of different models and providers of online interpreting. We are also keen to include deaf people in our wider work to promote equality and inclusion for disabled people. We are committed to promoting equality and inclusion for all disabled people, including those with hearing loss. While we acknowledge that deaf BSL users are proud of their linguistic and cultural identity, we recognise that they, too, are covered by disability legislation. Because of that and our commitment to the issue, we have been working across the Government to promote equality and inclusion for disabled and deaf people. We have implemented the disability equality duty and responded to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which includes specific references to the human rights of deaf people and sets out expectations in relation to accessible information and communication support. We are also delivering on our commitments to promote independent living for disabled people. Independent living is based on a commitment to the principles of participation, inclusion and maximising potential. It includes deaf people, many of whom need improved communication. The Scottish Council on Deafness is also included  on the reference group that steers the work on independent living. The current work plan focuses on inclusive communication. I want to comment specifically on BSL recognition. The Scottish Government recognises the importance of BSL to the deaf community. It is a vital means of communication for deaf people, as well as being part of their linguistic and cultural identity. As I said, we have provided significant funding to support BSL training, although the numbers issue needs to be tackled. More widely, if Bill Kidd sends me details of the voucher scheme, we will look at whether we can pursue that course of action in assisting deaf people.  In winding up, I pay tribute to everybody who has spoken in the debate. Although it has not been well attended, everybody who has spoken has highlighted the particular needs of the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities. We want to ensure that those who are deaf, hard of hearing or deafblind have exactly the same opportunities as others to maximise their potential and to participate fully in the daily life of our nation.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

Our recent consultation on a proposed private housing bill outlined new powers for local authorities to require letting agents to provide a list of the properties that they manage. That measure could help to put an end to unscrupulous agents acting on behalf of unregistered, rogue landlords. The consultation also described legislative provisions that will clarify prohibited charges, which will prevent agents from charging unacceptable administration fees. I am well aware of the impact that rogue landlords and private letting agents can have on communities such as Govanhill and those in Mr Gordon's constituency, and I am determined to tackle the growing problem. That is why, last week, the cabinet secretary announced £1.8 million in funding to tackle problems in Govanhill.

As Mr Gordon knows, we are considering all such issues in the drafting of the proposed private housing bill. We are specifically considering the definition of who constitutes a fit and proper person to be a landlord and how that relates to their allowing tenants to engage regularly in antisocial behaviour. The bill will place the responsibility on landlords as well as introducing additional measures for controlling and regulating letting agents. We hope that the combination of those measures will have the desired impact. I share Mr Gordon's objective in that area of policy.

At my regular meetings with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I have raised a number of times the need for all local authorities to implement the landlord registration scheme more robustly and to take action against rogue landlords. We will include additional powers in the proposed private housing bill, which will be published after the summer recess. I entirely share the member's objective of taking a more robust overall approach to dealing with the problem of rogue landlords.

The Scottish Government wants to help as many people as possible, within the resources that are available, to access home ownership if it is affordable for them. We keep all five schemes in our low-cost initiative for first-time buyers under review. We have made a number of adjustments to enable more first-time buyers to achieve their aspiration of home ownership, particularly in the current economic climate. An evaluation of the main LIFT schemes is being carried out this year to help to inform how our support for first-time buyers should best be targeted.

I have already raised the issue with the Council of Mortgage Lenders and individual banks. I share Pauline McNeill's concern about the fact that, for a shared-equity scheme under which the Government was providing up to 40 per cent, banks were still demanding deposits averaging about 5 per cent. We need to persuade them that that is not a fair proposition. They reply that there is a lower default rate among those who put in some money of their own, but I believe that the deposits that they are asking for are far too high—in many cases, they are excessive. However, many banks do not require a deposit when a property is purchased under a shared-equity scheme.

Last year, we spent £60 million on our LIFT schemes, which helped 1,500 families. We are helping up to another 1,000 this year. Two thirds of the money is in the open market shared-equity scheme; another third last year was in the new supply shared-equity programme. However, we have recently launched an innovative pilot with five developers, in co-operation with Homes for Scotland, the umbrella organisation for developers in Scotland, which will involve them sharing the shared-equity contribution 50:50 with the Scottish Government. We are considering every way possible to increase the numbers against a background of reducing public sector budgets.

I begin by expressing my gratitude to David McLetchie for keeping me regularly posted on the result of the match between England and Slovenia. At the moment, the score is 1-0.

It is to England, Presiding Officer. I was keeping that until the end of my speech. On a more serious note, Ross Finnie said that the Government should respond adequately to the points that the committee made in its stage 1 report. I give an undertaking that we will seek to do that by responding not only to the committee's report, but to our on-going discussions with stakeholders through the bill sounding board. We will listen to and review the content of this debate, as a number of members have made practical suggestions that we will pursue not only in this bill but in the bill that we are planning on private rented housing.  As the Tory party is the only party that is likely to vote against the bill tonight, I will set the record straight on a number of issues relating to the right to buy. I fully appreciate that David McLetchie and his colleagues are ideologically committed to the principle of the right to buy. However, as several members—including Ross Finnie—have pointed out, the issue concerns not the right to buy per se, but the right to buy at a substantial discount. The negative impact of the discount is felt on public finances, and in particular on the availability of future funding for future housing. I have the greatest respect for David McLetchie and Alex Johnstone. However, in referring to paragraph 109 of the committee's report, Mr McLetchie heavily criticised the points that Tricia Marwick and other members made about the average outstanding debt of £7,000 per house that is sold off. He confused the outstanding value of the debt with how the receipts are applied. He is right that it is for each council to decide how to use the receipts that are gained from right-to-buy sales. The council can decide to use those receipts to invest in new housing, to upgrade the quality of existing housing or to pay off the debt. However, the outstanding figure of £7,000 refers to the situation after the receipts have been applied to the debt. In other words, if a council sells off a house at a £15,000 discount, and it uses the receipts from that sell-off to put down against the debt, an outstanding debt of around £7,000 per house on average still remains. That debt has to be paid off by those who are still renting, or, if it is not paid off, they have to pay the interest and eventually pay it out.

Yes—that is the figure.

It is not. That is the point—there is a misunderstanding on the Tory benches about the financial implications. I also correct Mr McLetchie, as Tricia Marwick did, on the building of council houses. I refer specifically to council houses not including those built by new towns, Scottish Homes or Government departments. He referred to council house building at the end of the Thatcher period and compared it with the subsequent period. I point out that, in the year when Mrs Thatcher came to power, 4,755 council houses were built in Scotland. Mrs Thatcher resigned—or, more  accurately, was pushed out—in 1990, and in that year 1,046 council houses were built in Scotland. By any calculation, there was a significant drop in the number of council houses that were built during that period. With all due respect, the Tories have got it wrong on the right-to-buy receipts, and they have also got it wrong—

I cannot give way to the member again. The member also mentioned the £100 million. Leaving aside the fact that he takes a very narrow view of the financial implications of the right to buy, it is a fact of life that the £100 million that is estimated in the financial memorandum refers to a period after 2015, so it cannot possibly act as a barrier to the £2.5 billion investment programme that is in place to bring social housing in Scotland up to the quality standard by 2015. I turn to the issue of landlord registration and enforcement. The current regime—I am not making a party political point—is one that we inherited. We agree with those who say that there needs to be a far more robust approach to the implementation of the current legislation. That legislation gave local authorities powers, but the powers are not duties, therefore there is wide variation in how effectively the landlord registration regime is being implemented. I have raised that continuously with COSLA. Following the consultation on the proposed private rented sector bill, we are looking at the feedback that we have received and we will publish the analysis of the results within the next week or so. I was particularly taken by Glasgow City Council's submission on the need for additional powers to enforce landlord registration, and we are seriously considering that. Patricia Ferguson and Charlie Gordon mentioned making it an offence for letting agents knowingly to market unregistered tenancies. As I have said, we consulted on the proposed bill and we sought views on powers to allow local authorities to require letting agents to provide a list of properties that they rent out. Also, the private rented sector strategy group is looking as part of its work plan at the role of letting agents and how they are regulated. We take those points on board and we will seriously—

I have a queue. We will seriously look at Patricia Ferguson's proposal.

That is also a sensible suggestion and we are prepared to consider it.

Indeed. That is exactly the kind of area that the new private rented sector bill will contain proposals on. Among the proposals that we are considering is a more robust definition of what constitutes a fit and proper person to be registered as a landlord. I am particularly keen to consider landlords' responsibilities for tenants who engage in antisocial behaviour, particularly those who do so regularly.

The problem is that housing benefit is a reserved matter and what we can legislate on is restricted. However, I am prepared to consider anything that is within our powers. When we publish the private rented sector bill, we will take into account the points of view that have been expressed in this debate and in the consultation. We are considering enforcement, and we will include in our forthcoming bill additional provisions for more robust enforcement. I say to Ted Brocklebank that I have, as he knows, regular discussions with him and other MSPs who have a particular interest in the HMO legislation. As he knows, we have already laid the statutory instrument to implement part 5 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 by the end of August. That will be a significant landmark in making progress towards ensuring that HMOs are properly policed, controlled and regulated. [ Interruption .]

The Government has been listening and will continue to listen to what is said on all of those issues, and it will consider any sensible proposals that are made outside or inside the chamber. I want to mention one or two issues to do with housing associations. Again, I do not want to be too partisan. The reduction in the housing association grant was referred to. The target subsidy per unit, which we have recently reduced, is related to the actual cost of provision. In the recent period during the recession, there has been a 20 per cent reduction in social housing construction costs. It is sensible that the housing association grant target subsidy reflects that reduction in construction costs. The important point is that, if we can reduce the cost per unit without affecting the quality, we can build significantly more units for the same amount of money.

I have already taken several interventions. To back up what I have said, I should point out that housing associations built just under 5,000 new houses in Scotland in 2009. The idea that any reduction in HAG has resulted in a reduction in performance in respect of housing starts therefore does not stand up to scrutiny. There are many other issues, which I do not have enough time to cover. I accept many points that members have made about the importance of housing legislation controlling antisocial behaviour, particularly in the private sector. In designing the final provisions of the private rented sector bill that we will bring before members in September, we will be mindful of the need to include in it provision to try to bring under control the level of antisocial behaviour that has resulted from rogue landlord activities in different parts of Scotland.

It is with great pleasure that I open the stage 1 debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I begin by thanking the Local Government and Communities Committee for its care in taking evidence on the bill, and in particular for seeking out the views and opinions of tenants and other service users. I very much appreciate the committee's recognition of the efforts that the Government has made to capture the views of tenants and other stakeholders. I am continuing to work with stakeholders, through a bill sounding board that I have established. I thank that board's members for their contributions to our regular meetings and for the constructive way in which they have engaged with me and with each other in debating how best we can strengthen and improve the bill as it progresses through the Parliament. The bill that is now before us is part of the Government's response to the challenges that we face in housing. It has its origins in "Firm Foundations", this Government's first major discussion document on the future of housing in Scotland, and it is the culmination of the extensive consultation that we initiated with that document. As members will know, we recently published a new discussion document, "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas", to encourage debate on how to continue to make progress by applying new ideas in response to the much harsher climate that we now face. It encourages everyone to think radically about all aspects of housing policy, and I hope that members across the Parliament will contribute vigorously and with imagination to the debate. The bill demonstrates our willingness to implement radical solutions to the problems of inadequate supply and poor quality in housing. It has three main objectives: to safeguard and improve the supply of social housing, through reforms to the right to buy; to improve the value of social housing, by modernising the regulation of social housing; and to improve conditions in private sector housing, by strengthening local authorities' ability to regulate private sector landlords and deal with disrepair. In addition, the bill will provide for us to address the question of unauthorised tenancies, in light of the recent report of the repossessions working group. It will  remove the absurd anomaly under which our servicemen and women are unable to form a local connection in the areas in which they were based during their service in the armed forces to enable them to get on the housing list. I welcome the committee's endorsement of the bill's objectives and its support for the bill's general principles. The proposals to reform the right to buy attracted significant interest from the committee and others. They also attracted near-universal support among stakeholders, including tenant representatives, landlords and housing professionals. The key element of the reforms is the end to the right to buy for new social housing and for new tenants in social housing. In effect, that means that the right to buy will wither on the vine over time. Quite rightly, the committee subjected such significant and radical reforms to exhaustive scrutiny, probing the Government's position and testing the views of stakeholders. The committee's support for the proposals following that rigorous consideration is most welcome, for the simple reason that if the Parliament agrees to the reforms, it is projected that sales will gradually reduce by a fifth. Over a 10-year period, that could mean that up to 18,000 houses will be saved for social renting that would otherwise have been sold off. That is the equivalent of three years' worth of new supply in the sector. In addition, without the reforms and the confidence to invest that they will provide, we would be unable to kick-start a new generation of council house building. We have already announced £50 million of funding and we will shortly announce allocation of a further £25 million. In all, that will help councils to start work on more than 3,000 new council houses by March next year. We are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and others to ensure that new council house building plays a continuing role in meeting the need for affordable rented housing in the years ahead. Those are real benefits, which are made all the more valuable by the knowledge that other means of safeguarding and improving supply are coming under increasing pressure.

As Mary Mulligan knows, in the third tranche of funding we are providing £30,000 per unit, compared with £0 per unit just two or three years ago. That is the best way of ensuring that  we do not need to jack up rents to fund the new housing. On modernising regulation, it is as important to ensure that the total stock of social housing delivers value for tenants and taxpayers as it is to safeguard and encourage the supply of social housing. Social housing in the ownership of councils, housing associations, co-operatives and the like still accounts for a quarter of all housing in Scotland and represents historical public investment that goes back generations. The bill provides a new framework for regulating that valuable national asset, by creating a Scottish housing regulator, which will be an independent body that has the objective of safeguarding and promoting the interests of tenants, homeless people and other service users, and by introducing a Scottish social housing charter, which will require the approval of the Parliament and will set the outcomes that all social landlords should deliver for their tenants. The committee is keen that the new regulator should have a role that goes beyond dealing with poor landlords and actually drives up performance across the board. I share that objective, and the bill addresses that point by giving the new regulator the duty to monitor, assess and report on the performance of all social landlords. Those assessments and reports will serve two purposes. First, they will encourage self-improvement among landlords by giving them and their tenants the ability to compare performance and identify areas of relative strength and areas where improvement is required. Secondly, they will form the basis for the regulator to intervene—for example, by setting performance improvement targets—whether for individual landlords, groups of them or the sector as a whole. I am pleased that the committee shares the Government's broad aims for the bill's provisions. I look forward to working with the committee at stage 2 to improve the bill. As requested by the committee, I have written to the convener setting out our position on a number of issues that it raised in its stage 1 report. I want to mention in particular unauthorised tenancies. Our plans are based on the repossessions working group report that was published last week. The group made clear that legal protection for unauthorised tenants in repossession cases in Scotland is already stronger than that in England, but it recommended that part of those protections should be put on a firmer statutory basis. We will therefore propose an amendment at stage 2 to provide for that and to address the concerns that have been expressed about the current marker provision in the bill. The committee raised a number of significant issues around the private rented sector provisions, particularly whether the provisions should remain  in the bill or be transposed into the forthcoming private housing bill. I am in dialogue with the committee on the matter, and once that dialogue is complete we will reach a conclusion about exactly where the proposals best fit. However, it not just a matter of tidier or neater handling arrangements; there is a need to respond proactively to the growing concerns about the impact that rogue landlords are having on some of our most vulnerable communities. Those concerns will be familiar to many members from their constituency correspondence. Certainly, it has become clear, not least through the evidence gathered by the committee, that rogue landlords threaten the fabric of communities such as Govanhill in Glasgow. We need to crack down on such landlords and ensure that local authorities have the powers to tackle them. If we do not, such landlords will not only continue to make people's lives a misery and undermine the wellbeing of many neighbourhoods, but tarnish the reputation of the private rented sector as a whole. We need that sector to play a greater role in meeting the country's housing need, particularly given the future financial prospects for public budgets. However, the sector can do that only if families can be confident that it offers them decent, quality accommodation and if neighbourhoods and communities are satisfied that there are proper safeguards against poor landlords. We plan to work during the summer on a package of measures that will provide those safeguards and support the great majority of private landlords who act responsibly and provide decent accommodation. Clearly, in the time remaining this session, there will be a limit on the extent of any measures that we can bring forward. Our aim, therefore, will be to develop a package of priority measures that target rogue landlords. We will decide, in light of further discussions with the committee, on the most appropriate vehicle for doing so. However, for those suffering from the effects of rogue landlords, it will be the fact of our acting that matters, not the means. In the case of Govanhill, our actions include last week's announcement of £1.5 million to revitalise the area and £300,000 for an enforcement squad to root out rogue landlords. I am grateful to the Scottish private rented sector strategy group and its chair, Professor Douglas Robertson of the University of Stirling, for the group's work in developing consultation on the proposed private housing bill. It is my intention that the group will continue to play a key role in the Parliament's development and consideration of that bill. The Housing (Scotland) Bill is an important piece of legislation that is intended to improve the supply and quality of our housing. I commend the  bill, and our motion in support of it, to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

This has been quite an interesting debate in a number of respects. I want to cover one or two things that members have asked me about.  The Government takes cognisance of the need to address rural poverty as well as urban poverty. A recent example of how we have done that is our introduction of a separate set of assumptions, which recognise the special circumstances in rural areas, for the allocation of housing association grant in relation to rural housing. The carers strategy has been drafted and our strategic partner COSLA will consider it at its convention on 25 June.

I need to make progress. It is therefore not true to say that no progress has been made. The debate has been about poverty, of which there are three major causes in our society: high levels of unemployment, low incomes and poor housing. On high unemployment, I share Duncan McNeil's concerns about the Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury's decision to abolish the future jobs fund, which I think was a useful tool to see us through the recession and provided funding at a critical point.

In nearly all our verbal and written communication with the new Government we are stressing the need to maintain every available weapon to safeguard employment, because we see that as the best way out of recession. It is critical to dealing not only with unemployment but with poverty. I have to say that, listening to Labour members, one would not realise that they have just completed a 13-year period of government. The level of unemployment they have left in this country is among the highest in Europe and the level of youth unemployment under Labour was even higher than it was under Margaret Thatcher, so I do not think that Labour members are in a particularly strong position to criticise others in relation to unemployment. It is clear that if people do not have an adequate income they are by definition living in poverty. I hope that the new coalition Government will tackle the regressive nature of much of the tax system. I welcome the fact that capital gains tax will be equated more with levels of income tax—that is a move in the right direction—but other taxes such as national insurance contributions are regressive, as those who are more highly paid pay a substantially lower percentage of their income than do the low paid.

I will in a minute. I am rather bemused by the fact that Mary Mulligan is proud that the living wage was in Labour's 2010 manifesto. It was in Labour's 1924 manifesto—I know that not because I remember it but because I have read my history. In the intervening period there have been 31 years of Labour government and yet it has not done anything about a living wage in any one of those years, so we will not take any lessons on that. We should consider that the Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council is doing everything in its power to avoid having equal pay and single status for women. Labour's record on employment and dealing with low income has not been particularly proud in London, North Lanarkshire or elsewhere. The third major driver of poverty is poor housing. That is why we have given such high priority to investment in social housing and why we have record investment and record starts and completions in social housing. It is not just because of the great need to produce more housing—

I will in a minute. It is also the fact that housing investment creates and maintains jobs. We have, where we can, used community benefit clauses to ensure that local people benefit from the housing investment.

That is a sentiment I share, Presiding Officer. What I found most strange about Jeremy Purvis's contribution was that he did not mention his own amendment once. That is because he is calling on us to introduce a fairer pay policy. Has he not noticed, as the Lib Dem finance spokesperson, that we have already done that? We have already done everything we possibly can to ensure that people on the lowest wages are treated more fairly and to discourage bonuses for those at the higher levels, even when their contracts were signed by the Lib-Lab pact that was in power until 2007. We have already introduced a living wage in the health service and we are spreading that to the whole of Government by August this year—something Labour and the Liberals did not do when they were in power. We have heard that the council tax freeze is not helping poorer people. I ask the Liberal and  Labour members who criticise the council tax freeze whether they realise that the minute someone earns £6,000 they have to pay the full council tax. Anyone who is earning £7,000, £8,000, £9,000 or £10,000 is by definition low paid. We are saving those people a fortune year in, year out with our council tax freeze. Yes, we wanted a local income tax—but the Labour Party, supported by some others, frustrated our efforts as a minority Government to deliver it. Then I hear from Johann Lamont, sent by the Scottish Labour Party to the Scottish Parliament to cheer up the nation, criticise us for not poverty-proofing our policies. When she was a minister, there was no poverty-proofing whatsoever.

Do I not get injury time, Presiding Officer? The reality is that the difference between those on the Labour benches and us is that whereas we want to spend the money on housing, health and education, they want to spend it on Trident.

I should point out that the member's spokesman contributed to the drafting of the motion.

Does Jamie Stone agree that any increase in VAT would add to that burden?

I am pleased to have an opportunity to speak about the actions that the Scottish Government is taking to tackle the important issues of poverty and income inequality in Scotland. We are determined to provide opportunities for all to flourish and to tackle the injustices of poverty in Scotland. There is no doubt that we all face major challenges in the current difficult economic climate, but that makes it more, not less, important that we focus our efforts on helping those who are least well off in facing the impact of the downturn. Today, about 17 per cent of Scots live in relative poverty. Overall, poverty rates have remained the same for too long, although we are pleased that pensioner poverty has fallen significantly in the past year. However, there are no grounds for complacency. Currently, the poorest 30 per cent of households receive 13 per cent of Scotland's income, while the richest 30 per cent receive more than half the income. In the past 10 years, no progress has been made on tackling income inequality. The Government wants us all to live in a fairer nation as well as a wealthier one, which is why we set our ambitious solidarity target, to increase the proportion of income that is received by the poorest 30 per cent of households by 2017. The fact remains that too many people live below the poverty line, and radical action is required to address that. We are especially concerned about those who are caught in persistent poverty—the people who are most scarred by the experience of living in poverty and who lack the opportunities and resources to escape its clutches. We know that there are concentrated geographic areas that suffer from multiple deprivation and where people live in, or at very high risk of, poverty. Many of those areas have been in deprivation for a long time. Entire communities as well as households can suffer the effects of persistent poverty. Of the data zones that were in the bottom 15 per cent in the Scottish index of multiple deprivation in 2004, 83 per cent were still there in 2009. The consequences of living in poverty extend beyond material deprivation. One example is the striking relationship between imprisonment and deprivation. A 2005 study showed an almost  perfect correlation between risks of deprivation and levels of imprisonment. We know that 45 per cent of all prisoners come from the 15 per cent most deprived areas in Scotland. There are many other examples of the negative consequences of people living in poverty. It impacts on educational attainment, health outcomes, aspirations, employment levels, benefit dependency and overall quality of life. The Government is determined to do what it can to address the root causes of poverty once and for all and to bring about the change that the nation deserves.

Actually, we focused the education maintenance allowance on poorer people, in a way that it was not focused previously. Early intervention sits at the heart of our three complementary social policy frameworks: "The Early Years Framework", "Equally Well" and "Achieving Our Potential", which are joint Scottish Government and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities frameworks to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland. The core principles of "Achieving Our Potential" are to tackle the drivers of poverty and income inequality in Scotland; to maximise the potential for people to work; to make work pay for those who can work; and to support those who cannot work and those who are experiencing poverty now. Some of the groups of people who are most at risk of persistent poverty are pensioners, disabled people, women and children. The latest statistics show that relative pensioner poverty in Scotland fell from 21 per cent to 16 per cent over the past year. That is an encouraging sign, and we hope that the range of measures that we have in place to help pensioners will help that trend to continue. I welcome the commitment by the new coalition Government to re-establish the link between the annual increase in the pension and the annual rate of wage inflation from 2012. Older people continue to be an important target group for the Scottish Government's income maximisation work under "Achieving Our Potential" and they have benefited substantially from the energy assistance package. We also fund the Scottish helpline for older people to help vulnerable older people to maximise their income.  The Scottish Government also introduced free Scotland-wide bus travel. The Parliament introduced free personal and nursing care and we have provided a record number of central heating installations for pensioners in their own private accommodation in the past two years to help to alleviate pensioner poverty. Twenty per cent of Scotland's children live in poverty. We cannot let poverty blight more generations of our young people. That is why we have taken radical measures to intervene early and to address both the causes and consequences of child poverty.

Across Scotland and the United Kingdom, the percentage of people in relative poverty is now at 17 per cent. That is the figure for all individuals. For children, the figure is 21 per cent. Over the piece, the long-term trend over the past three years, for example, is still on a downward path. We have a range of policies to help to maximise the income of people who are in work as well as those who are not in work. We also have polices on employability and skills initiatives. In the longer term, we are investing in our children through the early years framework and getting it right for every child. We are also taking forward the development of the Scottish Government's child poverty strategy. That is still in its early stages, but we can be sure that support to enter and sustain employment will be a high priority. In order to move out of poverty, people need good job opportunities, and we believe that decently paid, sustainable employment is the best route out of poverty for people and their children. I want to mention disabled people. Many people still have to live with difficult and often complex barriers to employment. For example, despite improvements over the past decade, the employment rate for disabled people in 2008 was only 48.1 per cent, compared with the general population figure of 74 per cent. That is why, together with COSLA, we have published a supported employment framework for Scotland, which aims systematically and effectively to provide the mechanisms that are necessary to support disabled people's move to paid  employment in the open labour market. The framework sets out our shared determination to support disabled people who want to work to get into employment. It seeks to put in place the vital ingredients that are required: well-trained and qualified staff, professional standards for service delivery and consistent quality, irrespective of postcode. We want a more consistent, person-centred approach, with sustained employment as a realistic and achievable outcome for the individual. It is not about work experience, volunteering or taster sessions; we want people in real jobs, properly integrated and rewarded. People have a right not to be dependent on benefits and a right to make the progression into work. That is good for them and their families and communities, and ultimately it is a prerequisite to allow the whole of Scotland to flourish. There is poverty among those who are in work, too. It is important that people have access not just to employment but to reasonably well-paid employment if they are to escape the poverty trap. It is encouraging to see living wage campaigns gathering momentum. Paying a living wage brings benefits to employees and employers. Employers can expect to benefit from increases in productivity, greater staff loyalty and motivation, easier recruitment and retention, reduced absenteeism and higher-quality staff. I am proud to say that from August this year, no one in the employ of the Scottish Government will be paid less than a £7-an-hour living wage.

I have already given way and I am just about to finish. I welcome the coalition Government's plans to increase the personal allowance over time to £10,000. That should help to make work pay and encourage people to move from welfare to work. Poverty has been a blight on Scottish society for far too long, for children, pensioners, disabled people and for some people in work. We in the Parliament must all—especially in these difficult times—do everything that we possibly can to reduce poverty among all those groups in Scotland, with a view to eliminating the blight of poverty from our society. I move, That the Parliament notes the continuing approach set out in the Scottish Government's poverty and income inequality framework, Achieving our Potential , to take long-term measures to tackle drivers of poverty and income inequality in Scotland, to maximise the potential for people to work, to make work pay for those who can and to support those who cannot work and those who are experiencing poverty now; recognises the need to focus on those people and communities who experience longer-term persistent poverty, and supports the need to streamline the  welfare system while ensuring that reforms provide better protection for, and do not further disadvantage, vulnerable people, particularly in these challenging times.

Although my job title is Minister for Housing and Communities, I also have ministerial responsibility for veterans. Some of my duties in that role are the most pleasant that I have to carry out as a minister. Speaking in tonight's debate is one such duty. Like all the other members who have spoken, I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing this debate. I welcome Duncan Brown to the gallery and hope that he is enjoying the debate. His book  is fascinating and told me a thing or two that I did not know about the history of the Victoria Cross. Until the Crimean war, the only real medal was the Order of the Bath, which was for those and such as those. The book describes how, after the Crimean war, the Duke of Newcastle wrote to Prince Albert, Queen Victoria's husband, to suggest that an award be created, as there were so many brave people who should not go unrewarded and unrecognised. Eventually, the Queen and the Secretary of State for War agreed that there should be such an award. Originally, it was to be called the Military Order of Victoria, a title that was eventually shortened to Victoria Cross. Also unbeknown to me was the fact that, when people received the Victoria Cross in those days, they were awarded what Duncan Brown describes as a parsimonious annual £10. I do not know whether that is still the case. Arrangements were made for the first presentations of the medal to take place on 26 June 1857, in Hyde Park in London. The book provides a fascinating account of the history. In particular, it points out the importance of Lanarkshire. I have tried but have so far been unable to check whether the figure of 14 for a single county is a record for the whole country. If it is not, it must be close to being one, despite the attempts of Murdo Fraser and Jim Tolson to make such claims for Perthshire and Kinross and the Borders. As Jim Tolson rightly pointed out, many brave and valiant fighters came not just from the rest of the United Kingdom but from the rest of the empire. I am particularly gladdened by the fact that a large part of the proceeds from the book and the profit from the sale of prints of its illustrations will go to Erskine Hospital Ltd, which is one of the finest institutions in Scotland. I am sure that Duncan Brown's generous offer will be warmly applauded everywhere. As members have pointed out, the bravery, gallantry and achievements of the 14 Lanarkshire-born Victoria Cross recipients, all 172 Scottish recipients of that accolade and all other veterans, irrespective of whether they were awarded a medal of whatever type, cannot be ignored, forgotten or lost in history. We should acknowledge on a regular basis their sacrifice and selflessness in securing the freedoms that all of us now take for granted. To ignore those men and the history of the Victoria Cross and those who won it would be a disservice to them. Their stories are important. History is important. We, our children and future generations must maintain the link with the past. The monument in Hamilton to the Lanarkshire-born Victoria Cross holders is a fabulous way of  keeping their memory alive. It is a fitting tribute to those 14 brave men. I congratulate everyone who was involved in the fund raising to make the monument a reality. Duncan Brown's book is an excellent way of recording and learning about the achievements of the men who are commemorated on the monument. It is both an easy and an engaging read—once someone has started to read it, they will want to finish it—and is one of the best-written books that I have ever read. Willie Coffey was right to say that many schoolchildren—not just the length and breadth of Scotland, but throughout the United Kingdom—will want to read the book and will find the history and stories that it contains fascinating. I will say a word or two about monuments, given that we have talked about the Hamilton monument. There is a body of opinion in Scotland that the Scottish Government should maintain war memorials in Scotland. That is a perfectly justifiable view and I understand and sympathise with it. The problem is that the Imperial War Museum has estimated that there are between 3,000 and 5,000 monuments in Scotland, and keeping up the standard of monuments involves a huge cost. Therefore, I take the opportunity to welcome the establishment of a new graves and monuments trust in Edinburgh, which will have the task of maintaining some of the monuments in Edinburgh. I hope that we can do something similar in Lanarkshire, Ayrshire, Glasgow and Dunbartonshire—and in every city and county the length and breadth of Scotland. That would be a fitting tribute from our communities to those to whom we owe so much. We are proud of our heritage and we are very proud of the people who fought for our freedoms. It is right that the national Parliament of Scotland should recognise and pay tribute to them and that it should thank Duncan Brown for having done such a wonderful service for the whole nation in writing his excellent book.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

The debate has been entirely justified, and we have heard a number of thoughtful and interesting speeches from across the chamber, as Bill Aitken said. I will try to answer as many of the specific questions that were put to me as possible in the time that I have. I have taken two lessons from the debate. First, the complexity of domestic violence and domestic abuse is even greater than I originally expected.  Secondly, we still lack enough knowledge of and intelligence about the nature and scale of the problem. I will give two examples. Much of the debate has been about the statistics. It is interesting that 85 per cent of all reported domestic violence incidents in Scotland are incidents against women, and 14 to 15 per cent—the balance—are against men. However, as Christine Grahame said, there are different figures in the Scottish crime and justice survey. The incidents are still predominantly of violence against women as opposed to men, but the ratio is 60:40 instead of 85:15. We need to do much more to get behind those figures and get a far better understanding of what is happening. I think that we all agree that all policies should be based on the available evidence, and we need much more evidence to inform future policy. It is not just about the statistics; it is also about the qualitative analysis of the evidence. Some of the questions that have been posed are fair, and they apply on both sides. What is the cause of many incidents of domestic abuse and violence? We do not yet have the understanding and evidence that we need to decide future policy. However, one statistic is clear. Whether the victim of domestic abuse or violence is a woman or a man, they are 100 per cent the victim of it, and that can never be acceptable. I think that all members without exception agree that no one should experience abuse of any sort, particularly by someone close to them. That is a breach of trust, and it can have a devastating impact on aspects of their life. I will say a word or two about victims. It is not just the man or woman who is the victim; children are victims as well. Another bit of research from the Scottish crime and justice survey that I have picked up on is that one third of victims had dependent children living with them at the time of the most recent incident of domestic abuse. In two thirds of the cases, the children were present when the incident took place. In 77 per cent of those cases, the children actually saw or heard what happened, and 20 per cent of them became involved in the incident. How horrific for any child to witness domestic abuse of any kind, and how horrific for a child, no matter what their age, to become involved in and a witness to domestic abuse.

That highlights the point that I made earlier: we need a much greater understanding of  the evidence and what is actually happening. One action that I am taking forward from the debate is to commission more research to find out much more about what is behind the figures so that we can ensure that services are designed and tailored to meet the nature as well as the scale of the problem. When we talk about children as victims, it is also important to remember that the long-term impact on them can be devastating. I am glad to say that we now have a group of young experts—voice against violence—who help us to develop and implement our policy. Those young people provide invaluable insights and their own perspectives to make things better for other young people who are experiencing domestic abuse.

I will cover that point later in my speech. We do not know much about the experiences of young people when their father is being abused by their mother, by a female partner or by a male partner. I fully acknowledge that gap in our knowledge, and it is something that I intend to address alongside the consideration of services for male victims. We need to know much more than we do at present about violence against men and about all those involved—victims, perpetrators and children. Some of the responses involve the referral of men, whether they are victims or perpetrators, to support services in relation to, for example, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, legal advice or housing. They can also receive general counselling support.

I am sorry; I am going to run out of time. I am particularly grateful to the male victims who have spoken out about their own experiences and raised our awareness of the issue, which has remained largely hidden until recently. Their courage has helped to ensure that others in the same situation will have the help that did not previously exist. We know that we are at an early stage in our consideration of the issues for male victims, and I recognise that, although the helpline is a step forward, it is only the first step forward. I do not rule out, for example, future adverts that deal specifically with the problem of domestic abuse against men. As we know, one key objective of the  helpline is to help us gather the intelligence to inform policy. There is no point in our commissioning new services and adverts if they are not aimed at the right people, at the right time, in the right area and in the right circumstances. We have to have an informed approach for the future. The helpline, with other sources, will allow us to gather the intelligence that we need to ensure that the scale and nature of future service provision is designed along the right lines.

A question was asked about funding, which I will cover very quickly. I give three commitments on funding. First, we will spend the £44 million to tackle violence against women over the three-year period up until next year. Secondly, the money that has been made available for the helpline has not come out of that budget. Thirdly, once we know our budget for next year, we will ensure that proper consideration is given to the allocation of resources to deal with all forms of domestic abuse in Scotland.

I start with the strongest message possible that violence against men will not be tolerated under any circumstances by the Scottish Government. That is not a new message, nor is this the first time that I have said that in the Parliament. Ministers in the previous Administration said the same thing. In nearly every debate that the Parliament has had on domestic abuse, violence against women or forced marriage, the message has been the same: violence, no matter who perpetrates it against whom, is wrong. In the past we have focused on debating issues to do with the violence that women experience at the hands of some men. On one occasion, we had a members' business debate on domestic abuse services for all victims. However, today—I think for the first time in 11 years—the Parliament debates violence against men, and in particular domestic abuse of men by women or by male partners. I pay tribute to members who have raised the issue with me and elsewhere. In particular, I pay tribute to the work of Mary Scanlon, from the Tories; John Wilson, from the Scottish National Party; Mike Rumbles, from the Liberal Democrats; and James Kelly, from the Labour Party. I also pay tribute to John Forsyth, who has campaigned on the issue for years. Of course, men experience many forms of violence. The Scottish ministers have demonstrated their commitment to services for the victims of violence against men through SurvivorScotland's national strategy for adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse, which was launched in 2005. The national reference group that was established to deliver on the strategy has a range of members, including male survivors. In 2009, services for male survivors were identified as a key priority of the SurvivorScotland strategy. Funding has been allocated to a number of organisations to take forward the development of services for male survivors in Scotland. I will focus on the serious issue of domestic abuse and the men who experience it. In 2008-09, nearly 8,000 men reported domestic abuse to the police in Scotland. Of those incidents, 7,336 had  been perpetrated by a woman. The number of reports from men of domestic abuse represents 14 per cent of reported domestic abuse incidents in Scotland. During the past three or four decades, domestic abuse against women has been brought to the forefront of the political agenda and the public's mind—and rightly so. The vast majority of the Scottish population realises that domestic abuse is not acceptable, is a matter of concern and is a problem that needs to be addressed if we are to have a Scotland of which we can all be truly proud.

We are undertaking a close examination of what is behind the figures. In that respect, I commend the work of Strathclyde Police, which has done an enormous amount under the current chief constable to get a better understanding of the complex relationship between men and women in relation to domestic abuse, and of the number of repeat offenders as well as the number of incidents and who commits them. I will say a word or two later in my speech about repeat offenders. Because domestic abuse is now better understood and more openly talked about, many services have the knowledge and ability to cope better with either female or male victims. As recently as a decade ago, police officers could be heard saying, "It's just a domestic," when a woman reported domestic abuse, and they would never have considered that a man could be a victim. Today, it is different, and police forces across Scotland are at the forefront of tackling domestic abuse. There are innovations such as the Strathclyde domestic abuse task force, which proactively seeks out repeat offenders and brings them to justice.

Okay. I will allow another intervention from Ms Lamont when she recalls what she was going to ask me. Some repeat offenders are women, although the majority are men.

That culture within the police has changed dramatically over the past decade, which is to be commended. For example, Strathclyde Police has been very innovative in the run-up to and immediately after old firm games when, as a direct result of police activity, there has been a 28 per cent reduction in the incidence of domestic abuse, be it against men or women. Mainstream services provided by organisations such as Victim Support Scotland, health services and local authorities have a responsibility to support all victims of domestic abuse with the same courtesy and understanding. Victim Support, for example, provides practical and emotional support to all victims of crime, including men who experience domestic abuse. It is the largest voluntary organisation addressing the needs of victims in Scotland. In addition, there is now a specialist service providing support to male victims of domestic abuse in Scotland, which I will come on to in just a moment. It is clear that domestic abuse against a man is just as abhorrent as when a woman is the victim, and the Government is committed to tackling the issue. However, it is also clear that there are differences in the experiences of male and female victims, and in their service needs. One of the benefits of the launch of a specialist helpline is that it will help us to collect the necessary intelligence to enable us to design services for male victims of domestic abuse over a period of time. The Government recognises that men who experience domestic abuse require a service that is specific to their needs. That is why, in March, with cross-party support, I launched the extension of the men's advice line service to Scotland. The helpline has been funded with £12,000 initially for this year on a pilot basis. The funding came from the equality unit budget and not from money that would otherwise have been used to provide services for women, and it is for one year at present, with the option to continue thereafter. The men's advice line is a confidential, freephone helpline offering emotional support, information and practical advice to male victims of domestic abuse. It will gather information on the number of  callers, the purpose of the calls and what callers' needs are for support services. It is very early days yet but, in one month alone, the helpline had 21 calls from Scotland, with five of those being from male victims of domestic abuse. If we assume that the same number of calls will be received each month this year, that will be equivalent to a rise of 150 per cent in the number of calls in a year compared with before the launch, despite the fact that publicity material is still being distributed and is still to be made widely available throughout the country. The men's advice line will be an invaluable source of information about male victims in Scotland. We have never previously had the opportunity to gather such in-depth intelligence on the issue.

Indeed, I had a meeting yesterday with one of the major movers behind the petition. We are working with them on the issues that the petition identifies. As I am in my last minute, let me just underline the fact that we believe, on a cross-party basis, that the issue behind today's debate is now being properly addressed. Those efforts in no way undermine or undercut the valuable work that is being done by the violence against women national group or any of the organisations that are associated with that campaign. There is no doubt in my mind that domestic abuse against men is not only a significant issue in Scotland but a growing problem. It would be a dereliction of duty for us not to recognise that and to respond accordingly. Working with all the other parties in the Parliament, the Government intends to ensure that we tackle head on the problem of domestic abuse against men, like the problem of violence against women, and make significant progress in the years ahead in trying to reverse the very worrying trends of recent years. I move, That the Parliament recognises that domestic abuse is a very serious and totally unacceptable problem in Scottish society; notes in particular that all victims, whether they be women, men or children, deserve appropriate support, and therefore welcomes the Scottish Government's provision of funding for a support helpline for male victims, which will provide the further information about their needs that is  required before any future decisions about services are made.

The Government is proud of its work to improve affordable warmth. Through our acclaimed energy assistance package, we have helped more than 67,000 households. Some 13,000 homes will have been improved under the 2009-10 budget, of which at least 11,500 will have heating system measures. We are also reducing the cost of heating for many other households with the delivery of insulation through the home insulation scheme and the boiler scrappage scheme, under which old, inefficient boilers will be replaced. Social landlords are continuing to work towards achieving energy efficiency aspects of the Scottish housing quality standard for social landlords.

Some 4,600 people have received assistance through the boiler scrappage scheme, which is very popular. If our budget had not been cut by £500 million this year, we would have been able to do much more. We would have liked to have done much more but, unfortunately, the Labour Government cut our budget.

I am happy to consider that problem, although it is primarily an issue for the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. I am happy to make representations to it on the issue, as it affects quite a number of people throughout Scotland.

Like other members, I pay tribute to Hugh O'Donnell for bringing the debate to the Parliament, as it is valid to debate the employment and support allowance here. The issue impacts on a number of devolved and reserved matters. I also pay tribute to Citizens Advice Scotland and the citizens advice bureaux, which operate  throughout Scotland. It is particularly helpful that their reports are informed by their day-to-day experience of dealing with many thousands of individual cases. Those cases are not only to do with the employment and support allowance; there are cases from across the benefits system. I will make two general observations before I deal specifically with the employment and support allowance. First, from my experience as an MSP and from what people who have come to my surgeries have said, I think that the benefits system is almost at the stage of being totally shambolic. Recently, I had to help an individual who was not at all well off. He had no money, but he still had to make £60-worth of phone calls to try to get to the right benefits centre. He had to determine which benefits centre was the correct one to deal with his case. I ended up phoning for the guy, and spoke to the sixth benefits centre before we got to the right one. We ended up getting the wrong advice. At the end of the conversation, all that we got was a promise that a form would be sent out for my constituent to fill in the following week; it was then to be taken to the local job centre. There are many examples of such things happening. I hope that the new Government will quickly reorganise the whole benefits set-up and make it easier for people to deal with the benefits situation in which they find themselves. People are being left with literally nothing because of the discretionary and discriminatory way in which some benefits are withdrawn, for example. Secondly, we all share the ambition of getting people off welfare and into work. That is absolutely the right thing to do for the reasons that Andy Kerr outlined and for other reasons. However—and I hope that the new UK Government bears this in mind—it is important that we all try to ensure that there are jobs for people to go into. One problem that we have had in the past, particularly in certain areas, is that, because of concentrated levels of unemployment and much higher levels of unemployment than vacancy, it is not always possible to get people who are fit, able and willing to work into work, because the jobs are not always there. Lanarkshire is a good example of such an area. All the evidence points to increasing levels of confusion and discontent, particularly in relation to the application of the employment and support allowance, not just in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom. The Scottish Government takes very seriously the impact that the welfare system has on individuals, families and communities, in relation not just to money but their physical and mental health, which in many respects are even more important. Irrespective of the administration arrangements that govern tax and benefits, we believe that the  following five key principles must guide benefits and tax credits policy if we are to eradicate poverty and reduce income inequalities, not just in Scotland, but throughout the UK. The first principle is that individuals must have a strong degree of confidence about the security of their income. That means that the benefits system must be fair, transparent and sympathetic to the challenges that people who live in poverty face. I do not believe that the ESA meets that criterion. The second principle is that the benefits, tax credits and employment support systems must work in harmony to support those who are capable of pulling themselves out of poverty through work. For those who can work, the financial benefits of working must be significant, sustained and clearly signposted. To that end, the issue is about not only the benefits system, but the interface between the benefits and tax systems. I welcome the new Government's commitment to increase the personal allowance through time to £10,000 a year, as that will help to reduce the poverty gap for people moving from welfare to work. The third principle is that successful transitions into employment should never be undermined by financial uncertainty. That means that the system of transitional support must be transparent, responsive, quick and effective. I had a lot of sympathy with the proposal that the Labour Party made prior to the general election that there should be a guarantee that everybody who moves from welfare into work will be at least £40 a week better off as a result of doing so. Such a commitment would be a simple message and a major incentive. The fourth key principle is that, for some, work is not possible. It is essential that the benefits system does not relegate such people to a life of disadvantage, financial uncertainty and poverty, particularly people who are severely disabled. There are examples—Bill Kidd mentioned some—of individuals who are disabled, in some cases quite severely disabled, being treated appallingly by the people who administer the ESA. Benefits must provide a standard of living that supports dignity, freedom and social unity. That must include female pensioners who are disadvantaged under the current system for time spent caring for dependents. The final underlying principle is that the administration of benefits and tax credits should be as swift, streamlined and customer focused as possible to avoid administrative complexity that leads to confusion and uncertainty about entitlement and support, particularly when individuals are trying to make a successful transition back into work. I regret to say that my experience of the ESA is that it does not meet that criterion either.  I therefore look forward to what I hope will be a wholesale overhaul of the benefits system. We must tackle those who abuse the system, but we must ensure that, in doing so, we do not penalise those who genuinely want to move from welfare into work. To that end, I hope that the Parliament can unite in sending a loud and clear message to our colleagues in London that the time for change is here, but that the change, as well as being effective and efficient, must be fair and humanitarian.   Meeting closed at 17:40.

I, too, welcome Stewart Maxwell's motion and congratulate him on securing a debate to mark the 65th anniversary of victory in Europe on 8 May 1945. I am very supportive of the motion, which thoroughly deserves the endorsement of all members—albeit that we do not vote on such motions. Every speech in the debate has been exceptional. It is a pity that members' business debates are not so well attended, either in the  chamber or in the gallery. This is the second veterans debate that we have had in recent weeks. The quality of the debates—perhaps because they do not lead to a vote, which means that we can unite behind the motion—has been exceptionally high. As a number of members have indicated, VE day marked a halt to the deaths of people from as far apart as eastern USSR, as it was then, and the west coast of the United States of America. Almost every nation on earth paid a heavy price. Australia lost 40,000 military personnel, which was a lot of people, given that its population at the time was about 12 million. Canada, which also had a fairly small population, lost 45,000 military personnel. Poland, the Soviet Union, the United States and the UK lost 240,000, 10 million, 417,000 and 380,000 personnel respectively. As Christopher Harvie pointed out, about 50,000 of those 380,000 British military deaths were of Scottish soldiers. Those are only the military deaths. On top of those were the civilian deaths, of which there were millions across Europe and the rest of the world. In addition, there were the Holocaust victims, of whom there were 6 million. VE day was a celebration of good over bad and totalitarianism. It meant that people could hope, plan for the future, return to their normal lives and put war behind them. The massive celebrations that took place—with some justification—on the day stretched from Los Angeles to Vladivostok and from the Arctic circle to the south of New Zealand. The UK and its then empire had much to celebrate. Troops would be returning home, families would be reunited and people would have a chance to build a new country from the ashes and destruction of bombing. Celebrations were held across the UK. I am too young to remember VE day, but I am sure that those who lived through it will remember the crowds around Trafalgar square and on the Mall in front of Buckingham palace in London, and the celebrations that took place here in Edinburgh and the length and breadth of the country. Churchill said on the day: "It is the victory of the cause of freedom in every land. In all our long history we have never seen a greater day than this. Everyone, man or woman, has done their best. Everyone has tried." VE day should not be left just to the history books. It is our duty and our responsibility to ensure that the toil, the effort, the sacrifice and the ultimate success of our armed forces continue to be recognised and acknowledged. Our veterans, whether they be Scots or people from any other part of the UK, the then empire or the allied nations, deserve nothing less. We are all agreed that what we owe them is immeasurable.  In his motion, Stewart Maxwell makes clear that "there should be greater recognition of war veterans in Scotland". I totally agree, and all those who have served as veterans minister, regardless of which Administration they have served in, would agree, too. We now know the shape of the new Cabinet in London. I had a good and close working relationship with Kevan Jones, who was the minister for veterans in the previous Westminster Administration, and I spoke to Liam Fox, who is the new Secretary of State for Defence, a few weeks ago—although I am not in any way suggesting that I predicted the outcome of the general election. I met him at a function for veterans in St James's palace, when we agreed that if he became the defence secretary, we would work closely to ensure that our veterans got the level of service that they required and to which they were entitled north and south of the border. I have an update for members on the debate that we had about veterans who end up in the criminal justice system. We have asked the Scottish Prison Service to undertake a survey of the prison population to determine the number of ex-service personnel who are serving custodial sentences in Scotland. That will inform our policy with a view to avoiding many of them ending up in the criminal justice system, often as a result of mental health and addiction problems that they have incurred as a direct result of their war experiences. Rob Gibson mentioned veterans champions, on which I take this opportunity to update the chamber. Veterans Scotland is holding a seminar tomorrow for veterans champions from across Scotland. At that seminar there will be an examination of their role, how they engage with service providers, how they share information, including on best practice across Scotland, and how they can help to resolve issues that our veterans face. There are already approximately 50 such champions in Scotland, and we expect most of them to attend tomorrow. As well as having veterans champions at the political level in our local authorities and in health boards, we have veterans co-ordinators at official level, with a view to ensuring that when veterans leave the services to go into civvy street they have as smooth a transition as possible and a continuum of service provision from the armed forces resettlement officer to the local champions and co-ordinators. I confirm that I and my ministerial colleagues will attend and participate in as many commemorative events as we can across Scotland, as well as elsewhere in the United Kingdom and Europe, from VE day to armed forces day, which takes  place in June. I assure members that, right across the range of devolved services for which we are responsible, we are working with the Ministry of Defence, the armed forces, the health service, local authorities, the veterans community and service providers to put in place the best possible level of support for our veterans across Scotland. Although the control and management of the award of medals to veterans is reserved to the Ministry of Defence, I agree with Stewart Maxwell's call to veterans to take advantage of their eligibility for the veterans badge, which they should wear with pride. We celebrate VE day with pride. It marked the end of tyranny in Europe and rekindled hope and the human spirit. For that, we should all be eternally grateful.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

Antisocial behaviour should not be tolerated wherever it occurs. Our framework for tackling antisocial behaviour, "Promoting Positive Outcomes", will help local agencies to work together in partnership with local communities and others so as to respond in a proportionate, appropriate and timely fashion. I recognise the efforts that members have made—Sarah Boyack in particular—in raising the issue. I know that Sarah Boyack attended the meeting on 29 March, and I hope that she was encouraged by the commitment of local agencies, including the City of Edinburgh Council, Lothian and Borders Police and Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service, to address the matter. As was reflected by those who attended the meeting, the problem is best resolved locally. However, we remain in regular contact with local agencies, and we are keen to assist those agencies in practical ways to help to draw attention to the issue.

I appreciate the concern that local residents and their representatives, especially Sarah Boyack, have expressed. Tackling antisocial behaviour is primarily the responsibility of the criminal justice agencies and the police. I  am willing to meet Sarah Boyack to discuss the issue more widely. We are planning a private housing bill later this year. If Sarah Boyack has practical suggestions to make, she should be aware that we are always open to talking to people and listening to their ideas.

The Scottish Government does not categorise local authorities as high, medium or low risk against achieving the Scottish housing quality standard by 2015. All local authorities have set out plans for how they will fund and comply with the quality standard by 2015 and they will report progress and updated projections to the Scottish Housing Regulator this autumn, and annually thereafter. That information will be used to inform the shared risk assessment exercise that is to be undertaken with other scrutiny bodies. We will publish draft guidance later this year to help landlords to interpret the SHQS and target their SHQS activity more cost effectively. The estimated cost of meeting the SHQS across all local authority housing in Scotland between now and 2015, according to the landlords themselves, is approximately £6,000 per unit of the total housing stock. However, those costs have not been broken down by local authority, and they might include works that are not strictly required to meet the basic SHQS requirements.

I recall that Mr McNulty was once a minister with responsibility for housing. The reality is that we inherited the target of 2015 from the previous Administration without any plan, let alone a risk assessment. As I said in my answer, we will undertake a risk assessment after the autumn, after the Scottish Housing Regulator reports on progress and updates projections. I think that Mr McNulty wrote his reply to my answer before I gave it, so I repeat—read my lips—that that information will be used to inform the shared risk assessment exercise with other scrutiny bodies. We are undertaking a risk assessment exercise for a target that is five years away.

I heard the interview and was, to use a Des McNulty word, staggered by the way in which the Prime Minister completely wrote off the importance of social housing south of the border. Given the low level of investment in social housing by the Labour Government south of the border, I can understand those sentiments. However, north of the border, under this Administration, we have had record spend, approvals, starts and completions.

As I explained last week to the Local Government and Communities Committee, of which Mary Mulligan is a member, our proposals to reform the right to buy would have only a  marginal impact on Scottish housing quality standard funding. Indeed, other factors—such as the continuation of the rental income from 18,000 houses that will remain in the rented sector instead of being sold off—mean that the overall impact of our right-to-buy proposals will have a positive effect, not only on the quality of housing in Scotland but on the number of houses that are available for rent in Scotland. It is a pity that the main Opposition party will not come clean on whether it has a policy on modernising the right to buy or whether it is simply waiting to see what the Tories do so that it can follow in their footsteps.

Over the financial period 2008 to 2011, we will allocate a £36.6 million vacant and derelict land fund to five local authority areas, namely Glasgow, North Lanarkshire, South Lanarkshire, Dundee and the Highlands. We will also publish the Scottish vacant and derelict land survey—I am sure it will be a bestseller—which is an annual survey of all local authority areas to establish the extent and state of vacant and derelict land throughout Scotland.

Yes, I am aware of the activity in North Lanarkshire, which of course includes the very substantial Ravenscraig site. I take this opportunity to underline and reiterate our commitment to the development of Ravenscraig.

In addition to the five areas that qualify for assistance through the derelict and vacant urban land fund, housing associations and local authorities would qualify for housing association grant or, potentially, assistance with council house funding for housing developments in the social housing sector. As the member will know, this Government has engaged in assisting  housing associations and councils to build new houses in Scotland. In fact, between this year and next, we will build more than 3,000 new council houses in Scotland, which is a record about which I am sure that he will be very complimentary.

I keep the uptake of the scheme under constant review. I look forward to seeing the impact of an amendment to regulations that should come into effect in May and which will extend the benefits of stage 4 of the scheme to more families, as recommended by the fuel poverty forum. We have already made changes to the scheme on the basis of addressing fuel poverty, which is at the heart of the programme. It is about addressing the needs of the most disadvantaged people in Scotland.

The figures on the spend will be produced shortly. If Mary Mulligan can give me examples that show too much bureaucracy or red tape, we will address that, because that defeats the programme's purpose. I am always keen to remove red tape from any programme, and especially from one that is directed at poorer people.

I do not recall receiving that letter, but I am happy to check it out and to reply to Malcolm Chisholm. If I have not already received it, I will ask for it. I will consider the issues that he highlights, ask my officials to address them and write to him.

The recovered funds were not allocated to any other organisation or charity. As is standard and proper practice, all unused funds  were collected centrally and used to meet expenditure priorities for the Scottish Government in the normal way.

My answer was not evasive. It is just a fact of life that it is, and always has been, standard procedure to reinvest such moneys in central funds and not to earmark them for any specific additional project. On the more general issues that Mr Butler raises, I will remind him of two points. First, the initial funding application was considered by the previous Executive and had all-party support. Secondly, Audit Scotland has already thoroughly investigated some of the issues that he raised and has found nothing unwarranted in the actions of the Government or of the Scottish-Islamic Foundation.

We are currently considering options on how the £31 million additional funding from Barnett consequentials for affordable housing developments should be allocated. The agreed allocation of funding will be published on our website, once it is announced.

In relation to the allocation of the £31 million primarily for registered social landlords, and the third tranche of council house money—another £25 million that is currently under consideration for allocation—we are mindful of the need to give high priority to the criteria that relate to achieving the homelessness target in 2012. That will not be to the exclusion of all other criteria, but it will be an important consideration in all cases.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the points that Shirley-Anne Somerville has made. It is clear that there are many priorities for spending in Edinburgh. This party and this Government certainly did not regard the trams as having higher priority than housing or, indeed, than other essential services such as education and health. I have every sympathy with the argument that Shirley-Anne Somerville makes.

All our spending is evaluated in the normal way at local authority, central Government and registered social landlord levels. On obtaining value for money, we follow the same procedures as were followed when Mary Mulligan was a minister. I am absolutely sure that we will have achieved value for money, because that was an up-front condition of getting the money in the first place.

We are currently considering options on how the £31 million additional funding from Barnett consequentials for affordable housing developments should be allocated. The agreed allocation will be published on our website, once it is announced.

As I have said, for both the £31 million allocation and the third tranche of council house money, which is £25 million, housing need will be the overriding consideration, including issues such as homelessness, areas under housing pressure and other pressures on housing need in each area of Scotland. That will be our top priority. We have presided over record spend, record build, record starts and record completions in housing, and we will continue to do so.

I agree with Gavin Brown and Andy Kerr: this has been a fairly civilised and good debate. It is perhaps a shame that it is restricted to just over an hour, as the subject is very important. I will try to answer the points that have been put to the Government as far as I can within my time, and to explode some myths that have been perpetuated yet again. The Labour Party's commitment to a living wage would be more credible if it had done anything in its past 13 years in power to implement it, which it has not done. As Elaine Smith articulately pointed out, it has been Labour Party policy to have a living wage since 1924, 86 years ago. During the interim, there have been six Labour Governments, yet we still do not have a living wage. The Labour Party has a record of failure and incredibility on the issue.

The Liberal Democrats talk about a mansion tax. To impose a mansion tax in Scotland would require them to undermine the Scotland Act 1998 totally and to override the powers of this Parliament and the rights of local authorities.

No, I will not. They cannot even tell us how much money the mansion tax would raise—and they talk about prudence.

The member could not answer the question when I asked him it, so he should sit down. As far as myth is concerned—

On the myth about the National Minimum Wage Bill, let me point out that there were 33 Scottish Labour MPs in bed at the time, too. Indeed, Tony Blair was in bed at the time of the division that Mr Whitton referred to. Facts are chiels that winna ding—that is the reality. The other myth, which Johann Lamont articulated, is that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth tried to veto a plan to implement the living wage in the national  health service that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing proposed.

That is a lot of nonsense. As Andy Kerr should know, being a former health minister and finance minister, we have actually implemented that plan from 1 April.

If we have implemented it, how can it have been vetoed?

Ah'm no feart o you, Duncan. On the wider issue, the current lowest rate of pay in Scottish Government core activity is £6.53 per hour. Under this Government, that will increase to £7.23 an hour from 1 August. Unlike the Labour Government in London, the SNP Government in Scotland is implementing the living wage.

Labour has had 13 wasted years; we have had three productive years, in which we are implementing the policy that Labour failed to deliver for 86 years. Of course I pay tribute to Glasgow City Council and to the leadership of Steven Purcell—we have done so publicly. Elaine Smith has referred to North Lanarkshire Council. It is the only other Labour-controlled council in Scotland, and it has had to be brought screaming and kicking to implement the equal pay and single status strategy, which—

No—the member did not sit in on the debate. Only now is North Lanarkshire Council being brought screaming and kicking to implement that pay strategy, at a very late hour. We will take no lessons from the Labour Party on the living wage. It is to the eternal shame of the Labour Party that over the past 13 years the level of income inequality in the United Kingdom—under Gordon Brown's stewardship—is now the worst that it has been in decades. That is Labour's record. We are proud of our record. We are delivering the living wage, not just throughout the national health service in Scotland but throughout every area of  government for which we are responsible. We can be proud—but not Labour.

Can the member tell us how many properties in Scotland are valued at more than £2 million and would therefore qualify for the mansion tax?

I thank Patrick Harvie for bringing the subject to the attention of the chamber and for the tone that he adopted, which I hope we will all adopt throughout the debate.  The Scottish Government's position is very clear. We believe that a more equal society—I emphasise "more equal"—would be a "happier, healthier, safer and greener society". That is why we have made it such a priority. We agree with Patrick Harvie that the levels of poverty and income inequality in Scotland are unacceptable. We firmly believe that a fairer distribution of income and wealth is key to tackling poverty. Our overall approach is to try to create a more successful country with opportunities for all. One of the great prerequisites for the abolition of poverty and for more equality in our society is full employment, and we regard the drive towards full and fuller employment as a key priority in tackling poverty and inequality.

In actual fact, we have commissioned more general work on the council tax and, in particular, on its impact on those at the lower end of the income scale, which in relative terms is very unfair compared with its impact on those at the higher end. For us, the key driver for abolishing the council tax is its unfairness. It is related neither to income nor to wealth but to residency alone, which is not even a proxy for income or wealth levels.

No. In fact, the council tax freeze has benefited many people who do not qualify for council tax benefit but who are nevertheless on a relatively low income. To qualify for that benefit, a person must be earning less than about £6,000 a year, and I would not call anyone who earns just over £6,000 a year as being particularly well off. The group of people, many of them pensioners, whose income is just above the threshold to qualify for benefit or rebate are spending a proportionately higher level of their income on council tax than they would pay under a local  income tax. That is one of the reasons why we have been so insistent about the need to relate local government finance and revenue raising to the ability to pay. Indeed, that would all be part of a wider reform that we would carry out if we had the powers to do so in this Parliament. In the meantime, however, I hope that whoever wins the election at Westminster—

I will give way in a minute. I hope that whoever wins the Westminster election looks at the fundamental issue of the interrelationship between taxation and benefits. Many of our taxes redistribute things the wrong way. For example, people who earn £150,000 a year pay far less, as a proportion of their income, in national insurance contributions than people who earn, say, £10,000 or £11,000 a year.

I give way to Patrick Harvie.

I will indeed continue in that vein if I can get a chance to do so and if there are no further interruptions. The Scottish Government's targets are very much focused on solidarity and reducing income inequality. Indeed, our primary target, which is to increase the proportion of income received by the poorest 30 per cent of households in Scotland by 2017, was chosen specifically to ensure that we focus on the working poor as a priority group. Our response to the challenge of low pay is being driven forward through "Achieving Our Potential", our flagship policy on poverty and income inequality, and we share the commitment to eradicate child poverty by 2020. Because I want to comment further on the issue of low pay, I will not have time to comment on the amendments that have been lodged. On the Scottish Government's public sector pay policy, I must first of all emphasise that the Scottish Government is not responsible for all Scottish public sector workers, many of whom are still under the aegis of either the UK Government or local government. Moreover, many of those who work for the Scottish Government and its agencies are subject to UK national pay  bargaining procedures instead of having their pay set at the Scottish Government's discretion. That said, addressing low pay is one of the Scottish Government's four key pay policy priorities in its 2009-10 public sector pay policy. The policy itself encourages public bodies specifically to consider their lowest paid staffing groups and makes it clear that policies should take into account delivery of the solidarity target that I have just mentioned. The most recent pay deal for Scottish Government staff had a particular emphasis on assisting our lowest paid staff, and the rise is a reflection of our commitment to recruitment and retention. Moreover, everyone in the national health service in Scotland, which is by far our largest group of employees, is on the living wage. Unfortunately I do not have time to say much more. I will try to make further points in my closing speech. I move amendment S3M-6216.2, to leave out from "therefore" to end and insert: "welcomes the action that the Scottish Government has taken to freeze pay for government employees on higher salaries and the progress that the Scottish Government is making toward achieving a living wage of £7 per hour for government employees and employees of the NHS in Scotland."

I, too, pay tribute to Angela Constance, not only for securing the debate but for pursuing the issue vigorously. Every speaker has made new and important points. We are small in number but the standard of debate has been extremely high. I have had a detailed informal discussion with Kevan Jones, who is my counterpart as minister for veterans in the UK Government, about identifying accurately the number of prisoners in Scotland who are veterans. I shall explain what was done south of the border. The first thing to understand is that the Ministry of Defence has a database that includes the name, address and details of every veteran who lives in the United Kingdom. That is an important start because it means that, through the Ministry of Defence, we can identify every veteran in the country. The Prison Service south of the border matched that MOD database with the database of people in prison and officials were able to identify—accurately, it appears—the percentage of people in prison at that time who were veterans and, if they so wished, the names and addresses of the veterans who were in the prison system.  I asked Kevan Jones whether it would be possible in principle for the Ministry of Defence to work with the Scottish Prison Service to carry out exactly the same exercise in Scotland, to allow us to get a much better handle on the numbers. He saw no difficulty in it and suggested that, once the election is over—whoever the Secretary of State for Defence and the minister for veterans in the new Government after 6 May are—we can take the matter forward. I have already asked my officials to fix up an early meeting with the new veterans minister to that effect and to put the exercise on the agenda. The second point that needs to be stressed is the distinction between the number of veterans in prison and the number in the criminal justice system. Many veterans may not be in prison but are at some other stage in the criminal justice system. Therefore, although a good start can be made by identifying the number in prison through co-operation with the Ministry of Defence on its database, it would probably be much more difficult to identify all those who are in the criminal justice system. My belief—based on my mailbag and on having been minister for veterans, as well as minister for housing, for more than a year—is that 1.7 per cent is probably an underestimate of the percentage of prisoners at any time in Scotland who are veterans. The figure is based on prisoners who declare themselves to be veterans, but for various reasons they often do not declare themselves. The important point, however, is that, at 1.7 per cent, the number is 134. Even if the figure is double that, it still means that fewer than 300 prisoners at any time in Scotland are veterans, so it should not be beyond our wit, working with the Scottish Prison Service, to identify the particular needs relating to a prisoner's status as a veteran that need to be catered for. I agree absolutely with all the members—Hugh Henry, Christine Grahame and others—who said that we must take a wider view and consider prevention. The most difficult time for veterans is their transition from the armed services into civilian life. I have asked the Scottish Government's armed services adviser—Major General David McDowall, the former general officer commanding second division in Scotland—to pursue the agreement that I had with John Hutton when he was Secretary of State for Defence and subsequently renewed with Kevan Jones and Bob Ainsworth, under which we are establishing throughout Scotland a process whereby the resettlement officer for each member of the armed services who is about to leave the services has a contact in the local authority to which the member of the services will relocate.  The person in the local authority will act as the single point of contact Christine Grahame mentioned and will help to co-ordinate not only local authority services but contacts with the designated people in the health service, who are already designated in most hospitals in Scotland, with the Department for Work and Pensions, housing associations and other relevant bodies. I believe that that quality and level of support in the transitional phase is essential to minimising the transitional difficulty that veterans experience when they leave the armed services and move into civilian life. Other issues need to be addressed, but I do not have time to address them all. I take the point that Jeremy Purvis and other members made: that it is often 10 or 13 years before mental health problems are identified and it is sometimes even longer before they are dealt with. One of the major causes of problems is housing. The Housing (Scotland) Bill, which is currently going through the Local Government and Communities Committee, deals with the disadvantage that veterans currently have under the allocation system. We will rectify that problem. I have also specifically asked Linda McTavish, who is chairing my working party on supported accommodation, to look at the particular needs of veterans, because at a later stage they often need not only a house but total support in a totally supported accommodation environment.  Unfortunately, I am unable to outline the whole range of services, but I will mention one other matter. On 7 March, the Big Lottery Fund announced a new £35 million trust, which is to help veterans across the UK who struggle with the transition to civilian life, especially those with psychological wellbeing problems. I intend to try to access as much of that money as I possibly can over the coming months and years to improve the services that are available to our veterans in Scotland. We owe it to them.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

The Scottish Government has worked closely with Machrihanish Airbase Community Company, known as MACC, to provide impartial advice to enable it to register an interest in the ex-RAF airbase under the community right-to-buy provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. That has enabled MACC to secure a pre-emptive right to buy on the former airbase, and the  Government will continue to provide impartial advice throughout the right-to-buy process.

We in the Scottish Government will do everything we can within our powers and our resources to facilitate the community right to buy. However, many of the very valid issues that the member has raised can be addressed only by the Ministry of Defence in London. We will be very happy to raise these matters with the new Secretary of State for Defence, whoever they might be, and encourage them to address them to ensure that the community can not only exercise its right to buy successfully, but go on to make a success of the development.

Every household can apply for help under the energy assistance package. As well as getting advice on saving energy, people can ask for a check of whether they are getting all the pension credits and tax credits to which they are entitled, their electricity supplier can check whether they can get a cheaper tariff or a cheaper payment method, and some people will be eligible for free insulation. If the heating system is working and the standard assessment procedure rating is less than 55, the householder may be eligible for stage 4 of the energy assistance package. If the system is working and the SAP rating is 55 or above, the dwelling is not eligible for stage 4 of the EAP unless the system is condemned as unsafe. I would advise householders with a heating system that they believe is working intermittently to seek appropriate advice from a gas safe registered engineer.

I deplore the disinformation and misinformation that the Labour Party is putting out about the energy assistance package. The reality is that the energy assistance package is designed to help people in fuel poverty—rich retired bankers do not qualify for a central heating system under our scheme. When the statistics are published, I believe that we will be able to demonstrate that we have spent the budget and achieved our targets. Indeed, last year, when the official statistics on the central heating programme for private housing  were published, they showed that we had a record unmatched by Labour at any time in the previous 10 years.

John Scott asks an extremely valid question. As he said, I have asked the Scottish fuel poverty forum to examine the issue of chronically ill people who are living in fuel poverty. I am advised that it expects to report to me within the next few weeks, and I will study its recommendations carefully, because we are empathetic to the points that John Scott and others have made.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that all patients have appropriate and timeous access to the services they need in NHS Scotland. It is, however, for national health service boards and local authorities to determine the level of service provision that is required for speech and language therapy based on local needs. The Scottish Government is working with NHS boards and local authorities to develop a partnership approach and supportive guidance on how education and health services can work together to best provide for children with additional support needs, including speech and language therapy. It is anticipated that the guidance on working together to improve outcomes for children and young people will be available in June 2010.

Of course, the legacy of the previous Administration was not encouraging, but positive action is being taken. For example, the number of therapists increased this year by more than 3 per cent; in the previous year, it was more than 6 per cent. We recognise the challenges in this area, and we are responding by putting in additional resources when and where the priorities lie.

No, we do not accept that that work is being undermined. We accept that additional pressures have resulted from the additional  support for learning legislation, but we have attempted to resource those additional pressures so that we can live up to the aspiration of ensuring that the services are provided at the required level throughout the country. We will aspire to achieve that objective.

Guidance was issued to the Energy Saving Trust and Scottish Gas on 23 October 2009, stating that, "where the outcome of an energy efficiency survey of an applicant's dwelling was marginal around bands E/F, the Managing Agent is expected to consider all the areas where there might be any dubiety around the input to that rating and where there is dubiety or a potential margin of error, then err in the applicant's favour." Following the amendment to regulations that extended eligibility to band E, that guidance now applies to the borderline around bands D and E. If there is any dubiety around the input to the rating or a potential margin of error and the household is  eligible for stage 4 by dint of age or qualifying benefits, it will get the package of measures that is appropriate to the house, which is likely to include a central heating system.

I am happy to take additional measures to ensure that things are absolutely transparent. If Rhona Brankin or any other member has any constituent who is a borderline case and thinks that the rule has not been properly applied, I am happy to pursue the matter on behalf of that member and their constituent.

The first benefit is that people no longer have to pay the huge VAT bill that the Tories imposed back in the early 1990s. That makes a difference in itself. We are spending a record amount on fuel poverty measures. There is the energy assistance programme and the insulation programme that was announced last year. A new insulation programme was announced as part of this year's budget. We are working with the energy companies, which will spend more than £100 million this year working with the Scottish Government and other agencies to ensure that those who live in fuel poverty are assisted, and that our pensioners, particularly our poorer pensioners, do not suffer in the winter but remain cosy.

I make it clear that the full budget will be spent by the end of the financial year. More than 7,000 central heating systems have already been installed this year under stage 4—that is not to mention the throughput through the other stages of the energy assistance package. It would, of course, be exceptionally helpful if the United Kingdom Government agreed to my request to improve winter fuel payments for people in Scotland who are being penalised because of our weather. The UK Labour Government refuses to pay the additional amount that we have requested.

I, too, congratulate Elizabeth Smith on securing the debate, which I am very proud to sum up on behalf of the Scottish Government. We are celebrating over 150 years of the cadets. It is absolutely fascinating to look back over some of their early history. The cadets began way back in the 1850s with the formation of several forerunners to the existing organisations. Despite the rumours, I was not around at the time. The Cadet Corps, the forerunners of the Combined Cadet Corps, was first formed in schools as a means of training young people to support the masses of volunteers who were required to boost army numbers following heavy losses in the Crimea and given the possibility of further war. The Cadet Corps was recognised by the then War Office and permitted to wear the uniforms of their parent volunteer battalions, which were later combined to become the Territorial Army. Gradually, additional battalions developed outwith schools and, as the threat of war receded, some Cadet Corps battalions developed into rifle clubs, and cadet battalions that were not associated with schools became social welfare organisations, the forerunners of the current Army Cadet Corps. In the meantime, also during the 1850s, a number of orphanages were established to look after children who were orphaned as a result of the Crimean war. Those were run with the help of sailors returning from the Crimea. An organisation was then formed called the Naval Lads Brigade. Over the next 50 years or so, 34 brigades of boys were established and, in 1919, were granted recognition by the Admiralty. The title Navy League Sea Cadet Corps was adopted. Taking us forward to 1938, a retired officer from the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Air Force, Air Commodore Chamier, had the foresight to see the need for people trained in airmanship and started the Air Defence Cadet Corps. That comprised units that were set up in schools to provide part-time training for young men who intended to join the Royal Air Force. They were hugely successful and their value was noted by the Government of the time, including Winston Churchill. Having developed from the Air Defence Cadet Corps, the Air Training Corps was formed in 1941 by royal warrant. By 1942, the other cadet forces started to thrive once again and were heavily supported by the Government. That has been the case until today, when the cadet forces are still heavily supported by the UK Government and the Scottish Government. Although many cadets join the armed forces, it is a myth that there is pressure on them to do so.  The Ministry of Defence accepts that the cadet forces add value to the youth of today, and for that reason it continues to support them, as we do, whole-heartedly. There is no compulsion to engage in a military career because of one's involvement in cadet forces. As Elizabeth Smith pointed out, the four cadet forces in Scotland have a total population of 11,000, with 700 adult volunteer instructors and 400 officers who provide training. In the UK, there are 131,000 cadets, with 25,000 adult volunteers in more than 3,000 units—numbers that we hope will be enhanced over the coming years. All four cadet forces—the Army Cadet Force, the Combined Cadet Force, the Sea Cadet Corps and the Air Training Corps—are military-themed youth organisations in which participants have to undertake public service tasks to rise through the ranks, and in which there is a strong emphasis on social inclusion. As others have said, the cadet movement is based on principles of equality, fairness, teamwork and public spirit. Thus, it is a force for good that brings training, teamwork skills, community spirit, discipline and a sense of worth to thousands of young people in Scotland. Business and Technology Education Council qualifications were developed in public service and music, and are recognised by colleges and universities, which enhances opportunities for Scotland's young people. To date, 1,000 have studied for their BTEC in music, mainly piping. I hope that the cadet movement continues to flourish and to foster a spirit of adventure and that, at the same time, cadets continue to develop the qualities of leadership and good citizenship. Through its tailored training, the cadet movement will continue to instil and promote in our young people the qualities of responsibility, self-reliance, resourcefulness, endurance, perseverance and a sense of service to the community. We cannot ask any more of our young people, and we are proud of them. The cadet experience is invaluable for young people of all social backgrounds, and we encourage young people to participate. Membership helps to develop life skills, and it is excellent experience, as well as being fun and enjoyable. I invite my ministerial colleagues to participate in the 150th anniversary events throughout the year. In addition to the events that have already been mentioned, there are three others. First, cadets will plant 150,000 trees that have been supplied by the Woodland Trust as part of the celebrations. Secondly, first world war remembrance activities will be given a special cadet 150 flavour this year. Finally, teams of air cadets from Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland are hoping to be joined by cadets from throughout the country in the Scottish poisk 2010, helping to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the cadet movement. The Scottish  poisk is the original air cadet mountain endurance event, which takes the form of a continuous journey through mountain fell, moorland forest and water, broken down into various stages, with a strong element of navigation throughout. Needless to say, I have never participated in such an event. We encourage all members of Parliament to support the 150th anniversary and the celebrations that go with it. I hope that we can congratulate, on a cross-party and all-party basis, the cadet forces on their 150 years of success. They deserve every plaudit that comes their way. We have every reason to be proud of their achievements.   Meeting closed at 17:45.

Housing for asylum seekers in Scotland is a matter for the United Kingdom  Border Agency and Glasgow City Council, as it is the only local authority in Scotland to have a contract with the UKBA to provide accommodation to asylum seekers. However, Scottish Government officials regularly attend the multiagency move on group, which includes Glasgow City Council, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' strategic migration partnership, Glasgow Housing Association, YMCA Scotland, the Scottish Refugee Council, and Jobcentre Plus. The group was initially set up in 2007 to address the issues resulting from the case resolution process. However, it continues to meet to discuss emerging issues in relation to asylum seekers and those recently granted refugee status.

George Foulkes makes a valid point, and I appreciate the initiative that he has taken with Lord West. I am happy to raise the issue at my next regular meeting with COSLA to see whether something more can be done on this issue.

I start on a personal note by wishing Ian Macpherson all the best after his recent operation. I look forward to seeing him back to full fitness as soon as possible. I also congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate and agree with Robin Harper that it is a pity that more members are not present. The Aurora house is not a localised, South Lanarkshire issue; it has much wider implications, not only throughout Scotland, because the project is an exemplar of what can be done throughout Europe. The low-carbon Scottish buildings of tomorrow must be affordable to construct, buy or rent and comfortably heat and power without forcing householders into fuel poverty. The Aurora house brings all those conditions together into one project. It offers an important insight into what is needed for us as a society to realise a low-carbon  future in respect of technical solutions and the construction skills that are needed to support them. Robin Harper's point about the construction skills that are required for the future is valid. Scotland has the best energy standards for new buildings in the United Kingdom and will continue to keep the leading edge in that respect. Revised building regulations that are to be introduced in October this year will result in emissions of around 70 per cent less than 1990 levels for new homes. We recognise that higher energy standards will require more skilled people and we know that more trained apprentices will be necessary. Therefore, with cross-party support, we are investing £16 million to support an additional 7,800 new apprenticeships this year. Construction Skills, the sector skills council for construction, is also reviewing future training needs against the sector's shift to low-carbon requirements. Skills are also one of the many areas that will be addressed in our energy efficiency action plan, which we will publish in late spring. That plan will set out a range of policies and programmes to reduce energy consumption across all sectors. We recognise that the energy efficiency of existing homes, as well as new build, must be improved significantly and a lot of work is under way on that. Indeed, the energy efficiency action plan consultation document that we published late last year estimated that, for the housing sector to achieve its share of the 42 per cent reduction in carbon emissions by 2020, we need to invest £16 billion in our housing stock throughout Scotland. The action plan will also include Scotland-wide advice for householders. We have made a modest start with our £2 million interest-free loans for a range of measures and the energy efficiency design awards, which reward innovative approaches to saving energy, particularly in hard-to-treat housing. As has been mentioned, these initiatives are important in tackling fuel poverty. One of my first visits as Minister for Housing and Communities was to the Lochside estate in Dumfries. The first lady tenant whom I met there had just moved from a two-bedroom flat to a four-bedroom, upstairs-downstairs house and, because of the new insulation technology that Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership had applied, her gas bill had gone down from £40 a week for a two-bedroom flat to £36 a month for a four-bedroom house. That shows a coming together in achieving fuel poverty objectives and carbon emission reduction objectives. One of the Aurora house's great strengths is, of course, its low energy requirement, which mitigates the effect of rising energy prices and the risk of fuel poverty. We must also recognise the importance of microgeneration in  meeting future challenges, as well as the importance of new technologies, the feed-in tariff for electricity and the renewable heat incentive, which helps to encourage and facilitate the new technologies that are required. I welcome the debate—it is a pity that it is not better attended—and the contribution of the Aurora project. I have not yet had the opportunity to visit the project, but I would welcome an invitation to do so. As the minister responsible for housing and fuel poverty, I want to see this kind of technology at first hand. However, Mr Swinney assures me that the Aurora project makes an exciting contribution to addressing the challenges of climate change, energy efficiency, the promotion of new skills for the new economy and the reduction of fuel poverty. On a new note, Aurora is the Latin word for dawn. I commend all those involved in the ambitious project and I hope that the Aurora house signals not just a new dawn for Dawn Construction Ltd, but the dawn of a generation of affordable low-carbon and low-energy housing for Scotland. Where better to start than in Lanarkshire?  Meeting closed at 17:32.

The Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 already enables social landlords to give tenants a short Scottish secure tenancy agreement in certain circumstances, including as a probationary tenancy for those with a history of antisocial behaviour. That probationary tenancy enables tenants to be given a second chance to sustain a successful tenancy. The tenancy will be for at least six months and can be for up to 12 months. If the tenant or member of their household continues to act in an antisocial manner, the landlord can seek to end the tenancy.

I thank the member for highlighting those issues. A number of local authorities already use existing provisions effectively, but if local authorities find any problems, barriers or unnecessary bureaucratic problems with the procedure, I am happy to listen to any proposals for reform.

I thank the member for raising that issue, which I will put on the agenda of my next meeting with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations to try to identify whether it is a serious, widespread problem and whether any Government action is needed to deal with it.

The energy assistance package is delivering heating systems, insulation, energy savings advice, increased incomes, and lower fuel costs to many thousands of fuel-poor households. Anyone who is having problems meeting their fuel bills should phone 0800 512 012 today. Just last week, I wrote to Helen Goodman, Under-Secretary of State at the Department for Work and Pensions, asking for wind chill to be taken into account when calculating the trigger for cold weather payments. I am sure that the chamber will support me in continuing to press Westminster to take proper account of the severe climate that is experienced in Scotland.

I correct Andy Kerr: it is not true to say that not all pensioners have access to the energy assistance package. That package consists of four different stages, including assistance with income and benefit maximisation. I think that he was referring to stage 4 of the package, in which we are deliberately targeting our resources at those who are fuel poor, based on the recommendations of the Scottish fuel poverty forum and proposals that were supported by the Labour Party.

All ministers have on-going dialogue with the third sector, which includes discussion of how it can assist with such programmes. The officials who are involved in the Energy Saving Trust, which delivers the energy assistance package with Scottish Gas, and those who are involved in delivering the home insulation scheme are regularly in touch with third sector organisations to try to reach those whom we are trying to help the most. As Nanette Milne knows, I have responded to the concerns of Macmillan Cancer Support nurses about cancer patients' eligibility for the energy assistance package and other measures. The fuel poverty forum is considering whether there is any way in which we can effectively help people who are long-term sick and who live in fuel poverty.

Of the heating system measures that were delivered up to the end of January, 70 per cent were undertaken as part of our commitment to honour applications under the previous central heating programme. By the end of this financial year, most installations will have been generated by the energy assistance package. As well as heating measures, we deliver insulation, energy saving advice, increased incomes and lower fuel costs. By the end of January, that had benefited more than 40,000 households throughout Scotland.

I have dealt with several of my constituents who were not initially approved because their system was working when the inspector visited. I have issued the clear instruction to the Energy Saving Trust and Scottish Gas that, when a system is not working properly or providing the necessary heating—particularly for older people—they must take a sympathetic and flexible approach. If they are in doubt, they should approve a central heating system for people in such a situation.

As well as providing energy saving advice, our energy assistance package helps fuel-poor households in important ways that attack the three causes of fuel poverty. It helps them to increase their incomes by providing benefit checks that deliver, on average, more than £1,300 a year. It helps them to reduce the price that they pay for fuel by accessing social tariffs or cheaper payment methods from the energy companies. It helps them to reduce their use of energy through insulation and draught-proofing to stop their homes losing heat and through efficient heating systems. We are reducing the cost of heating for many other households, with insulation that is delivered through the home insulation scheme and with energy saving Scotland home loans to replace old and inefficient boilers.

Not for the first time, Karen Whitefield is behind the times. The energy assistance package has a boiler scrappage scheme. Where appropriate, we offer replacement boilers for nothing. Any pensioner who is fuel poor in Shotts or anywhere else and who receives benefits is entitled to stage 4 of the package. It is ridiculous for members to try to mislead constituents about their eligibility for the scheme.

So that I do not hold up the First Minister too long, I shall give a short answer. I agree with every word that Anne McLaughlin said.

I am sure that the member agrees with me and many of her party's back benchers that one of the problems is the difficulty that people have with the complex process that they have to go through to change their factor. That is a competition issue. We want more choice so that it is easier to change a factor that is not providing the service.

Will the member make it clear whether she accepts my invitation?

As other members have said, this has been a very good and wide-ranging debate on a serious issue that affects many people. In my closing remarks, I will emphasise a number of my earlier points, deal with some of the points that have been raised in the debate and issue an invitation to members. I want to make the Government's position absolutely clear. First, we regard this as a priority issue that needs to be dealt with. Secondly, we believe in the need for urgent action. Thirdly, we will support Patricia Ferguson's motion at the vote at 5 o'clock. As I said in my opening remarks, we are taking a very empathetic approach to Ms Ferguson's proposed bill. Once we see the detail, we will sit down and consider it with her and, if we believe that the bill can achieve its objectives, we will give very serious consideration to supporting it. There are certain wider issues that need to be addressed but which might not be covered in the bill. To some extent, the debate has been dominated by arguments over whether there should be legislation or a voluntary scheme. In fact, landlords and, as Robert Brown pointed out, the legal profession are dealt with by a combination of legislation and voluntary codes. I believe that we need more legislation to enforce landlord standards, although we have, nevertheless, in recent years made significant progress not by choosing between legislation and a more voluntary approach, but by introducing a combination of both, with legislation playing an important role. In that respect, I liked Robert Brown's comment that legislation would provide a statutory framework within which a voluntary code could work. A number of members asked about the detailed timetable for publication of the accreditation standards. I am pleased to be able to tell Parliament that they will be published next month, which indicates the importance and urgency with which we are dealing with this issue.

That case has been very well made this morning by Robert Brown and others. As I  said, we have a very open mind not only on that issue but on the wider issues that Patricia Ferguson's proposed bill might not necessarily deal with. That brings me to my invitation. Given the fact that across the chamber there is broad consensus about what we are trying to achieve, I invite each of the parties—including the members of the Green party and Margo MacDonald, who are not present this morning—to a meeting that I, as minister, will convene in order that we can try to map out and agree together the way forward in dealing not only with all the issues that have been raised this morning, but with many other related issues that have not featured in the debate, but which need to be addressed. If we, as a Parliament, can move forward together and agree a critical path for the proposed legislation, the voluntary framework and the other bits and pieces that we need to deal with in addition to the issues that would be tackled in Patricia Ferguson's proposed bill, we will not only make the measures more effective and ensure that they cover everything that needs to be covered, but will help with the timetable of implementing these actions. It is, after all, a lot easier to move forward if we have cross-party and all-party consensus. As a result, within the next week or so, I will issue my invitation, which I hope will be accepted by all parties in the spirit in which it is offered and allow us to map out a way forward together. Robert Brown is absolutely right to say that this area is very complex. Some of the issues that have been mentioned will not, as I have said, be covered in Patricia Ferguson's bill or, indeed, by the voluntary code. For example, Sarah Boyack and Mary Scanlon highlighted the situation in certain new developments, in which the developer-appointed factor cannot be replaced by the residents for five years or until the last house is sold, whichever happens earlier. I know from experience that problems often arise in the period immediately after a development has been completed. It is often the critical time when many issues that relate to the developer and on-going management and maintenance have to be dealt with. We need to consider that area, and whether we need to reform the law that relates to new developments and offer greater flexibility. Members need to consider seriously and urgently several other issues that have been mentioned.

Absolutely. I hope that we will consider it together as part of the joint approach that I have suggested. A holistic and comprehensive view must be taken. We must ensure that a voluntary or a legislative scheme should not be overbureaucratic, as Elizabeth Smith rightly said, and that it does not, as an indirect or unintended consequence, undermine good factors and the work that they are doing. We should be extolling the virtues of good practice among the bulk of factors, but we must also be determined not only to root out slum landlords—I said to the Public Petitions Committee the other day that we should be determined to do that in Govanhill—but to root out rogue factors. That is the issue. Those people can make people's lives a misery. As Mary Scanlon and Elizabeth Smith in particular highlighted, the peace of older people who have moved into factored accommodation and are looking forward to enjoying their retirement in comfortable surroundings is often disturbed. I am dealing with such constituency cases, in which people have sleepless nights and worries as a result of their factor's bad practice. That is unacceptable. We have called the Parliament the people's Parliament, so it is the Parliament's job to rectify that situation. If voluntary action is required to do so, let us ensure that it happens; if legislation is required, let us ensure that it happens. I think that the mood is that we should work together to try to seriously advance the issue this year. I will therefore issue an invitation to all the parties, including to Margo MacDonald and the Greens, so that we can, I hope, put aside any party-political considerations, put the interests of our constituents and our people above any narrow political considerations, move forward, and see real progress this year.

At the start of a speech in a members' business debate, we congratulate the member on securing the debate. It is unusual to do that in a party-political debate, but I congratulate Tricia Ferguson on securing the debate, because the subject is worthy of the time that it has been allocated and the seriousness with which I think all parties intend to address the situation. The Scottish Government acknowledges the cross-party support for action. We all accept that the status quo is not an option. I support the outcomes that Tricia Ferguson is trying to achieve through her proposed member's bill. I have already indicated to the member that the Government will approach her bill empathetically. When we have the details, we will consider our position on the bill, but our approach will be from the standpoint of trying to do everything that we can to address the problems, which we all acknowledge. Passage of the proposed bill would of course include consideration of how the Parliament might legislate to provide the  appropriate authorities with effective powers to make a real difference on enforcement. I look forward to seeing the final details of the bill. I have a meeting soon with Tricia Ferguson to discuss how we can proceed.

I will spell out the Government's position on exactly that point if the member will give me an opportunity to do so. I emphasise how important the issue is to the Scottish Government. Improving the condition of the common parts of housing in the private sector is one of our key policy priorities. More than one third of Scotland's population lives in a flat, maisonette or apartment, and properties of that type have been identified as being more likely to suffer from a lack of maintenance. As a result, arrangements for the management of communal repairs are critical to the condition of a large section of our private housing stock. Property managers have a crucial role in maintaining and improving the stock condition. At the same time, we want to support property owners to take on more responsibility for the condition of their homes. It is important that owners are aware of their responsibilities, that they understand the various services that are available, and that they enjoy access to quality and value-for-money property management services. Ultimately, the customer must have trust in the services that their property manager provides. As Tricia Ferguson articulately outlined, the quality of service that some residential property managers provide is a matter of concern. It is a concern to the Government and the Parliament, and it was a concern to previous Administrations. The housing improvement task force recommended in its final report in 2003 that a national voluntary accreditation scheme for property managers be established. I think that Margaret Curran was the minister at the time. In July 2008, we announced plans to work with the property management industry to support the establishment of a national accreditation scheme. However, at that time, the Office of Fair Trading, as Tricia Ferguson said, was about to conduct a study to establish whether the market for residential property management services was working effectively in Scotland. We therefore  decided to await publication of the OFT report before entering into discussions with stakeholders. In February 2009, the OFT published the report on its market study, which concluded that some form of self-regulation was desirable, backed up with better information for consumers to improve the efficiency of the market and the quality of services. The OFT recommended that the Scottish Government should take the lead in ensuring early implementation of a self-regulatory scheme and that it should review progress of the scheme. It also recommended that, if a voluntary scheme did not prove to be effective, the Scottish Government should take steps to introduce a scheme on a statutory basis. As Mr McLetchie pointed out, we accepted those recommendations. To date, they represent our main work in the area. We have been developing a national voluntary accreditation scheme with the industry and other stakeholders. The aim is to help property management businesses build a better reputation and gain the trust of consumers, and to ensure that the industry takes ownership of finding the solution to its image problem. That approach has the potential to raise standards above the legal minimum that might be afforded by statutory regulation approaches to control the market. Let me be absolutely clear that, although the voluntary scheme is important, we are open to the possibility of the need for legislation. I have already indicated that we are prepared to sit down with Tricia Ferguson and consider the detail of her proposed bill. Particularly in light of the work that the Public Petitions Committee has done in relation to Govanhill, we are certainly of a mind to consider whether legislation is needed, whether or not the voluntary scheme is successful. The issue is that the roughly one third of property managers to whom Patricia Ferguson referred are giving the other two thirds a bad name. It may be that those property managers who would participate in a voluntary scheme are not from the third who make up the problem. We have an open mind on the issue.

That is precisely why I am making my remarks today. Statutory regulation in itself may not be a guarantee of achieving outcomes and carries some risks. If done wrongly, it could create barriers to entry to the market that might stifle  competition and reduce choice for the consumer; we want to avoid that. We also want to ensure that there is flexibility, so that we can respond to changes in the market over time. We must ensure that whatever legislation is framed does not have unintended consequences.

I agree with Robert Brown, but in some areas there is undoubtedly a local monopoly, which is driving down rather than driving up standards. As with every proposed legislative measure, we must consider the possibility that it may have unintended consequences. However, I emphasise that we are approaching the matter with an open mind and in the knowledge that we need to deal with the Govanhills of this world. I have made that absolutely clear.

It happens that I am dealing with a constituency case in Bothwell on that issue, so I am very aware of it. One of the residents concerned is a former Secretary of State for Scotland, so I am keen to ensure that I deal with the matter as effectively as possible. Self-regulation is being pursued in the form of the development of an industry-led voluntary accreditation scheme. At this stage, legislation and voluntary accreditation are not mutually exclusive, because legislating inevitably takes time. There are issues relating to the borderline between devolved and reserved responsibilities. The regulation of professions is a reserved matter, so we need to talk to our colleagues south of the border about the powers of the Parliament, to establish what legislation we can legitimately pass under the current constitutional arrangement.

We are in constant touch with people south of the border—especially John Healey—on a range of issues. We have also had on-going discussions with the OFT. This started as a consensual debate; I hope that it remains one, as I have made it clear that the Government is determined to work with Patricia Ferguson on the detail of her bill. We do not yet have that detail, and I cannot give an absolute commitment to support something when I do not know the detail of it. I have given an undertaking in principle to work with Patricia Ferguson and have given a clear steer this morning that, although we will progress the voluntary accreditation scheme, the Government has an open mind on the need for legislation. When we look at the situation in areas such as Govanhill and the work that Mike Dailly, the Public Petitions Committee and many others have done, we recognise the challenge and we are facing up to it. With all due respect, when Johann Lamont was a minister, nothing was done about it. We intend to move ahead on the basis of trying to reach a consensus in the chamber. We will consider legislating, if necessary, but in the meantime we will continue to progress the voluntary scheme and try to make it as effective as possible. Any decision on whether we will legislate or support the detail of Patricia Ferguson's bill will be determined by the persuasiveness of the arguments, by the evidence and by the need to ensure that any legislation that is proposed will deal effectively with the problem, without having unintended consequences. I move amendment S3M-5872.1, to insert at end: ", and seeks to ensure that the appropriate authorities are given the powers necessary for effective enforcement of any new legislation."

We have had a good debate. The speech that I enjoyed the most was that of Karen Gillon. I did not agree with everything that she said, but she hit a number of notes and underlined the important point about the need to succeed in regeneration. She repeated a point that Ross Finnie made, which is that some towns and cities are currently the subject of regeneration projects for the second, third or fourth times. We must ensure that when we regenerate an area we do so in such a way that the area becomes self-sustaining at the end of the regeneration period. That is why I talked about the projects in Blairgowrie and Neilston, which provide not just capital investment in physical regeneration but an income stream, which will be an investment stream for the communities in future. Another important point that Karen Gillon and many other members made is about the need to ensure that economic prosperity and investment underlie regeneration activity. We have had problems in the past when successful physical regeneration, as happened in the GEAR project,  was not of itself enough, because jobs were not there to sustain the community after the physical regeneration had taken place. If there has been no economic regeneration, over time the benefits of physical regeneration often start to be eroded as the area declines again.

I will come on to the role of the economic development agencies and target sectors. We must consider not just economics but fairness. I recommend to members the book, "The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better", if they have not already read it. It was published last year. The authors demonstrate that the societies that are the fairest are also the best economic performers. It is important to ensure that our society is not only economically prosperous but fair. A consequence of not having a fair society is that the second, third and fourth generations of some families are experiencing unemployment, poverty and deprivation. Regeneration is all about breaking that cycle of poverty and deprivation, and I hope that members are united on the substantive points of principle that must underlie our effort. We are working to a national strategy. I will not "do a Pontius Pilate" and abdicate responsibility—quite the opposite. We have an overriding strategy in the Scottish Government that is designed to make Scotland wealthier, fairer, safer, greener and smarter. Within that, we also have a strategic approach to regeneration, which is encapsulated in our document, "Equal Communities in a Fairer Scotland: A Joint Statement". Through community planning partnerships and the delegation of responsibility, for example for the fairer Scotland fund, we want to empower partnerships, which should include the voluntary sector, to spend money in their areas on the basis of what are locally agreed to be the top priorities. The last thing that we need is ministers or civil servants in Edinburgh trying to write the budgets of every local authority, ring fence all the funds and decide how CPPs will spend their money when the people on the ground are best placed to do that. I do not see how it is possible to argue on the one hand for community empowerment and, on the other, say that we should ring fence all the  funds from Edinburgh and dictate to people what they can and cannot spend their funding on.

My experience is that it is mainly Labour councils that are not giving community organisations a voice because other councils are definitely doing it. The most complaints that I get about deliberate attempts by a local authority to squeeze out community councils and similar organisations certainly come from Glasgow and North Lanarkshire, so I do not think that the Labour Party is in a good position to criticise other people in that respect.

No, I will not at the moment. I also put it on record that Cathie Craigie's description of the situation with the high flats in Cumbernauld was totally alien to the true situation. I will not go into detail because other members will not be aware of it, but the idea that the Scottish Government has laid down what should happen to the high flats in Cumbernauld is absurd to say the least.

I will not give way to Cathie Craigie again. We must think about how we make progress because there is no doubt that, in the immediate period ahead, irrespective of who wins the general election on 6 May, our budget and that of the UK Government will be squeezed. I say to whoever is elected in London on 6 May that it is highly important—Vince Cable has made this point—not only to tackle the medium-term problem of the budget deficit but to be very careful about where we make the cuts. The danger is that we cut the wrong things and, in doing so, put more people on the dole, which would in turn make the deficit worse. That is why we are engaged in an innovative approach to the joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas—JESSICA—initiative and other matters. The proposition that we should spend all the extra money that Labour demands while it cuts our budget by £800 million a year is equally absurd. That is why we need control over our budgets in Scotland to protect our people against Labour and Tory cuts from London.

Is it not the case that Mr Tolson's leader also blames the UK Government for the state that we are in?

Does the member accept that figures that were published last week demonstrated a record build of 7,700 new social houses in Scotland—something that was never achieved in the first 10 years of the Scottish Parliament?

Regeneration of our deprived and disadvantaged communities is a key priority for this Government. It is critical to achieving our purpose of sustainable economic growth that benefits everyone in Scotland. Regeneration is at the heart of every aspect of this Government's policy, in terms of physical infrastructure regeneration and economic and social regeneration. However, much of the responsibility for delivering regeneration rests with our friends in the local authorities and their partners, particularly those in community planning partnerships. Furthermore, the role that local people play in regeneration is absolutely critical. Community empowerment is not an add-on to regeneration; it is a fundamental building block. Solutions cannot be imposed from the top down by people sitting in offices in Edinburgh or elsewhere; a bottom-up approach is required so that the community can take ownership of regeneration projects. We need communities to shape the services that they receive and to be able to deliver change for themselves. The Government's role is to provide the tools for the job. We set the national policy context, lead innovation and support delivery. In that way we can create an environment in which the lasting transformation of areas is possible. During the period of economic downturn in the past two years or so, the importance of regeneration has been enhanced. It is often the work of regeneration projects that has allowed communities to maintain higher levels of employment and income than would otherwise have existed. If we look at the history of regeneration in Scotland since the first modern, large-scale regeneration project was launched in the east end of Glasgow in the late 1970s—the Glasgow eastern area renewal, or GEAR, project—we can learn certain lessons about what constitutes a successful regeneration project. There are two or three fundamentals that apply irrespective of the timescale or what kind of community we are considering. Whether it is a large or small community, a peripheral housing estate or a city centre, certain underlying principles can contribute significantly to the success of regeneration.  The first lesson to be learned from GEAR is that the focus should not be only on the physical regeneration of an area: to be successful, we have to tackle not just the physical needs but the economic and social regeneration of the area.

There is no doubt that the pressures on public finances will have consequences for a number of projects not just this year and next year but for the foreseeable future. The reality is that, as there is a cut in our budget so, inevitably, there is a reduction in what is available to organisations that are supported by the Scottish Government, with the consequences that that entails. One of our objectives is to try to ensure that our budget goes further and that, where possible, we use the public money that is available through the Scottish Government to leverage in additional resources, for example from the European Investment Bank, whose remit includes encouraging, financing and supporting urban regeneration. In addition to the first lesson about the need to tackle not just the physical problems but the economic and social ones, one of the key differences between the old Highlands and Islands Development Board and its successor organisation Highlands and Islands Enterprise, as compared with the Scottish Development Agency and its successor Scottish Enterprise, is that the HIDB had and HIE has a social remit as well as an economic one. Many communities in the Highlands and Islands have benefited from that combined economic and social remit, which is appropriate, particularly to small communities in the northern part of Scotland.

Scottish Enterprise never had a social remit, so it is not a case of putting it back. When the legislation was introduced, it did not carry a statutory social remit for Scottish Enterprise, and the legislation has never been changed since it was passed in the early 1990s. The second underlying lesson is about the need for community ownership. A couple of weeks ago, I visited Neilston, which is a community of just over 5,000 people just south of Paisley. Although it is a small community, it has an historic legacy of  success in industry, particularly in the textile and related industries. Neilston is a very good exemplar and shows what can happen when the community not only supports a project but has originated it. In this case, the community used powers under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 to purchase a disused bank building in the town and to make it the focus of community regeneration. It is now planning a 20-year development strategy to regenerate the community in a self-sustaining way. It intends, for example, to establish a community-owned wind-farm facility that will, once it is up and running, generate up to just under £500,000 of revenue that will be put back into the community. That, in turn, can be used to attract additional investment.

As the member knows, we fund Co-operative Development Scotland, which is probably much more integrated into Scottish Enterprise with regard to developing such matters. My field is housing, so I very much support the concept of housing co-operatives, which involve the active participation of tenants and management at local level in a vital physical, economic and social asset. Another underlying principle is embodied in the approach that has been taken by communities such as Neilston and Blairgowrie, which submitted a very imaginative and successful proposal to the town centre regeneration fund to develop an indigenous renewable energy resource that would also generate, over a sustained period, an income stream for reinvesting in the community. By doing that on a third-sector basis, the bodies in question can access all the money that Government agencies can access, and they can access other funding, including lottery funding, that is often not available to Government agencies. The ethos of organisations that deliver regeneration is also important. They must not be a bureaucracy or part of the state per se, but should instead be under community ownership and control, and include the involvement of all key stakeholders, be they voluntary organisations, private sector companies or individuals. Many organisations' proposals that were submitted to the town centre regeneration fund—and, indeed, the fact that the fund itself was two or three times oversubscribed—clearly demonstrate that communities have assets that not only have major  economic potential but which also provide economic benefits.

The tap has been turned off because the fund's £60 million was accelerated from next year for spending this year, as was agreed by all parties. While the budget negotiations were going on, no one suggested that we should set aside another £60 million next year. Quite frankly, the UK Government's £800 million cut in our budget has meant that that money is simply not available. Had that £800 million been available, we would have been happy to extend the town centre regeneration fund. Labour members cannot have it both ways: they cannot, on one hand, turn off Parliament's tap in London and then, on the other, demand more money for this, that and the next thing. The reality is that we are making maximum use of the money that is available. The town centre regeneration fund, which was originally suggested by our friends in the Conservative party, has been an excellent initiative that we as a Government have been happy to comply with and enthusiastically implement. Many projects throughout Scotland under its auspices, such as the Lochgelly Business Centre, are now coming to fruition. They are not only one-off projects; the new Lochgelly Business Centre, for example, will provide the capacity to build in Lochgelly a new industrial base of small new start-up companies that can bring new jobs and investment to that part of Fife. The same will happen in many areas. All the weapons that we can use, including town centre regeneration funds, urban regeneration companies—all six of which are doing great jobs for their areas—the vacant and derelict land fund, and the range of other resources that we make available to regeneration projects are part and parcel of growing the Scottish economy for the 21 st century, and of trying to ensure that our urban and our rural communities play their full parts in doing that, and realise their full economic, physical and social potential in the years and decades ahead. I finish by emphasising the importance of rural regeneration as well as urban regeneration. Regeneration should not be confined to urban Scotland. In many parts of rural Scotland, including the part that the Presiding Officer represents, regeneration activity is needed to boost employment opportunities and investment. Despite the very difficult financial situation that has been imposed on us in London, the Government is absolutely determined to use every available resource to maximise the potential of every community in Scotland and to ensure that, for our  people's future, we maximise job creation and investment potential. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the continuing need for regeneration of communities across Scotland, particularly in challenging economic times; also acknowledges the critical role of local government, community planning partners, the private and voluntary sectors and community members in delivering regeneration, and recognises the contribution that regeneration makes to increasing sustainable economic growth and the improvement of opportunities for people living in deprived communities.

The Scottish Government is fully committed to meeting its objective to ensure as far as reasonably practicable that people in Scotland are not living in fuel poverty by November 2016. The energy assistance package, which is aimed at households that are in fuel poverty, is contributing to that. By the end of December, that new programme had helped more than 56,000 people in more than 33,000 households. However, that is only part of the story. In July 2008, the rate of fuel poverty in Scottish households had risen to just under 27 per cent, because energy prices rose by about 13 per cent in the previous year, whereas incomes rose by only 2 per cent. I will continue to press Westminster and the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets for urgent action to reduce fuel poverty through benefit income and energy price policy. I am sure that all MSPs will support that.

The number of central heating installations to the end of December was 5,500. The number of households that received insulation was 3,594, of which 2,462 were installations that arose from referrals this year. By definition, a low number of successful appeals suggests that we are selecting the right people for the programme—those in fuel poverty—and not rich, retired bankers as happened under the old programme.

If we included a reserved matter in the bill, the danger is that we would be referred to the Supreme Court, which would mean that the bill would not be enacted for a considerable time. I do not think that any of us would want that to happen. I suggest to the member that the Local Government and Communities Committee writes to Lord Myners to support the points that I have made to him and to request urgent action from the United Kingdom Government.

Had I access to the data, I would undoubtedly publish them. I do not have access to the data, but I would welcome a commitment from the Conservatives that, if they win the general election, within 24 hours they will order the FSA to publish the data.

I reinforce the point that the member has just made. The Financial Services Authority has made available evidence about rogue lenders that illustrates why the bill is needed. Although the FSA was not called to give evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, we should take cognisance of the research that it has done.

No matter whether or not her criticisms of the Government are valid, we are way ahead of the member's colleagues at Westminster, where she aspires to go in three months' time. Her colleagues do not even have a bill on the stocks. Indeed, they have not even finished the consultation. It will be another two months before they have done that.

Just for the record, the consultation on the measures south of the border does not finish until the end of March, so there is no chance of legislation before the general election. Therefore, yet again, Scotland is well ahead of what is happening in the rest of the United Kingdom.

I am glad to open the stage 3 debate on the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill. I pay tribute to the work of the Local Government and Communities Committee under the convenership of Duncan McNeil. The committee considered the bill in a diligent, thorough and constructive manner at stages 1 and 2. It is to the committee's great credit that we were able to move from the bill's introduction in October to completion of stage 2 before the end of January. I pay tribute in particular to the work of the clerks to the committee, who were extremely helpful and co-operative. It is almost a year to the day since the repossessions group, which was ably chaired by Adrian Stalker, first met. I record again my appreciation of the group's role in recommending the ways in which legislative protection for home owners needed to be strengthened. The debt action forum is also to be commended for its role in shaping part 2 of the bill. The policy development and passage of this small but complex bill has been relatively swift, but the bill has certainly been subject to appropriate testing and scrutiny. Although the key principles of the bill were widely shared and have not been altered, we listened carefully to committee members' views and were happy to make a number of amendments to the bill on points of detail, notably  in section 1, on voluntary surrender, in section 6, on recall arrangements, in section 7, on lay representation, in section 9, on certificates for sequestration, and in section 10, on trust deeds. Our acceptance this morning of amendments 2 and 3, in the name of Mary Mulligan, is further evidence of our willingness to listen and adjust when it is right to do so. We could not address some issues that members raised. For example, although we supported the spirit of Bob Doris's amendments, which sought to protect people from liability for their lender's legal expenses when the lender had not complied with pre-action requirements, it is regrettable that the matter is—at the moment—reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. For that reason alone we could not support Bob Doris's amendments. However, as I promised to do at stage 2—this Government keeps its promises—I have written to Lord Myners to ask the UK Government to address the issue, and copies of my letter are available from the Scottish Parliament information centre. [ Interruption .] The debate had become a bit too consensual, Presiding Officer. I am also grateful to Bob Doris for raising an important point about voluntary surrender. We responded to concerns that a formal affidavit was too onerous, but Bob Doris also sought the creation of a set of guidelines, to enable borrowers to be clear about what they are doing. As I said to the committee, it will be for the lender to decide how that will work in practice; that is not an issue for the bill. However, I reassure Bob Doris and other members that it is one of a number of issues that we will seek to address when we implement the bill, through consultation of all interested parties. I also assure the Parliament that we will keep the new legislation and funding for the advice sector, courts and others under review, and we will come back to the Parliament, if that is required, to ensure that the provisions work as the Parliament intended or to correct deficiencies. Pauline McNeill did us a service when she drew the Parliament's attention to a serious issue. Fergus Ewing explained that although we could not have supported the amendment in her name, we are happy to engage with her and other members to get to the root of the issue and to consider what steps can be taken to improve the transparency and scrutiny of insolvency practitioners' fees. Not just members but key stakeholders were influential throughout the passage of the bill. I commend stakeholders for their on-going support, consultation and input. In particular, I thank Citizens Advice Scotland, Money Advice Scotland, the Council of Mortgage Lenders—it says "moneylenders" in my notes—Shelter Scotland  and the Scottish Association of Law Centres for their willingness to engage constructively, and for the work that they do to avoid repossessions and to help people who are struggling with debt. The insolvency profession and the Law Society of Scotland also engaged fully. Stakeholders did not always get their own way, but the process of consultation was extremely valuable in securing a better balance between protection for lenders and debtors and ensuring that we produced workable legislation. I remind members of the circumstances that prompted us to introduce the bill. One of the most significant consequences of the economic recession, especially during the past year or so, is that too many Scots are caught in a debt trap, which puts family homes—and families—at risk. Our response, which is embodied in the bill, has been to act quickly to legislate, well ahead of our colleagues south of the border, to introduce more protection for home owners, not just in these difficult times but for the longer term, and to offer support to people who currently cannot access debt solutions. As members know, the pressing need for legislation has been a focus during previous debates, but it is worth restating why the bill is so important. Home repossessions in the UK increased fivefold from 8,000 in 2004 to 40,000 in 2008, and the Council of Mortgage Lenders has forecast a further rise to 53,000 this year. In November, the CML predicted that the number of families in the UK who have mortgage arrears that amount to more than 2.5 per cent of the balance would top 205,000 in 2010. The risks for such people will only intensify if unemployment or interest rates, or both, go on rising. An issue on which all members agree is the need for more reliable statistics for Scotland. I had written yet again to the Council of Mortgage Lenders to ask for that information, but I regret that I received a reply in the negative yesterday. The CML's view is that issues to do with reporting the Scottish numbers cannot be resolved unless action is taken by the regulators—in this case, the Financial Services Authority. That is a disappointing reply. Given that the FSA will be under new management from the summer, subject to the election result and its consequences, I will again approach the FSA and ask it to take appropriate action. In relation to the need for legislation to protect home owners, the FSA said recently that "firms were often too quick to take repossession action", and that "some firms explored very few forbearance options before taking legal action against borrowers. We observed these poor practices across the mortgage market".  Not only in the Scottish Parliament but throughout the country, the bill is welcome and will make a material difference to many families and individuals who find themselves in the unenviable position of having too much debt and facing the prospect of repossession of their homes. I am delighted to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill be passed.

We have worked closely with Mary Mulligan on her amendments 2 and 3 since stage 2. I hope that the Parliament will unite behind them. As she said, the amendments build on her stage 2 amendment that required sheriffs to consider the reasonableness of applications. The  effect of these stage 3 amendments will be to ensure consistency between the 1894 and 1970 acts and the bill, and to ensure that the legislation is workable in practice. I fully accept the need for amendments 2 and 3 and consider that they will reduce the risk that a court would feel obliged unnecessarily to continue every undefended case to another hearing—which was our primary concern at stage 2—while allowing sheriffs to adjourn cases to seek further information if they believe that that is necessary. We still have concerns about the potential impact on other court business, so we will monitor that carefully during the implementation period. However, I welcome amendments 2 and 3, which will ensure consistency between the two relevant acts and the bill when it becomes an act. The proposed wording is an improvement on what was envisaged either by the Government or by Mary Mulligan at stage 2. I am therefore happy to support amendments 2 and 3, in the usual consensual manner.

The Scottish Government is aware of the increase in the number of cases in which men report domestic abuse to the police. Whether domestic abuse is perpetrated by men or by women, it is never acceptable. Many professional agencies in Scotland offer services to victims of domestic abuse regardless of gender, including the police, NHS Scotland, Victim Support Scotland and local authority social work and housing services. Male victims can also access services within the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, such as victim information and advice, witness services and use of the vulnerable witness provisions where that is appropriate. The primary issue is to ensure that male victims of domestic abuse and their children are aware of those services and able to access them. The Scottish Government is considering options for providing dedicated helpline support for male victims to enable them to access appropriate services. I will be in a position to provide more detailed information when discussions with the relevant external organisations have been concluded.

In looking at practice elsewhere in the UK, we have been in touch specifically with the Welsh Assembly Government, which has fairly advanced provision for male victims of domestic abuse. My officials are in constant touch with our colleagues in Wales to see whether there are any particular lessons that we can learn from there.

I agree with the sentiments that Mary Scanlon expresses and congratulate her on her efforts to address the issue. As I said, I hope to be able to make an announcement fairly shortly in  respect of the establishment of a helpline in Scotland that is dedicated to male victims of domestic abuse in Scotland.

With the gender-based analysis approach that we are taking to the issue of domestic abuse, a dedicated facility for the male victims of domestic abuse will be required. That is the strategy that I am working on.

I think that I made clear in my previous response that our strategy is based on a gender-based analysis. I accept that the vast majority of incidents are male on female, but we are also trying to address the growing problem of male victims of domestic abuse. I hope that Johann Lamont and the Labour Party agree that that is the right thing to do.

I have recently discussed a range of housing and communities issues with local authorities and with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities spokesperson for community wellbeing and safety.

The procedures that we are following were inherited from the previous Administration, but I am keeping under constant review whether any are not satisfactory. We are working closely with our local authority colleagues on all aspects of the problem.

I am glad to say that earlier this week I, the Glasgow Housing Association and the Glasgow and West of Scotland Forum of Housing Associations announced the transfer of 16,500 houses from Glasgow Housing Association to community-based housing associations. That compares with the previous Administration's record of no second-stage transfers.

The Scottish Government supports the work of housing co-ops by investing in the provision of new affordable housing. My recent visit to Easthall Park Housing Co-operative in Easterhouse highlighted the good work of such organisations in their communities. The housing co-operative sector is part of the registered social landlord sector, and individual organisations within the sector establish their own vision and business plan to suit their specific needs.

We estimate that there are only 14, rather than 18, housing co-operatives in Scotland. The massive reduction in their number is a direct result of the Labour-Lib Dem Administration's efforts in 2001. However, the SNP Government is committed to the principle of co-operation and is encouraging housing co-operatives by giving record support to them and to the whole social housing sector in order to complete the construction of a record number of social houses in Scotland this year.

Bring back Jack!

The Scottish Government is already helping people throughout Scotland to reduce their heating bills and keep their homes warm through  the energy assistance package and the home insulation scheme. Anyone can call 0800512012 to obtain guidance on energy savings or to check their entitlement to benefits and cheap energy tariffs. Many people are eligible for cheaper rates, and, if they call today, they could be on a new tariff within a couple of weeks. Between April and the end of December last year, 5,500 fuel-poor households had heating and insulation measures installed under stage 4 of the energy assistance package, which should save them on average £884 a year on their fuel bills.

Peter Peacock raises two points. The first is about the number of heating systems installed under this Government. We had a record number of installations of central heating systems last year—unprecedented since the Parliament was established. His second point is a very reasonable one. I am aware of new technology that can be used for external insulation measures. I am already looking at that and I will be delighted to share that information with the member in relation to the valid point that he raises about particular types of building.

I have raised that matter on a number of occasions with the UK Government, so far without success. It is a rather absurd system that states that, after the kind of weather that we have experienced since before Christmas, places such as the Western Isles do not qualify for the cold weather payments. I hope that the Labour  Government in London will look at that very cruel policy.

This has been a good debate, in general terms. I do not agree with Hugh O'Donnell's point—it is perfectly legitimate for this Parliament to have a debate and express concerns on behalf of the people of Scotland, including those who would be directly affected, as to the potential consequences of the green paper should its provisions be implemented. In addition to being a legislature, we are the platform and the voice of Scotland. Today, we have been acting as the voice of Scotland in saying that if the proposals go ahead in the form in which they have been presented by the Labour Government in Westminster, they will be highly detrimental to our older citizens in Scotland, and indeed south of the border. Although I am a nationalist, I am concerned about poverty south of the border as well as north of the border. We should not forget that the purpose of the debate is to ensure that we defend the living standards and rights of our elderly citizens, in this case vulnerable elderly citizens who are disabled and who require a certain level of benefits to maintain a decent standard of living. Nearly a fifth of pensioners in Scotland are still living in poverty, much of which is concentrated among disabled pensioners. Anything that could make that poverty even worse must be resisted and fought against enormously strongly.  I say to those who accuse me of scaremongering that it is not me, the Scottish Government or any speaker who has expressed concern about the proposals today who is doing that. The best way to ensure that nobody is scared would be to withdraw these proposals. I will deal with some specific points about consultation. Let me run through what has happened. First, the Scottish Government got less than 24 hours' notice of the publication of the green paper from Andy Burnham, the Secretary of State for Health, who of course is now in favour of minimum pricing for alcohol. Secondly, when the consultation was carried out, not one event was held north of the border, whereas 26 consultation events were held south of the border. Thirdly, the green paper and its contents have been the subject of two meetings at official level. Our officials reported back to us that at no time were representatives of the UK Government prepared to discuss the proposals' policy implications. The meetings indeed took place but, from our point of view, they were extremely unsatisfactory and certainly not informative. It is significant that the green paper is signed by seven secretaries of state: Andy Burnham, Yvette Cooper, John Denham, Ed Balls, Tessa Jowell, the Lord Mandelson, who signs everything these days, and Liam Byrne. It is noticeable that there is no signature from the Secretary of State for Scotland. If Scotland was included in the UK Government's thoughts, why is the signature of the Secretary of State for Scotland not on the document? The Labour Party has spoken about the need for a dialogue. That has been our point all along—we have sought to have a dialogue, but it has ended up being a monologue because the discussion has been all one way, from us. What Jackie Baillie demonstrated was that the Scottish Government has consulted extensively in Scotland on its policy. However, with respect, I say to her that the Scottish Government is not just another consultee; we are the Government of Scotland. That means that we should have been consulted before the green paper was drafted and published. We should have been consulted on the consultation and on the consequences for Scotland and the people whom we represent. The UK Government says that it is a green paper but, as we know from experience, green papers have very big white edges. Mr McLetchie highlighted effectively the fact that, ultimately, every option includes the abolition of attendance allowance and DLA for the over-65s in Scotland. The UK Government has not told us what will replace attendance allowance in  Scotland. Is it to be abolished in Scotland as well as in England? If so, what will happen to the money?

No. We know that the last time we dealt with such issues, the UK Government cheated us out of £30 million a year and then asked us to trust it. How can we trust people who cheated their own Government in Scotland out of £30 million a year? They have not told us whether there will be means testing for what will replace attendance allowance and DLA or what the Barnett consequentials will be. We know that Andy Burnham changed the baseline figures for health in the budget last year in order to reduce the consequentials for Scotland. The guy then asks us to trust him and his policy.

No, I will not take an intervention. If the front-bench speakers from the Labour Party would not address the motion, why should I take an intervention from them? [ Interruption. ]

We are promised the equivalent of attendance allowance and DLA, but what is the equivalent of attendance allowance and DLA? Does it mean £70 a week still going into the pocket of each poor pensioner who is disabled? Does it mean the DLA money still going into the pockets of the poor pensioners? Does it mean that people will still get the carers allowance that the poor pensioners are going to be denied? We do not have any answers to those questions. [ Interruption. ]

As Jackson Carlaw said, the Scottish Government has approached this policy issue in a way that is about social policy, not the constitution. It is social policy, poverty, pensioners and the disabled that we are concerned about. What really gets me about the proposals is that we have a so-called Labour Government stripping the most vulnerable people in our society of vital income and benefits. To paraphrase a former leader of the British Labour Party, we have the grotesque sight of a Labour Government—a Labour Government—scuttling around with green papers, white papers, budgets and bills so that it can deny our pensioners the income, the pensions and the benefits to which they are entitled. Harold Wilson once said that the Labour Party is a crusade or it is nothing. After 13 wasted years, it is nothing.

There has been a monologue, not a dialogue.

I inform the member and the chamber that the Secretary of State for Health, Andy Burnham, informed the Scottish Government of the publication of the green paper only one day before it was published. I do not call that dialogue, discussion or consultation.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is worth beginning by reminding ourselves of the importance of attendance allowance and disability living allowance to our older people. Attendance allowance is paid to approximately 1.58 million elderly people across the United Kingdom, including more than 150,000 in Scotland who need help throughout the day, during the night or both. It is a tax-free benefit for people aged 65 or over who need help with personal care because they are physically disabled or mentally ill. Of those 1.58 million people, two thirds are aged over 80. Attendance allowance is not means tested, and it is usually awarded without a medical examination. It is paid directly to claimants who may spend it on whatever they like. The current higher rate of attendance allowance is £70.35 per week, and the lower rate is £47.10 per week. The vast majority of people who receive the benefit do not currently receive formal care from their local authorities. The amount that is spent in Scotland is of the order of £420 million, which does not include the £30 million that the United Kingdom Government cheated us out of when we introduced free personal care. The care component of the disability living allowance is paid to another 2.3 million disabled people—mostly non-elderly people—who meet the same conditions or who need help for part of the day or cannot cook a meal. In Scotland, the figure is 330,000 claimants, 250,000 of whom are under 65 and the balance—80,000—are over 65. At UK level, the benefits cost £9.2 billion a year, £1.1 billion of which is spent in Scotland and £300 million of which relates to people aged over 65. When those benefits were first introduced under different names in the 1990s—to be fair to the Tories, that happened under a Tory Government—the rationale was simple: disabled people, especially those of working age, typically have lower incomes than non-disabled people, and disabled people of any age face additional costs of living that leave them and their families worse off than non-disabled people with similar incomes. The attendance allowance and the disability living allowance were originally intended to contribute to those extra costs and were not specifically to pay for care. In other words, they  were an anti-poverty measure for disabled people, including elderly disabled people. The potential impact of withdrawing the benefits is frightening. A recent analysis by the institute for social and economic research in London, a highly regarded organisation, predicted that the removal of attendance allowance would mean that 40 per cent of current recipients would fall below the poverty line. Across Scotland, that would mean more than 67,000 of our most vulnerable people being forced into poverty by a Labour Government. In the constituency of Pollok in Glasgow, which I have picked at random as an example, the number of attendance allowance recipients is 2,900. If the proposals to remove the allowance were implemented, 1,160 of those people would be forced into poverty, which is a disgraceful situation in that already poor constituency. The story does not end there, because if the ill-thought-out and daft proposals go ahead, they will impact not only on attendance allowance and disability allowance, but on the carers allowance. At present, receipt of attendance allowance by disabled people is one of the grounds for receipt of the carers allowance by the carer. Ending attendance allowance will therefore make it harder for carers to receive financial support. There are currently—

Of course.

Rather than deal with that petty point, I ask Helen Eadie why her colleague, the member of Parliament for Kirkcaldy—one Gordon Brown—is the author of the proposals. He is letting down all the poor people in Scotland and south of the border. As I was saying before I was so unwittingly interrupted, 46,300 people in Scotland currently receive carers allowance and could lose that crucial support in order to pay for social care in England. Let us look again at the numbers for Pollok, which I have selected at random. The number of people in the Pollok constituency of Glasgow who could lose their carer's allowance under the Labour Government proposals is 960. That is a disgraceful situation. It is incredible that an anti- poverty measure introduced by a right-wing Tory Government might be abolished by an even more right-wing Labour Government in London. Many of the proposals originate in the Wanless report that was commissioned by one Gordon Brown in 2006. The report recommended that disability benefits that are paid by the Department for Work and Pensions should be reduced to release money to pay directly for social care in England. That is completely different from the situation in Scotland. Despite what Johann Lamont's amendment says, as already pointed out by SNP MPs and MSPs, the Tory spokespeople and the Liberal Democrats' Norman Lamb, the Wanless proposals take no account of the situation outside England. There has been no discussion, no consultation and no commitment on what will happen to what are supposed to be UK benefits in the rest of the United Kingdom if they are to be abolished south of the border.

I will not rise to that. I am never one for reducing debate to such partisan positions. I not only refer to the Conservatives and the Liberals but invite members to consider the serious comments that were made today by Inclusion Scotland, which said that it "continues to view any attempt to withdraw individual entitlement to Attendance Allowance or Disability Living Allowance from disabled people as threatening their financial independence and being completely at odds with the principles of Independent Living. That is a view arrived at through consulting widely with our local member organisations, and individual disabled people throughout Scotland, who are vehemently opposed to the changes in entitlement suggested in the Green Paper, 'Shaping the Future of Care'." Similar sentiments have been issued by many other groups, including the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland and the Scottish Association for Mental Health. As many members are aware, we are engaged in a major programme of work in Scotland to reshape our care of older people. We have already debated the subject in this Parliament. That is important because by 2016, the number of people in Scotland aged over 65—which might even include me—is projected to rise by 21 per cent and by 2031, the rise is projected to be 62 per cent. For those over 75, the figures are 21 per cent and 81 per cent. We estimate that slightly over 40 per cent of total spending by the national health service in Scotland and social work services is on older people. The philosophy of our measures and their intent are twofold. They are, first, to stop our elderly population who need those benefits from getting  into poverty. Secondly, they are to allow them to manage their own money through independent living and not have it dictated to them by bureaucrats in local authorities the length and breadth of the country. The Labour Party has paid lip-service to independent living, but if the proposals go ahead, they will put paid to independent living and they will drive tens of thousands of our older people into dire poverty both north and south of the border. I move, That the Parliament notes that the UK Green Paper, Shaping the Future of Care Together , published in June 2009, may have long-term implications for vulnerable older and disabled people in Scotland who are eligible for attendance allowance and disability living allowance as it proposes to remove the universal benefits of attendance allowance and disability living allowance and instead redesign the benefit system to meet English social policy objectives and redirect funding to pay for the provision of a National Care Service in England, while failing to give adequate consideration to the position in Scotland, and calls on HM Government to consult fully with the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament, local authorities, NHS boards and other interested parties before proceeding any further.

The energy assistance package is a national programme to tackle fuel poverty. By the end of November, the fuel poverty programme had helped 2,408 households in Fife. All were provided with energy savings advice; 711 were referred for a benefits check; 783 were referred for a social tariff check; 221 were provided with insulation measures; and 296 were provided with heating system measures. This year, we have also allocated £120,806 to Fife Council in respect of 377 homes, under the social sector stage 3 stream. That money is funding energy efficiency measures that complement work that is delivered by the energy companies under the carbon emissions reduction target obligation. The home insulation scheme includes 8,955 properties in Fife and, in the first month of operation, the programme of doorstep visits generated requests under the energy assistance package, including 31 benefit checks, 64 social tariff referrals, 109 referrals to CERT or stage 3 of the energy assistance package, and 57 stage 4 referrals.

Without further dithering, I inform the member that, in the energy assistance package, we provide free and discounted boilers, and we will decide whether to extend that generally to a boiler scrappage scheme. However, unlike in the previous Administration, the fundamental guiding principle of our policy on tackling fuel poverty in Scotland is to focus resources on those who are in most need. Based on the recommendations of the fuel poverty action forum last year, we reoriented programmes so that people who are in fuel poverty receive priority in terms of resources and the programme.

It is factually correct that, under this Administration, more central heating systems have been installed than were installed at any time under the previous Administration. Last year was a record year in that regard. I was glad to announce yesterday the extension of eligibility to large families in receipt of the additional element of child tax credit. I have also asked the fuel poverty forum to examine other areas of eligibility. Before Christmas I asked it to consider specifically whether it would be possible to identify households with a disabled adult that are living in fuel poverty, and yesterday I asked it to find out whether it is possible to identify people who are chronically sick—including cancer patients—and living in fuel poverty, to see whether we can extend eligibility for the programme to those groups. I emphasise that only people in fuel poverty in those groups would be assisted.

Following discussions with my officials, Scottish Gas has committed to install the enhanced energy efficiency measures for the vast majority of all energy assistance package customers in under 12 weeks and, where reasonably practical, any applicant waiting for three months or more as at 31 December 2009 will have their system installed by 31 March 2010. Usually, we require that insulation is installed ahead of the heating system, but to limit delays in  the cold weather we have instructed Scottish Gas to install the measures in whichever order is appropriate to the householder's needs. The snow has made it just as difficult for the surveying and installation engineers to travel to jobs in the snow as for anyone else. I want to note my appreciation of the teams that are working so hard to progress installations.

John Scott makes a fair point that no pensioner should have to wait unduly, especially after being accepted on to the scheme. We are taking every possible measure to ensure that that does not happen. I am aware of the case to which he referred, which is very much the exception and not the rule. However, I can tell him that, compared with a 99-day waiting period under the old scheme, we are now down to a 60-day period under the new energy assistance package.

I have a meeting scheduled with Scottish Gas, at which I will discuss progress on implementing the measures that I announced in  October, one of which is about ensuring that there is far better co-ordination on the ground to minimise delay. I get a monthly management report on all aspects of the energy assistance package, and the figures clearly indicate that there has been a substantial reduction in waiting times at each stage from approval through to completion. However, I am aware that that is not always achieved, and I and my officials are working with Scottish Gas to further improve the situation.

The Scottish Government is helping people throughout Scotland to reduce their heating bills and keep their homes warm through the energy assistance package. Anyone can call 0800 512012 to obtain guidance on energy savings or check their entitlement to benefits and cheap tariffs. Between April and the end of November, some 5,138 fuel poor households had heating and insulation measures installed under stage 4 of the package. That should save them an average of £858 a year on their fuel bills. Yesterday, I announced that we intend to make such help available to even more households. In addition to the families and pensioners who are already eligible, we will extend stage 4 to larger families with children under 16 who get more than the family element of child tax credit. We are helping people to switch to cheaper energy tariffs and payment methods, which together can save people an average of £300 a year. Many people are eligible for cheaper rates and if they call today they could be on a new tariff within a couple of weeks.

The Labour Government's proposals from London to abolish attendance allowance would be damaging to older people because that would reduce their incomes substantially—in some cases, by more than £70 a week. As attendance allowance was originally intended to be an anti-poverty measure, such a policy would be extremely regressive. It would put more and more pensioners in Scotland into fuel poverty.

I suppose that it all depends on where those people live and the state of their housing. However, if asylum seekers resident in Glasgow, for example, meet the eligibility criteria, there is no reason why they should be turned down for the programme.

Like the previous Administration, the Scottish Government has since its inception recognised the importance of British Sign Language for deaf people and taken positive steps to promote it. The British Sign Language and linguistic access working group, which was established in 2000, has been working within a strategic plan to deliver improved access for deaf people. At the moment there is undercapacity to deliver many of the required improvements and in that respect the group has identified various necessary long-term targets, including systematically increasing the pool of available BSL teachers, particularly at advanced levels, and developing a coherent progression route for BSL learners and for the training of BSL to English interpreters. To that end, the Scottish Government is providing from 2008 to 2011 almost £1.5 million to a consortium led by the Scottish Association for Sign Language Interpreters.

The proposal has been discussed with representatives of the BSL community and other groups, but the Government has not taken a definitive decision on the issue. We continue to discuss with all the key stakeholders points arising from the suggestion; indeed, I am quite happy to discuss the matter in more detail with Cathie Craigie in recognition of her particular commitment to the cause.

I am happy to circulate to all members a list of all the correspondence that we have been in with both the FSA and the CML. However, I ask Mary Mulligan whether she will ask her friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer to order the FSA to provide the information.

Does the member accept that, far from bringing our laws into line with England's laws, we will have a legislative framework that is far superior to that of England?

I hear what the member says, but does he accept Shelter's research, which shows that, for one third of the cases heard, the pre-action protocol has not been activated?

As this is the last debate of 2009, no doubt the whole chamber will be full of pro-Government Christmas cheer when we discuss this important bill, which will take forward an element of social justice in Scotland that is very important to a number of people. I pay tribute to the Local Government and Communities Committee, under the convenership of Duncan McNeil, which considered this complex bill within a reasonably tight timescale and, if I may say so, produced a balanced and well-researched stage 1 report. I commend the committee for producing an excellent report. In recommending approval of the bill's general principles, the committee recognised that not only in the chamber but outside among stakeholders there is widespread acceptance of the bill's general principles; any debate is around implementation issues rather than the fundamental principles.

With all due respect to my good friend Mr McLetchie, I disagree with him. There is widespread support for the general principles of part 2, although there is perhaps more debate on the implementation of part 2 than there is on the implementation of part 1. In my speech I want to deal, where I can, with some of the specific issues that the committee raised, but before I do that it is worth reminding ourselves why the bill is so important, particularly on a day when there have been 800 job losses at Globespan, which reinforces the position in which we find ourselves, in respect of recession, high unemployment and high levels of both personal and business debt. Too many people, both north and south of the border, find themselves in the debt trap. However, I pay tribute in general terms to lenders. Compared with the situation in the early 1990s—considering the number of repossessions  that took place then compared with the number that have taken place in the current recession, and given the fact that, throughout the United Kingdom, there are now seven million more mortgages than there were then—the proportion of people who are falling into the repossession trap is significantly lower than it was all those years ago. That is the case for two reasons. First, many of the lenders learned the lessons of the recession in the early 1990s, and more of them are taking early action to avoid having to repossess. When people fall into arrears now, action is taken and advice is given at a much earlier stage, which I welcome. Secondly, both north and south of the border, the actions that have been taken by the Scottish Government and the UK Government have made a significant contribution—not only through the advice that is now offered, but through the likes of the home owners support fund—to minimising the adverse impact of repossession and debt on families and their standard of living. Having said that, there is no doubt that, for the past six years, there has been a steady year-on-year increase in the number of repossessions in Scotland, most notably in the past two years. The figures show that 40,000 repossessions took place in the UK in 2008 and that 48,000 repossessions are predicted to take place in 2009. I repeat my request to the Council of Mortgage Lenders Scotland and the Financial Services Authority to give us the Scottish figures on a regular basis. That would help us to plan our budget to assist such people and would give us a clear breakdown of where the problem is most persistent. However, this is not just about repossessions; there is a similar picture regarding the increase in mortgage arrears. Over the same period, there has been a 47 per cent increase in the number of people with mortgage arrears amounting to more than 2.5 per cent of their balance, and there has been a 77 per cent hike in the number of mortgages that have been in arrears for more than three months. Similarly, there has been a significant increase in the number of court actions for repossession in the sheriff courts. The number of such actions rose by 20 per cent between 2007-08 and 2008-09. Unfortunately, the existing legislation falls short of providing people with appropriate support. Although the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001, which we passed eight years ago, gives home owners more time to find a solution to their payment difficulties, only 5 per cent of all repossession cases are defended in Scotland's courts. There is a clear need to take further action to protect people from the threat of homelessness.

As we have made clear in the financial memorandum to the bill, our upper estimate is that 50 per cent of such people will defend their actions in the courts, which is 10 times the current figure. The other cases will not be defended in court probably on the decision of the debtor not to defend for personal reasons. The clear point is that the bill will make it much easier for people who want to defend their actions in court to do so, in terms of both court procedure and available resources. The existing legislation does not provide a suitable solution for debtors who cannot access the debt relief that is offered by bankruptcy. No route into bankruptcy is currently open to them. It is essential that we provide effective measures to safeguard home owners, so that, whenever there is no real benefit to creditors in selling the home, the debtor has the reassurance of knowing that their home is protected. That is a humane measure. The need for urgent action to protect hard-pressed families is clear and widely recognised. I will now address what the two parts of the bill will do. Part 1 will improve the protection that is available through the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001 by extending protection to all repossession cases involving residential property and ensuring that all cases—unless the property is voluntarily surrendered—are heard in court. It will also require lenders to show in court that they have considered every reasonable alternative to repossession. I point out that the report from Shelter down south shows that the pre-action protocol that operates in England and Wales still results in a third of people not going through the proper procedure. In light of that, our decision to include that process in statute is absolutely the right decision. Part 1 will also allow home owners to be represented in court by approved lay representatives rather than solicitors, should they wish. Those provisions will significantly strengthen home owner protection. Nonetheless, we recognise that certain points of detail in part 1 need to be addressed. As we have indicated to the Local Government and Communities Committee, we will bring forward appropriate amendments at stage 2, following discussion with the committee and external stakeholders. Part 2 concerns sequestration and trust deeds. It makes a series of amendments to the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 and contains four broad provisions. Section 9 introduces a new route into bankruptcy, which will be based on a certificate signed by an authorised person. At present, there are two commonly used ways for someone to  make themselves bankrupt: they can show that they are "apparently insolvent" if their creditors have taken court action to pursue debt, or they can apply for bankruptcy on the basis that they meet the statutory test of low income and low assets—LILA. Although we believe that the vast majority of debtors now have access to bankruptcy if they need it, we estimate that around 500 people annually need the debt relief that is provided by bankruptcy but cannot access it. Section 9 will rectify that situation. Section 10 introduces flexibility to trust deeds to allow the protection of a trust deed that does not include the family home, but only with the consent of creditors. We anticipate that that will be particularly appropriate in cases in which there is little or no unsecured equity in the family home, which calls into question the benefit of selling it. I appreciate that there have been some concerns about section 10 and some misapprehensions—not to mention misinformation—about what it does. I therefore want to make it absolutely clear that the provision does not automatically exclude homes from all trust deeds. Other provisions in part 2 concern the Edinburgh Gazette . Section 12 repeals the requirement to advertise awards of bankruptcy in the Edinburgh Gazette . Members of the debt action forum supported that measure, but I accept that the loss of income from adverts may affect the Edinburgh Gazette . Accordingly, we will continue to work with Her Majesty's Stationery Office and The Stationery Office to ensure that, as far as possible, any impact is mitigated. We will also ensure that, before the provision is commenced, the register of insolvencies is able to provide stakeholders with at least the same level of service as is currently available from the Edinburgh Gazette . I acknowledge that concerns have been expressed about consultation, particularly with regard to part 2. However, although we employed a non-traditional way of consulting, we believe that the bill has been subject to more consultation than many other bills that have come before this chamber. Indeed, when we were being pressed to pass the bill in one day, we resisted that temptation so that we could consult properly the committee, the stakeholders and the Parliament. As a result of that, and with the amendments that we will make at stage 2, I am confident that we will end up with a home owner and debtor protection act that will do what it says on the tin, and will prevent people's homes from being unnecessarily repossessed. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.

I, too, congratulate George Foulkes on securing this important debate. I join members in congratulating Mark Cooper, too. It is clear from the barred campaign that Mark is a man of courage—and anyone who goes on a pub crawl in Edinburgh with George Foulkes has to be a man of courage. I commend Mark for his robustness in doing that. The barred campaign has had a very positive impact, in that it has secured an undertaking from the City of Edinburgh Council to perform an access survey of all licensed premises in the city. I am further encouraged by Edinburgh's commitment to turn that information into a guide concerning accessibility and relevant facilities. The council should be congratulated on doing that. However, the barred campaign is not just about Edinburgh, local authorities or pubs and clubs. In her intervention, Johann Lamont made an important point about attitudes, and the campaign is indeed about raising awareness and changing attitudes. It is amazing: I am astounded by the  negative approach of some people, even in this day and age, towards people with a perceived disability—and by their treatment of them, let alone their attitude. We must all join together in doing everything that we can to change attitudes, to raise awareness and to make life much more civilised and tolerable for those people who have a disability, be it a physical disability or a learning disability. As the minister with responsibility for disability issues, one of my key objectives is to enable far more people with disabilities to live independently and to decide their agenda for their lives, rather than having it decided for them. A key part of that is that people who have a disability should be able to partake in the social life of the nation as well as anyone else can do. Independent living must be a central focus of how we develop disability policy in the 21 st century. I have not met Mark Cooper. I offer him and George Foulkes an invitation to an early meeting, to discuss how the Government, including in its dealings with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the numerous agencies for which the Government has responsibility, can help.

That is excellent; I look forward to that. We should have a wide-ranging discussion, because it is clear that organisations such as VisitScotland, which promotes Scotland, should do their level best to ensure that disabled people have the same access as other members of the community have to the facilities that we promote. In my meeting with George Foulkes and Mark Cooper, I want to discuss the amendment to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill that George Foulkes proposes to lodge. I am 100 per cent behind the motion, but there is a problem with such amendments, because equalities legislation is reserved. Even though George Foulkes would be seeking to amend licensing legislation, I am led to believe that there might be a problem because the amendment would have an impact on equalities legislation. Of course, if reserved laws need to be changed I will be happy to raise the matter formally with ministers in London. Ultimately it is for the law officers and the Presiding Officer to decide whether the provisions in an amendment are within the jurisdiction of the Scottish Parliament, but I am sure that we do not want to miss an opportunity to do something because of a problem to do with a reserved matter. It is extremely important that we talk to the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which  has the lead responsibility for the implementation of disability equality legislation in Scotland. In the context of the equality duty, which will incorporate the disability duty, there are areas in which the Government can perhaps help to achieve the objective that we all share. There might be ways of achieving the objective that we have not yet identified. As I said, I am keen to work with George Foulkes and Mark Cooper, and with the EHRC and others, to consider what we can do within our jurisdiction—with a view, I hope, to our jurisdiction in the area eventually being extended. For example, we now have licensing standards officers in Scotland. Although they have no statutory duty in relation to disability, I am sure that it would be useful to make them aware of the need for enhanced facilities for disabled people in licensed premises. There is an awful lot that we can do by increasing awareness and trying to change attitudes, as well as by making changes to legislation, if such changes are appropriate. The motion that George Foulkes lodged has the Government's total support and we will do anything that we can do practically to make life more civilised, more fair and more equal for disabled people in Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

Over the next 12 months this Government will continue to deliver its wide range of programmes to improve housing for the people of Scotland. A key element is our record three-year £1.65 billion investment in affordable housing from which we will ensure that we extract maximum benefit to meet housing need. In addition, we will continue to invest in energy efficiency, tackle fuel poverty, work with our partners to meet the challenge of the 2012 homelessness commitments, help those at risk of repossession and introduce a housing bill that will improve the conditions in private sector housing and protect the interests of existing and future tenants by reforming the right to buy and modernising the regime for regulating social landlords.

I agree with Stuart McMillan on both points. Accelerating capital spending into next year would help us to overcome the problem of recession next year. The statistics announced last week showed a 71 per cent increase in completions, a 300 per cent increase in starts and a 300 per cent increase in approvals for social housing. I regret to say that we have not had a congratulatory telegram from any of the Opposition parties.

We already have a 2012 homelessness working party involving key stakeholders and we will extend our discussions to other stakeholders who are not represented in that core group. We will address the issues that Jacqui Watt rightly raised as well as all the other issues to help us achieve our 2012 target, to which we remain firmly committed.

This has been a good debate and there have been high-quality speeches from throughout the chamber. I, too, welcome the people in the gallery who have been sitting through the debate. I pay particular tribute to organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid, which do a tremendous amount of work for which we are all grateful. I reiterate that we all agree that  we have a shared commitment to dealing with the issue and facing the challenges that it presents. I will update members on four subjects that were mentioned in the debate. First, as members know, we held a consultation on forced marriage. We will shortly publish our analysis of the consultation responses. The UK Government has just published its review of the impact of the legislation south of the border, one year after its implementation. We will take into account the lessons that the UK Government has learned about the impact of forced-marriage legislation down south and we will shortly present to Parliament our views on the way forward. Women who have no recourse to public funds are particularly vulnerable in our society. The numbers that are involved are not high, but the issue is nevertheless important. As members have said, the Home Office has—after a delay that was not entirely of its making—recently announced a pilot project for such cases that is running from 30 November to the end of February. Mary Mulligan asked about the role of our monitoring group in that. The group will exist for as long as is necessary to monitor the pilot's impact in Scotland, on which we will work with our Home Office colleagues. I was supposed to meet Phil Woolas recently but, unfortunately, he had to withdraw at the last minute. I am seeking an early meeting with him, at which the pilot project will be top of the agenda. We will continue to work with the UK Government on issues that relate to women who have no recourse to public funds. I think that Margaret Mitchell talked about support for victims of human trafficking. The Scottish Government awarded quite a bit of funding last year and this year to the trafficking awareness-raising alliance, which has bid for additional funding to allow it to maintain a service throughout Scotland. The alliance estimates that it will support about 50 women a year. That bid and alternative approaches to providing support are being considered, to ensure that support is provided in accordance with best practice and that accommodation is appropriate and best meets victims' needs. The Government has also entered into an agreement with Migrant Helpline for the remainder of the financial year to support adult victims—other than those whom TARA supports—who include women who are trafficked for labour exploitation or domestic servitude. I put it on the record that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill contains a new offence in relation to extreme pornography. That is another part of our overall strategy for dealing with the exploitation of women and the issues that we have discussed this afternoon. I hope that that update shows some of the other action in which we are involved. The list was by no  means exhaustive but, as those issues were mentioned, I wanted to cover them in my speech. I am keeping a close eye on the bill that Rhoda Grant proposes to introduce. We welcome the publication of the consultation document and we encourage all interested groups to make submissions to the consultation, which runs until 26 February 2010. We are interested in the consultation's outcome. Once we see the details of the bill, we will consider the proposals. If we believe that they should be supported, we will be happy to consider that. We approach the bill with an open mind. If we believe that it would make a significant contribution and achieve the objectives, we will certainly be sympathetic and empathetic to it. Many references have been made in the debate to single outcome agreements and in particular to Scottish Women's Aid's work on the subject. Members may recollect that Scottish Women's Aid published a report in 2008 in which it analysed the local authority single outcome agreements at the time. The report made four recommendations, two of which we have already implemented, by publishing "Safer Lives: Changed Lives" and establishing the issue of violence against women as a ministerial priority. Scottish Women's Aid also recommended that we establish "key indicators to measure the scope, prevalence and incidence of violence against women and the impact of policy initiatives on its reduction." We are carrying out such a review in the national group on violence against women and are in the process of developing robust indicators. I will report to the chamber and, indeed, the Equal Opportunities Committee at the appropriate time. The final recommendation was that we monitor "the performance of local authorities in relation to violence against women" in single outcome agreements. [ Interruption. ]

We have four reports that are available or are to come. Between them, they cover a lot of this work. First, we have published the "Draft Budget 2010/11: Equality Statement". Secondly, we will shortly publish the statement to which Johann Lamont referred. Thirdly, we have to produce the gender equality duty report by 1 July 2010. That detailed report will set out the progress that the public sector has made right across the board and must be informed by survey work to identify good practice in Scotland on two priority areas: violence against women and occupational segregation.

As the member knows, sentencing policy is the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. Obviously, he is looking at sentencing policy in terms of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. As Angela Constance said, when the sentencing council is established, it would be worth while asking it to look at the whole issue of the adequacy, or inadequacy, of sentencing and violence against women.

The Tory amendment to the motion recognises the success of the domestic abuse courts in Glasgow and calls on the Government to roll out the initiative, where practicable, to other parts of Scotland. The Government is happy to support the amendment at decision time. I hope that that is warmly welcomed throughout the chamber. Unfortunately, I cannot support the Labour amendment. I agree with the wording in the middle part of the amendment but, in its drafting of the beginning and the end, Labour has been overtaken by events. As I said, we will publish the report to which the beginning of the amendment refers and we have published the report to which it refers at the end: "Safer Lives: Changed Lives", which meets the definition of an assembly of all that we are doing cross-directorate on the issue.

The debate has been worth while. We are all joined at the hip in taking the issue seriously and in doing everything that we can to face the challenge of violence against women. I think that that concern is shared equally in every part of the chamber. We will continue to step up our efforts to deal with this scourge of our society.

I have much pleasure in introducing—for the first time as minister—this afternoon's annual debate on an extremely worthy subject. This year, the debate is being held at a special time—almost in the middle of the 16-day campaign initiated by the centre for women's global leadership. The theme of this year's campaign on violence against women is commit—act—demand: we can end violence against women! We have just heard the Rev John Forbes talk about having a dream, and I am sure that all of us share the dream of eliminating violence against women in all its forms, as it is totally unacceptable. It is fair to say that all parties share that objective and the principles that underlie it. Like many other members, I am wearing a white ribbon as part of the white ribbon campaign. I urge as many others as possible to do so, too, to show that we are actively engaged in the campaign against violence against women. I was encouraged to note that at football matches throughout Scotland last Saturday and Sunday, the referees wore white ribbons and carried white whistles. In Fife, all members of the emergency services—the police, ambulance and fire services—will wear white ribbons during the 16 days of activism. Last week, the police published the latest statistics on incidents of domestic abuse in our society, and they make depressing reading. A total of 53,681 such incidents were reported to police forces around Scotland in 2008-09, which works out at more than 1,000 each week and nearly 150 each day. When one looks behind the figures, the picture is even more depressing, as 55 per cent of those incidents led to the recording of a crime or offence; the figure for the previous year was 50 per cent. In the incidents on which information was available, 61 per cent of victims had previously been recorded as victims of domestic abuse, whereas the figure for the previous year was 54 per cent. The figures on the number of incidents per 100,000 of population show that females are most at risk of being victims of domestic abuse when they are between the ages of 22 and 25,and that males are most at risk when they are between 26 and 30 years old. Another depressing feature  of the statistics is that about 10 per cent of all recorded incidents now involve violence against males, which must also be dealt with. The overwhelming majority of recorded incidents took place in the home—89 per cent, where such information was recorded. This was more likely if the victim and perpetrator cohabited. All in all, the statistics paint a depressing picture that presents some major challenges to everyone in our society. Michael Kaufman, the originator of the white ribbon campaign, said: "If it were between countries, we'd call it a war. If it were a disease, we'd call it an epidemic. If it were an oil spill, we'd call it a disaster. But it is happening to women, and it's just an everyday affair. It is violence against women." That sums up the need for action.

Yes, in percentage terms, that is right. Overall, the statistics show an 8 per cent increase in incidents over the previous year. Of course, it is not just women who are affected.

As a result of an approach that an informal cross-party group of members made to me about domestic violence against men, I have initiated work in my department to consider how such violence is being dealt with in Wales in particular—Wales is probably further ahead than any other part of these islands in dealing with that issue. I have said that I would be happy to lead a debate on that some time in the new year. However, this debate is specifically about violence against women. Cases that involve such violence make up the vast majority of the cases that we are talking about. Of course, not only women are affected by domestic abuse; children and young people in Scotland are affected by it far too often.

I am happy to reiterate the importance of that. Violence against women is by  far the most predominant problem, and it must be treated separately. It is in some ways related to the issue of violence against men, but that is a separate issue that requires specific attention on its own merits. Cases of violence against women represent around 90 per cent of the problem, and it is clear that we are dealing with violence against women today. Last week, I had the honour of meeting a group of young experts aged between 16 and 22 who have formed a new group called voice against violence. The eight young people from throughout Scotland have come together to advise on the implementation of the national domestic abuse delivery plan for children and young people. The Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, also met them. Their plan is to try to make a real difference to children and young people throughout Scotland. They will hold regular meetings with ministers, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other stakeholders to discuss progress across the 13 priority areas. Obviously, eight young people cannot speak for the thousands of children and young people who are affected by domestic abuse in our country, but the group will work with the Government across Scotland and through different Women's Aid groups, local authority services, schools and youth projects to identify issues that need to be addressed and to disseminate best practice throughout the country. As members know, the Scottish Government has, in recognition of the impact of domestic abuse on young people, specifically allocated more than £11 million for the three-year period between 2008 and 2011 to ensure that children throughout Scotland have access to dedicated domestic abuse support workers, no matter which locality they live in. I am glad that the young people whom I mentioned were particularly complimentary about the work of many of the support workers who have helped them through very difficult times in their lives. They went out of their way to stress the importance of continuing with the provision and funding of support workers, who are a key element in dealing with the problem. We have been developing our strategic approach to violence against women for some time. Obviously, we want to take into account the new landscape in civic Scotland and the new relationships between national and local government and other partners in particular. Refuge accommodation is another area that we are working on through the affordable housing investment programme. Through consideration of the strategic housing investment programmes, local authorities must make submissions to the Scottish Government in which they must identify  the additional refuge accommodation that is needed in the different parts of Scotland.

I totally agree with Christine Grahame. Indeed, I heard of a case in which a phone call was made to a rape crisis centre by someone who lived in a rural area. The adviser advised the person to contact the local policeman but, unfortunately, she was the wife of the local policeman. In her village, it was difficult for that lady to access the services that she required. I am very cognisant of the particular difficulties regarding refuge accommodation in rural and island communities. In the strategic housing investment plans that have been submitted to the Government for the period 2009 to 2012, four local authorities have specifically identified the need for additional refuge accommodation in their areas. However, I believe that more than four local authorities need additional refuge accommodation. I will discuss the issue with all local authorities to ensure that we identify and act on the need for additional facilities in different parts of Scotland.

Partly as a result of representations from Margaret Curran and other stakeholders, during this year both Kenny MacAskill, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, and I have worked with key stakeholders, including the police, to identify where additional resources are required in the run-up to, during and immediately after an old firm game. I congratulate Strathclyde Police, which, for the past two old firm games, has engaged in a range of activities. For obvious reasons, I will not go into the detail here, but during the latest old firm game, there was a welcome 28 per cent reduction in incidents of domestic abuse compared with the figure for the previous game. That shows the impact that those police activities  and other activities are having around old firm games. We still want to step up the effort and do better, but that example shows that, when services—the services for which I am responsible and the police service—work together with the old firm football clubs, which both support our campaign against domestic violence, we can make a real impact. A 28 per cent reduction is very welcome, but we want to make an even greater reduction in the future. I totally recognise the point that Margaret Curran makes. Earlier this year, Councillor Harry McGuigan, representing COSLA, and I provided a joint foreword for our strategy, which we launched at the Rape Crisis Scotland offices. That demonstrates COSLA's commitment—and the commitment of various local authorities—as a key partner in the implementation of "Safer Lives: Changed Lives". Other key partners are health boards and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. Some of the achievements that have been made already are worth mentioning. I do not present them in any partisan way, as a lot of the initiatives were started under the previous Administration. Whatever the colour of the Administration of the Scottish Government, we are all equally determined to tackle the problem of domestic abuse. One innovative measure that has been taken is the rolling out of the Caledonian system under which services are provided to women and children throughout Scotland at the same time as the perpetrators of domestic abuse are dealt with. As I have said, the statistics show many cases of repeat domestic abuse. We must identify those repeat cases and act on them in a preventive way, as Strathclyde Police has done around old firm games, but we must do so more systematically, and not just around old firm games. There are many other examples that I could mention, but I have run out of time and will perhaps use my closing speech to highlight some of the points that I have been unable to make in my opening speech. I move, That the Parliament is pleased to reaffirm its commitment to ending violence against women; supports the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence and its theme this year of Commit - Act - Demand: we can end violence against women!; celebrates the commitment of partners across Scotland, including the voluntary sector, local authorities, the police, NHS boards and others, to work together to end violence against women; acknowledges the importance of the shared understanding developed through the Safer Lives: Changed Lives strategic approach, and welcomes the progress that has been made to date on tackling violence against women in Scotland, including the groundbreaking work to involve young people who have experienced domestic abuse as expert advisers.

The organisations to be tracked are being selected by independent researchers. We expect to have the list by the end of December.

The organisations to be tracked are being selected by independent researchers. We expect to have the list by the end of December.

We have regular discussions with all the third sector organisations. Irrespective of the research exercise, we would always be cognisant of and responsive to any concerns by any third sector organisation at any time.

I join everyone else in congratulating Jackie Baillie on securing this evening's debate and on her excellent introduction to it. As Christine Grahame and others have done, I acknowledge Jackie Baillie's long-term commitment to helping people who are in poverty and other vulnerable members of our society.  As the Minister for Housing and Communities, I also pay particular tribute to the citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland and the overarching body Citizens Advice Scotland. Many professional people work for and provide professional advice through citizens advice bureaux, but we should also acknowledge the volunteers who work in bureaux the length and breadth of Scotland. Their commitment is to be commended. The debate has been helpful. There is no dispute in the chamber about the fact that debt is an increasingly significant social problem in Scotland. The information that is provided by Citizens Advice Scotland in its various reports is extremely helpful. As Liam McArthur pointed out, the data that are available are not comprehensive, so I am glad to say that the Office for National Statistics will later this year publish the results of a wealth and assets survey, which should help to show the causes and incidence of debt problems in our society as part of that wider survey. I want to address in my reply some of the issues that have been raised during the debate—particularly, but not exclusively, those that were raised by Jackie Baillie. I will try to be as helpful as possible. An on-going joint review by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Government is examining the range of welfare advisory services that are available in Scotland and we anticipate that the group's report will be published before Christmas. We hope that it will inform the debate on how we can improve the range of advice, and its delivery, throughout Scotland. That relates not just to Citizens Advice Scotland but to Money Advice Scotland, local authorities and many other organisations. I want to say a few words about the support that we provide. We core fund Citizens Advice Direct, which I visited last summer and which provides a helpful service in support of the wider work. We part fund the National Debtline, and we have provided Citizens Advice Scotland with an additional £1.1 million to increase the availability of advice in response to pressures that the recession is putting on our citizens and advice agencies. That money has been allocated across Scotland and has increased the overall capacity to provide general advice, but it has also helped us to provide some specialist support, particularly on issues such as potential repossession and debt that is associated with home ownership.

We will be in a position to make final decisions on that once we see the pre-budget  report on 9 December, which I hope will confirm our overall budgetary position for next year. I assure Jackie Baillie that Fergus Ewing and I, as the two ministers who are primarily responsible, will do everything we can to ensure that the resources are put in place, as far as possible, to cater for the increased demand, because we recognise the importance of that, as we told the Local Government and Communities Committee yesterday. If I may say so, it is better to invest in front-line, up-front rehabilitation services to help people before they get into too much debt or have to apply for bankruptcy, sequestration or whatever. I totally agree with Jackie Baillie's point. I hope that our consultation on improving access to the debt arrangement scheme, which will close on 18 December, will come up with some interesting recommendations. The Accountant in Bankruptcy's review of the scheme, which includes the operation of LILA, will also help to inform policy. It would be extremely helpful if, as part of those reviews, people could present evidence on issues such as the £100 barrier; after all, the purpose of the reviews is to find out what further action needs to be taken. Moreover, the Government bases its policies on evidence and we will certainly examine and respond to any evidence that is submitted. As some debtors are still unable to access debt relief, we have accepted the debt action forum's recommendations, including proposals for a new route into bankruptcy—the certificate of sequestration. The measure is included in the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, which is currently being considered by Mr McLetchie and his colleagues.

As I was about to say, credit unions play a vital role in helping people not only to manage their finances but to avoid getting into debt in the first place. It is much better for people, particularly people on low incomes, to borrow money from a credit union than from characters such as those to whom Robin Harper referred. I am glad to say that, in his time as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, my colleague John Swinney has very much supported credit unions. Of course, some of them will be able to access the additional funding for third-sector organisations that has been made available this year and which has already been set out in the draft budget for next year. Although, all in all, an awful lot of work is going on, much more can be done. For example,  councils could intervene much earlier with people who are getting into difficulties with rent and council tax arrears. Instead of simply waiting and then having to set sheriff officers on such people, some local authorities could learn lessons from the rehabilitation practices of some of the major banks, which in recent years have made great advances in this area. Now, if people get into arrears with their mortgages over two or three months, the banks are intervening with appropriate advice and general support to stop them getting into further debt. I had much more to say but, as always, I have run out of time. I have listened—and will listen—to what members have to say and will pass on to my relevant ministerial colleagues the points that have been made in tonight's debate. Whatever additional action is required to tackle the problem, we are certainly prepared to take it.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

The 16 days of global activism to tackle violence against women are an important time of the year. It is with great pride that I will wear the white ribbon during that period to raise awareness of the issue. This year, subject to parliamentary timetabling, we will hold what has become an annual Scottish Government debate on violence against women during the 16 days of action. This year's debate will be on the same theme as the 16 days of action: commit, act, demand—we can end violence against women.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing had a meeting with the STUC women's committee yesterday. That specific issue was not raised, but we are happy to meet the committee at any time to discuss the particulars of the 16-day campaign or any of the other issues. Through the national group on violence against women, which I chair, we try to consult every stakeholder on a regular basis to ensure that they have the maximum opportunity for input to the development and delivery of our strategy. I am happy to take on boards the points that have been made by Johann Lamont.

This has been a good debate. Good speeches have been made by members of all  parties and we have learned quite a lot. For example, Roseanna Cunningham and I did not realise that Lord Foulkes was our number 1 fan in the Parliament, nor did we realise that he is joining the 2 per cent of the population who cycle to work—we look forward to that with excitement. I will deal with some of the issues raised during the debate. A lot of genuine and reasonable points were made, and I have good news on some of them. I turn first to the issue of young people. We are all aware of the figures that were published yesterday, which show that youth unemployment in Scotland, and indeed in the rest of the country, is at an unacceptably high level. My view is that every one of us should take every opportunity to tackle that and to make an impact on the level of youth unemployment in our society. Therefore, I wholly endorse the comments that Karen Gillon and Sarah Boyack made about trying, wherever possible, to tailor the delivery of the programme to help deal with the problem of youth unemployment.

I know that Mr MacAskill is already looking at trying to employ young people who come into the justice system, to make them productive and fit to re-enter society. My colleague Roseanna Cunningham and I are keen to meet Karen Gillon and Sarah Boyack to discuss practical issues around how we can take forward the youth employment agenda as part of the development of the central Scotland green network. Next month, Roseanna Cunningham will be launching the Forestry Commission Scotland strategy, woods for learning, which sets out how to increase young people's opportunities for learning experiences in woodland and green spaces. That is a good start, which indicates the commitment throughout the Parliament to developing youth employment opportunities. Several members have referred to the areas that are not covered by the central Scotland green network. John Scott expressed concern about parts of South Ayrshire, George Foulkes expressed concern about parts of East Ayrshire, and Karen Gillon expressed concern about both Lanark and New Lanark. However, the 19 local authorities that are signed up to the programme include South Ayrshire Council, East Ayrshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council, and boundaries have not yet been agreed. In fact, although it is a central Scotland green network, we do not want to be hidebound by rigidity in our approach to boundaries. We are  open to suggestions about how we treat those areas, as there is a strong argument for tying places such as Lanark and New Lanark into some of the action points for the network so that those communities benefit, too. There is a similarly strong argument for doing likewise in some of the communities that George Foulkes mentioned, which have some of the highest levels of youth unemployment in Scotland. We have an open mind and will be co-operative as we share the agenda of ensuring that as many communities as possible in different parts of Scotland benefit from the programme. I turn to the Liberal Democrat amendment. Had the amendment called generally for further clarification of, or even detail on, the spending plans for the central Scotland green network, we would probably have been happy to support it. However, we must be careful what we vote for, and the very precise wording of the amendment causes us difficulty. The amendment asks the Scottish Government "to clarify within the next six weeks its funding and delivery intentions for all"— not just this initiative— "the national developments in the National Planning Framework for Scotland 2".

With due respect, that is not what the amendment says. First, the amendment is much more precise than that. It imposes a six-week timeframe, but four weeks will have passed before the Chancellor makes his pre-budget report on 9 December. Even our budget for next year will not be absolutely finalised until we see the detail of the pre-budget report on 9 December. For example, we are debating whether capital can be brought forward from future years. We do not know the answer to such questions, and it would be extremely unreasonable to expect us to spell out the detail of any programme of this size within two weeks of the pre-budget report.

I am sorry, but I have taken an intervention and need to explain this. The amendment also asks for details of all 13 of the priorities in the national planning framework. If it asked only for the details of the central Scotland green network, that would be reasonable, but it asks for details of all 13 projects. I had thought  that the Liberal Democrats' priority was the green network, but the wording of the amendment does not reflect what was said in the Liberal Democrat speeches.

No, I am sorry.

I will take an intervention from George Foulkes.

I thank Lord Foulkes for that intervention. Roseanna Cunningham and I will be happy to write to the conveners of the appropriate committees to set out how and when we can give clarification on the spending plans for the central Scotland green network. We understand members' need for that information, but we must schedule that according to a reasonable timeframe. The network's board will have its first meeting in January and those who are involved in the board, including the 19 local authorities, must have the opportunity to input into the business plan, including the spending priorities. It would be entirely unreasonable for us to prejudice that situation, which is another reason for rejecting the Liberal Democrat amendment. Unfortunately, I do not have time to cover the many other points that I wanted to cover. I thank all members for their speeches in what has been a good-quality debate. There has been a wide consensus of opinion and, as a consensus politician, I am delighted to acknowledge that.

Mr MacAskill and I have requested the Scottish Law Commission to undertake in its new work programme a comprehensive review of compulsory purchase order legislation. My understanding is that the commission has agreed to do that.

A moment ago, the member argued that he did not know anything about the funding. Now, he is complaining that the Lothians do not get enough money. He cannot have it both ways.

In its first six months, the energy assistance package has helped more than 16,000 households in Scotland to reduce the proportion of their incomes that they spend on fuel. Yesterday, I announced that we would extend the package to many more homes in Scotland as soon as the regulations can be amended. We will widen the definition of an energy inefficient house to include those with a standard assessment procedure rating that would put them in band E on an energy performance certificate. I also announced that we will provide local authorities and registered social landlords with up to £2.5 million of additional funding for stage 3 work in the social sector.

As the member probably knows, the current package was based on the recommendations of the fuel poverty forum. The  forum made representations to me about the need to make changes to the eligibility criteria. As I said, I have agreed to do that. I have asked the fuel poverty forum to consider the wider eligibility criteria for the groups that are entitled to benefit from the programme. The forum will report back to me in due course on whether a widening of the eligibility criteria is required. I am sure that the member will be delighted that, given the backlog of people who are in band E, the reforms that I announced yesterday should result in a tenfold increase at stage 4.

Local authorities are responsible for providing or procuring local services to tackle and prevent homelessness. The decision whether to put homeless services out to tender is therefore for the City of Edinburgh Council. It is the council's responsibility to ensure that local services are aligned with the Scottish Government's objectives on addressing homelessness and that resources are used in the most effective way to deliver its strategic outcomes.

I remind the member that the City of Edinburgh Council has an A listing from the regulator for its homelessness services. On the impact of the tendering procedure, we have been absolutely assured by the council that there will be no reduction in capacity of any of the services and that the council will ensure that the outcomes that the services are designed to deliver will be achieved.

I agree with every word that Shirley-Anne Somerville has just said.

It is a matter primarily for Glasgow City Council and Glasgow Housing Association to bring forward proposals for regeneration, but the Scottish Government has been working closely with them to ensure progress. An approach has been agreed that should see work proceed shortly in three out of the eight regeneration areas and a special purpose vehicle set up to make progress with the rest. Both Laurieston and Gallowgate are among the three initial areas in which work can begin in advance of the main programme.

I am glad to say that the local steering group in Laurieston has already been convened—indeed, it met last week. The council will reconvene the Gallowgate group before Christmas with the intention of holding a meeting before Christmas.

The energy assistance package replaced the central heating and warm deal programmes on 6 April. It is a more holistic approach that tackles all sides of the fuel poverty triangle: helping to maximise household incomes though benefits and tax credit checks; reducing fuel bills by providing advice on wise energy use and access to social tariffs; and improving the energy performance of the poorest performing Scottish homes by providing a package of measures for those most vulnerable to fuel poverty, including, for the first time, intensive support for low-income families with young or disabled children.

We have made representations not only on winter fuel payments, but on cold weather payments. In addition, we have been working with Macmillan Cancer Support to ensure that income maximisation advice and support is provided to cancer patients throughout Scotland. That has been a very successful service for a number of years.

One of the reforms to the energy assistance package that I announced yesterday is specifically to deal with the question of what happens between stage 3 and stage 4 of the programme. There had been an unnecessary delay for those who qualified for stage 4 but had to wait for stage 3 to be completed before they were referred to stage 4. With immediate effect, we will now ensure that those who qualify for stage 3 and stage 4 will have both stages taken together, instead of having to wait for stage 3 to be completed before they move to stage 4.

Reducing the number of additional winter deaths is a key priority for the Scottish Government. The causes of additional deaths in winter are complex and there is no simple solution to the problem. The long-term trend is clearly downward, although figures can fluctuate from year to year. Nevertheless, the additional deaths in winter are a cause for serious concern. Although research suggests that the overwhelming majority of the extra deaths are not due to hypothermia, our fuel poverty programmes make homes warmer and drier and significantly reduce condensation, dampness and cold in recipients' homes, long-term exposure to which is associated with poor health.

As I indicated earlier, I announced yesterday a number of reforms to the energy assistance programme that should result in a significant increase in the number of stage 3 and 4 installations not only in Mr Macintosh's constituency, but throughout Scotland. I am sure that he will welcome those measures.

We have made considerable progress with the development, introduction or expansion of support and public services for the armed forces community in Scotland. A report detailing our achievements will be issued in the next few days.

I am delighted to confirm that the annual report will cover a range of issues, including health, housing, education, employment and employability. It will contain details of what has been achieved so far, work that is in progress, our future plans in each of those areas and the consultations that we intend to have with key stakeholders.

We are aware of the issue and we are addressing it. We will report back on progress as and when there is progress to report back on.

I join in the congratulations to Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing the debate on an important subject. From listening to the speeches, I think that it is clear that the Polish connection stretches the length and breadth of Scotland, from Leith in Malcolm Chisholm's constituency, through Edinburgh, which Shirley-Anne Somerville mentioned, into the Borders, which John Lamont mentioned, and Fife, which a number of members mentioned. That is a clear indication of the welcome impact that Polish immigration into Scotland has had. There have been three waves of Polish immigration into Scotland: during the late 19 th century and early 20 th century; during and after the second world war; and in the past few years, when the migration has perhaps been more economic than it was previously. All those waves of migration of Polish people into Scotland and the historic connections that they have established have been extremely welcome to our country. A number of members have mentioned individuals such as Robert Gordon, who made his fortune as a merchant in Gdańsk and then came back and established the Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen. More recently, many of our memories are from the generation who fought during the second world war. In particular, I welcome the Polish consul to Scotland, who is here on—I think—his last day as consul. I spent some time with him over the summer in commemorating the 70 th anniversary of the start of the second world war, in particular marking the Polish navy's contribution in Scotland. Some of the figures for the involvement of Polish people in Scotland are staggering. About 50,000 service personnel and, as John Lamont mentioned, at least one bear, were based here and, after the war, 10,000 people—a fifth of those  people—stayed and settled in Scotland. We should also recognise that Poland made the fourth largest allied troop contribution to the war and, having been evacuated from France, they protected many of Scotland's coastal defences. As Des McNulty mentioned, one of the most heroic efforts was in March 1941, when the Polish destroyer Piorun saved John Brown's shipyard by putting up heavy anti-aircraft fire. Today, the Solidarity Plaza in Clydebank honours that achievement. Polish women have also played a major part in our shared history. The nurses of the Polish Red Cross and the army medical service, together with the Polish women's auxiliary service, cared for the sick at the Polish military hospital at Taymouth castle, near Aberfeldy, and at Dupplin castle, near Perth, where there was another Polish military hospital. The latter was funded by three Scotswomen for the evacuated Polish and British troops from France in 1940. The Polish military hospitals based in Scotland each had a PWSK—Polish women's auxiliary army service—company. The community has formed a number of societies and institutions, including the Polish Hearth, a centre for Polish refugees and servicemen, a Polish school, and the Polish Ex-Combatants Association. Today, the Scottish Government welcomes the contribution that Polish people have made to our economy and our society in more recent years. A number of organisations have not been mentioned. One that has been mentioned is the Sikorski Polish Club in Glasgow. There is also the Scottish Polish cultural association; there is Swietlica, the local Polish drop-in centre in Edinburgh, which has also been mentioned; there is the Polish Association in Inverness, where up to 35,000 Poles have settled in the past decade or so; and there are many other large and small groups throughout Scotland that help Polish and immigrant communities. I am glad to say that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, will attend the United Polish Falkirk conference on 28 November, and I am also glad to say that the Scottish Government granted £2,000 towards helping the organisation of the conference, which is typical of the kind of events that have been taking place, particularly over the past year or so as the 70 th anniversary of the start of world war two has been marked. As part of our engagement with people who have moved from Poland to Scotland in recent years, we have produced an information guide for Polish nationals looking to work in Scotland. The guide has been distributed throughout Scotland and Poland and is available online; it provides practical information on employment, housing and training opportunities as well as highlighting  leisure activities in Scotland. There has been a bit of a return of some migrants from Scotland to Poland in recent years—perhaps as a direct result of the relative performance of the Polish economy in recent years and the exchange rate—but nevertheless many of those who came have settled here permanently. The recent movement of people between our two countries has led to the establishment of important transport connections, particularly direct air links, between Scotland and Poland, which underpin our historic ties. Some of the other projects in which the Scottish Government has been involved include a project in Glasgow to which £200,000 has been committed between 2008 and 2011 to help the integration of the Polish community and a project at the Dundee International Women's Centre, where more than £250,000 of funding has been made available to assist with language and integration.  Scottish Development International, which enjoys excellent relations with the British-Polish Chamber of Commerce, is currently working to establish a Scottish-Polish association to focus on promoting and networking Polish-Scottish bilateral relations. As I said earlier, there is a very good relationship between the Polish Government and the Scottish Government. Since 2004, the Scottish Government has hosted trainees from the Polish national school of government on short-term internships. I am pleased that the current intake is also in the public gallery tonight to pay tribute to the historic links between our two countries. The Scottish Government welcomes the contribution that the Polish community has made, is making and will continue to make to Scottish society and the Scottish economy. We look forward to many more hundreds of years of close connections between the Polish people and the Scottish people.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

I understand that the intention behind the Prime Minister's announcement is to improve support for 16 and 17-year-olds, including teenage parents, who cannot stay with their families and who are provided with housing at public expense. The United Kingdom Government has explained to officials in the Scottish Government that there is no intention to compel pregnant teenagers into supervised accommodation as some reports have suggested. We have no plans to introduce identical measures in Scotland, but we certainly want all vulnerable young people to receive the housing and any other support that they need. We are working with a range of national and local partners to achieve those goals.

I and my colleagues are very much aware of the importance of the campaign on avoiding the problems that young females, in particular, get into. More widely, I recognise that there is a need to examine the provision throughout Scotland of supported accommodation and related services for young single mothers and single people of all ages so that we can deal with the problems that are associated with homelessness, which I think lay behind the member's original question.

I agree with Mary Mulligan on one thing—that it has been a good and informative debate. As the minister, I have listened to all the points that have been made and will be happy to progress a number of them. I begin by drawing out some general themes. It is clear that on all sides of the chamber there are genuine concerns about how the planning system is working in rural Scotland. In some cases, it is not working properly and is acting as a barrier to the development of housing to buy and housing to rent. It is clear from listening to the stories of Elaine Murray, Nanette Milne and Rob Gibson that although we are all signed up to the planning reforms that went through in the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, it is extremely important, if those changes are to become a reality, that a culture change takes place in local authority planning departments throughout Scotland. I am acutely conscious of the planning issues. Given that our rural communities will require more diversified economies if they are to survive in the future, the placing of restrictions under which it is possible to build only to facilitate housing for an agricultural worker clearly reflects an outdated concept of what our rural economies comprise. I agree with members that we need to do much more at local authority level in particular to ensure that the planning system works for housing development and not against it. I am deeply cognisant of the impact of the unintended consequences of the homelessness legislation. This Government is totally committed to meeting the homelessness target by 2012, but there is no doubt that unintended consequences have affected our rural and our urban communities. I have two specific points to make in support of what others—Karen Gillon, in particular—have said. First, last year, 45 per cent of housing allocations by local authorities were made to people on the homeless list, with the balance of 55 per cent being made to people on the mainstream waiting list. However, in some areas, the allocations to people on the homeless list reached more than 60 per cent. There is no doubt that that is causing division in the community and other consequences that need to be addressed. We will try to address those issues in the new joint steering committee that we have set up with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to deal with achieving the homeless target, because they are real issues. They should not detract from our  determination to achieve the homelessness target by 2012, but we cannot ignore the unintended consequences and the need to reduce the mainstream waiting list as well as the need to tackle homelessness. Secondly, if we consider the regulator's latest report and the analysis of the profile of people in Scotland who are homeless, we find that 60 per cent of those people are single men and 24 per cent are single parents—they are usually single mothers. Often, two things have happened—my colleague Christine Grahame referred to them. The problem will have been treated only as a housing problem although there are wider problems that need to be addressed, particularly with young single males. It is no accident that the local authorities that have made most progress towards achieving the 2012 target—North Ayrshire Council, for example—have brought together their homelessness and social work services to ensure that young single men or single parents, for example, are not simply put through the revolving door and given a tenancy when they have no money, furniture or job, or even no benefits. Those people need much more holistic support. The problem is not just a housing problem; it is a much wider problem.

That is absolutely right. Orkney Islands Council has been one of the best authorities in dealing with that matter. There are now two supported units for young people there, and that has made a significant difference to the opportunities that are available to them. We need to consider how we can learn from the examples of Orkney, Aberdeen Foyer and Cairn Housing Association's project in Inverness, for instance. More such providers and provision would help enormously in tackling the homelessness problem and the wider issues that many young people face. On the HAG rates, I acknowledge that a number of rural housing associations have claimed that they had difficulty with some of the targets that we are talking about. Over the summer, I met Western Isles Council, housing associations, and people in Lochaber, Argyll and a number of other areas. If a housing association or group of housing associations in a rural area says that it has difficulties, we will work with it and work through the issues, because we are determined to ensure  that houses are provided in rural areas. I hope that, by working with councils and housing associations, we can deal with any issues relating to the housing association grant that arise. The average grant in rural areas is significantly higher than the average grant across the country, as it should be, because many of the housing associations in rural areas are smaller. On the specific point that Rhoda Grant made about the loan element of the croft house grant scheme, that was, in fact, abolished by her Government in 2005. I think that it was abolished because the funding was run down and there did not appear to be the appropriate level of demand for it.

I am running out of time, unfortunately. For the record, I want to correct what Mary Mulligan said. It is not correct to say that there will be a 30 per cent reduction in investment in housing in Scotland next year. We brought forward £120 million worth of investment. That investment is taking place earlier than planned at the request of the Labour Party, among others. It is, therefore, ingenious for Labour members to try to describe that—

Indeed. I repeat, it is disingenuous for Labour members to try to claim that that is a cut. If Mary Mulligan is so concerned—as she should be—she should invite her chancellor to agree to our request to allow us to bring forward into next year capital spend from 2011-12. In that way, we will continue with our exceptionally high level of investment in housing in Scotland. I make no prediction, in case I get into trouble, but I hope that, when the figures for this year are published, they will show a record number of approvals, a record number of starts and a record number of completions by the SNP Government.

After your comments, Presiding Officer, I thought that I was going to have to restrict my comments to an hour. I congratulate the committee on producing a report of a very high standard and, in particular, congratulate the convener on her speech and her summary of the report's key themes. As far as the Scottish Government's response is concerned, all parties, including the committee and the Government, are pretty well singing from the same hymn sheet in recognising the importance of housing in sustaining our rural communities. If housing is not of a high standard or, indeed, if it is not available, particularly for rent, we will not be able to sustain our communities in the long term.  As we have seen in a number of areas, if not enough good-quality housing is available, particularly to young people, rural communities will lose those people—and sometimes they never return. As a result, we acknowledge the importance of housing and other community facilities to our rural communities' long-term economic and environmental sustainability. Since the Parliament's establishment, quite a lot of progress has been made on rural housing. This year alone, we are investing £146 million in delivering more than 1,300 new houses in rural communities throughout the country. I know that there is a dispute over the definition of "rural" with reference to rural local authorities, and we are looking at that issue to see whether we can take a more focused approach to measuring progress in rural areas. I will keep the Parliament abreast of progress in that regard. More than £126 million of the £146 million is for affordable homes for rent, which are delivered by housing associations the length and breadth of rural Scotland. Those housing authorities make an enormous contribution to the sustainability of our communities, not just as developers, owners and managers of houses, but in their wider role as local regeneration agencies. We are also providing nearly £14 million to support low-cost home ownership, with a temporary extension of the open market shared equity pilot throughout Scotland, £1 million for rural home ownership grants and £4.8 million for social and environmental improvements. On top of that, we have the kick-start programme for council housing. I am glad to say that councils such as Highland Council are considering taking up the opportunity of using that additional source of funding to build new houses in rural areas. So far, £26 million of the £50 million subsidy has been allocated; the other £24 million will be allocated before Christmas. Between them, Aberdeenshire Council, East Lothian Council, Orkney Islands Council and Perth and Kinross Council will receive £3 million of the sum that has been allocated to build 121 units in rural areas. Our pilot rural homes for rent project will eventually provide up to 100 new units in various communities the length and breadth of Scotland. I agree with the committee that we need to look at new ways of funding and supporting the development of new housing in rural areas. We all accept that there will be substantial financial pressures for the foreseeable future. We must, therefore, do as much as we can to make the public pound go further—in housing and other services—and look at other sources of funding. We will shortly conclude for seven housing associations in Scotland a loan agreement with the European Investment Bank totalling £50  million. Many local authorities covering rural areas will benefit from that.

Both the pay back period and the general terms and conditions are attractive compared with loans in the private sector. At the moment, the loan rate is 2 per cent below the average going rate in the private sector, which is 6.5 per cent. That represents substantial value for money and a better deal than private sector loans. The EIB will not replace the private sector, but it is an important supplement and an additional tool that we can use to provide the loan element of housing association funding in Scotland.

We are actively looking at all the options, including use of the bond market to fund housing, as there are limitations even on the use of local authorities' prudential borrowing capacity. We should use every possible opportunity. We have been campaigning for the Treasury in London to provide further tax incentives to encourage private sector investment in housing in both rural and urban Scotland, so that we can build new houses for rent. If the necessary changes are made to the real estate investment trust scheme—a venture capital scheme that currently applies only to commercial property—to extend it to housing property, that will act as a major tax incentive to invest in housing. We are also campaigning for VAT on housing improvement and renovation to be reduced on a permanent basis from 17.5 to 5 per cent. I hope that in his pre-budget report in November, the Chancellor of the Exchequer will give serious consideration to those proposals, as part of the economic recovery programme. We recognise the importance of reforming right-to-buy legislation to protect the housing stock that is available for social rent in urban and rural areas. We have produced three major proposals for our forthcoming housing bill: ending the right to buy for new houses, possibly ending the right to buy for new tenants, and—as the Rural Affairs and  Environment Committee recommended—extending the period of suspension of the right to buy in areas of high pressure. We are also considering the possibility of delegating the decision on suspending the right to buy for housing in areas of high pressure from ministers to local authorities. We shall shortly announce our decisions resulting from the consultation on the reform of the right to buy, which I am sure will be warmly welcomed by at least three quarters of members, but not by the entire Parliament. Many other new ideas are on the horizon. Maureen Watt mentioned East Lothian, which the committee visited in its evidence gathering. East Lothian Council is leading the way, with its innovative approach to funding for housing investment. That authority recently agreed to lend money from its own resources at very favourable rates to housing associations in East Lothian so that they can fund the building and management of houses on behalf of the council, in addition to the housing association mainstream programme in the area. We are considering how to facilitate the work of other local authorities, a number of which have expressed interest in doing something similar to what East Lothian Council has done. Sometimes, local authorities can make loan capital available to housing associations on more favourable terms than those that apply in the private sector. Maureen Watt made a fair point about the constraints that apply to compulsory purchase procedures. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice and I have requested that the Scottish Law Commission consider as an early priority the possible reform of compulsory purchase legislation, so as to make procedures much more timeous and much less bureaucratic than they are at present. I hope—in fact, I am pretty sure—that the commission will agree to that request. I hope that substantive proposals for the reform of compulsory purchase procedures will be made as a result of the commission's work. I take the point that has been made about land supply. We are actively considering incentives for public sector organisations and private landowners to make more land available in rural as well as urban areas. There is undoubtedly a problem in both the private and public sectors of landowners being unwilling to release land at current capital market values. We are considering whether it is possible to come to some deferred payment arrangement, whereby the land can be made available now for the required social housing development in return for a deferred payment at a market value at a later date, which would be a higher value than today's, but would nevertheless be affordable for a social housing development.

Given that there might be a change of Government, I cannot give a guarantee on anything, particularly in relation to the economy. I am not foolish enough to give any kind of guarantee on that. However, I guarantee that we will consider every possible innovation to release much-needed land for housing in both the public and private sectors. There is no doubt that in many rural areas, land availability is a major constraint on the construction of new houses. We will do everything that we can to tackle that problem, as well as the other ones that the committee has identified. I have run out of time, which is unfortunate, because I would have been happy to go on for another hour. I hope that I have given members a flavour of the Government's positive and imaginative response to the committee's recommendations.

Ministers have met Scottish-Islamic Foundation representatives on five occasions since June 2008. The meetings covered a wide range of topics such as Islamfest, policing and the Show Racism the Red Card initiative. In addition, Osama Saeed, chief executive of the Scottish-Islamic Foundation, is a member of the Scotland without nuclear weapons working group. I will write to the member with full details of the meetings and place the information in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

If, once I have sent information about the five meetings to Mr McNulty, he knows of another meeting about which I do not know, I will be glad to hear the details. We have checked the records and there have been five meetings. I understand that the etisal event, which was originally planned for November this year and has been postponed until March next year, is one of the victims of the current recession. The purpose of etisal was to act as a finance expo to bring investment, trade and technology to Scotland. I would have hoped that all members would support in principle any such event.

I met the independent living in Scotland steering group on Wednesday 9 September 2009. The group comprises disabled people from a range of disability organisations including Inclusion Scotland, the Glasgow Centre for Inclusive Living, Deafblind Scotland and many others. The main issue discussed was the Scottish Government's approach to independent living, which we are developing in partnership with disabled people.

I share Johann Lamont's concern about the level of employment of people with disabilities. In Scotland, the level is around 48 per cent of the adult population, compared with a level of employment of just under 80 per cent for the adult population as a whole. The employment level of disabled people with learning difficulties is only 18 per cent, which is unacceptably low. This week, we published our equalities statement. It is the first time in 10 years that an equalities statement has been published at the time of the budget. The detailed answers to the questions that Johann Lamont asked about the Scottish Government's role are provided in that document in a range of descriptions of each portfolio and of how we are mainstreaming the issue of equality, which includes the need to get a far better deal for our disabled people.

I cannot comment on the individual licence application or the licensee, but I share a general concern that any vehicle used for the taxiing of disabled people should be appropriately designed. If that is not the case, I am happy to discuss it with the appropriate authorities to see whether there is a need to raise the issue with the council and the licensee.

I am not particularly au fait with that issue, but I am willing to take a briefing on it from Jamie McGrigor because it is a serious matter that should receive the appropriate attention. If the  minister sends me an appropriate briefing—[ Interruption. ] I am sorry—I meant the prospective or shadow minister. If he and the ramblers send me an appropriate briefing, I will be more than happy to take the matter up with our friends in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to find out whether there is more that we can do between us.

The draft housing (Scotland) bill, on which consultation has taken place, deals primarily with social housing issues. We are consulting until 27 September on proposals relating to private housing that might be included in the bill when it is introduced. Four of those relate to possible ways of strengthening landlord registration, and two to the licensing of houses in multiple occupation.

I always maintain an open mind. We will be considering landlord registration in the context of the housing bill, with stronger powers for local authorities in obtaining information, higher maximum fines, more information for the public with regard to the landlord register and the power to charge a fee for adding an unregistered agent to a registration. We also intend to review the operation of the landlord registration scheme in 2010. That will inform us as to any additional powers that we require to take to ensure that rogue landlords are dealt with sufficiently.

I, too, congratulate Frank McAveety on securing this important debate. The debate has included some philosophical speeches, but some have been perhaps a bit more political or—dare I say it?—party political. I intend to follow Frank's example and to rise above party politics, as is our custom. As minister, I pay tribute not just to the organisations that have worked on this campaign, but to those that have campaigned effectively against poverty down the years, including the Poverty Alliance, the Child Poverty Action Group and international organisations such as those that Frank McAveety mentioned that also campaign against poverty. It is fair to say that philosophically—with the possible exception of Gavin Brown—members are fairly unanimous about the need to create a fairer society, to tackle the root causes of poverty and deprivation, and to use the tax system, employment law and other mechanisms to achieve a more equal society.

We thank Mr Brown for explaining that, and we welcome the new Tory party to the debate. It might be useful if I give some figures to underline many of the points that members have made. In 2008, 454,000 people in Scotland were earning less than £7 an hour. Of them, 63 per cent were women. That underlines the point that Helen Eadie, in particular, made about the gender pay gap. We must press for change and improvement in that in everything we do, both at United Kingdom level and at Scotland level. It is unacceptable as it is that people are in low pay, and it is unacceptable that women are at such a disadvantage, not just in having a much higher share of low pay but in having a much lower share of high pay. As has been mentioned, some sectors fare worse than others: for example, 70 per cent of people who work in the hotel and restaurant sector earn less than £7 an hour, and about three fifths of those, or 58 per cent, are women; 51 per cent of people who work in the retail and wholesale sector earn less than £7 an hour, and just over three fifths of them, or 62 per cent, are women; and 9 per cent of people who work in the public sector, compared with 29 per cent of people who work in the private sector, earn under £7 an hour. As far as Scottish Government policy is concerned, I say unashamedly that we have spelled out—for example, in evidence that John Swinney gave to the Finance Committee a few months ago and in documents such as "Achieving our Potential: a Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland"—that we are keen to try to increase general pay levels in Scotland and to ensure that people have a decent wage. Later this year we will publish an analysis of the impact that a living wage across the public sector would have on income inequality in Scotland, which will take into account the interaction with the tax and benefits system. When we publish that analysis, I hope that Jackie Baillie will find all the information that she seeks and that she will be satisfied that we have nothing to hide.

I will make two points. First, a three-year pay deal, which runs from 1 April 2008 to 31 March 2011, is in place in the NHS, which Malcolm Chisholm mentioned. Under the terms of the deal, the lowest-paid workers will receive £6.98 per hour from 1 April 2010. The general pay increase from 1 April 2010 will be 2.25 per cent, but the lowest-paid workers will receive a higher  increase, which equates to 3.17 per cent. The larger increase demonstrates our commitment to increasing salary levels for the lowest-paid workers in the NHS. The material impact of the approach is that it is unlikely that from 1 April 2011 any pay point in the NHS in Scotland will be below £7 per hour. I am sure that members of all parties will welcome that development. Secondly, in the Scottish Government's document, "Public Sector Pay Policy for Staff Pay Remits 2009-10", we set out our four key pay policy priorities, one of which is "addressing low pay". We are encouraging public bodies specifically to consider their lowest-paid staff groups, and we have made it clear that policies should take into account delivery of the solidarity target. The Scottish Government's recent pay award makes an important contribution to tackling low pay, particularly in the NHS. I therefore accept the challenge from Patrick Harvie and others that we should take the lead in this important area—as we are doing, by implementing our policies.

I will, indeed. First, I thank Patrick Harvie for describing the Scottish Government as "wonderful" in this policy area. I will pass on his suggestion to Mr Swinney, who is the cabinet secretary who has responsibility for public procurement. The debate is part of a wider debate about poverty in society. The Scottish Government remains committed to using much of the social wage, as well as the incomes for which we are responsible, in trying to do everything we can to create not only a stronger, safer and wealthier Scotland, but a fairer Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

I thank the member—

Oh!

I thank the member for agreeing at one remove to take the intervention. On Labour Party policy, will that party support our proposals to end the right to buy for new council housing?

Will Mr McLetchie tell us how much the Conservatives think should be cut from total public spending in the UK, what share of that  should be allocated to Scotland, and on what items he wants the cuts to be made?

On the issue of young workers, does James Kelly not think that it is a disgrace that, under the Labour Government, the level of youth unemployment in the UK is now higher than it was under the Tories?

It gives me pleasure to be the first speaker in the afternoon part of the debate on the Government's legislative programme. The principal themes running through the programme are economic recovery and social and environmental justice. If one portfolio brings together all those objectives, it is the housing portfolio. I am extremely proud of our record over the past two years, which shows that we have been extremely successful in significantly increasing the investment in affordable housing. At £675 million, the total investment this year is nearly £100 million higher than the previous record investment since the Parliament's establishment. Although it was announced while I was away on holiday, I was delighted by the fact that a record number of new social houses were built in Scotland during the previous financial year. It is a 15-year record—the last time the number was as high, the Tories were in power. That tells us that the Labour Government and the Lib-Lab pact failed utterly to match even the Tory record on the provision of new social housing in Scotland, let alone that of the SNP Government.

We are only getting started.

Absolutely. We will not rest on our laurels. I will mention two of the measures that we will take forward in the legislative programme: our new housing bill and our debtor protection bill. The housing bill will bring about further reforms to the right to buy, which has done so much damage to the provision of social housing in Scotland over the past 30 years. We are determined to end the right to buy for new social housing and are consulting on ending the  right to buy for new tenancies, suspending it in areas in which the pressure for housing is high and reforming the role of the regulator. We estimate that, depending on how many of those measures the Government proposes and the Parliament approves, up to 18,000 houses will be retained in the rented sector during the first 10 years of implementation of the legislation. That is equivalent to three years' worth of the average number of new houses that were built in Scotland during the first eight years of this Parliament. The new housing bill is not just a piece of legislation; it is about ensuring that we have an adequate supply of housing for rent in Scotland to achieve our strategic targets. It is about ensuring that we achieve the homelessness target of 2012 and reduce the housing waiting list throughout Scotland. On top of that, we will introduce a debtor protection bill, which will make our legislation in Scotland the most advanced in the United Kingdom for dealing humanely with repossessions. I hope that we can reach consensus across the parties on that measure above all measures and that we pass the bill as quickly as possible.

When the process will be completed will be up to the Parliament. Our ambition, which is, I think, shared by the Local Government and Communities Committee, is to have the legislation passed by early 2010. If we can pass it sooner, we will be happy. I am keen to talk about the bill's provisions to Opposition members and those who shadow me in all the parties. We are happy to consider their comments at this stage because we are keen to get things right from stage 1, and I think that we are united on the need to pass the bill as quickly as possible. The new figures for repossessions throughout the United Kingdom, which have been published in the past two weeks, show a flattening out of the number of repossessions and are welcome. As a result, the Council of Mortgage Lenders has downsized its forecast for the number of repossessions throughout the UK this year, from 75,000 to 65,000. We are again pressing the Council of Mortgage Lenders to give us the Scottish figures, because it would be much easier for us to manage the considerable resources that we have set aside to deal with the problem if we had exact numbers for Scotland. I hope that the  CML will acquiesce in our request. If it does not, I hope that the Financial Services Authority, which has the legislative authority to enforce the matter, will agree to implement a requirement that we get the Scottish figures. Those are only two issues. If I had more time, I could tell members about the town centre regeneration fund, the other £24 million for council housing to be announced before Christmas, the fantastic success of our housing associations in the current regime, and the importance of independence to economic recovery and social justice. However, time prevents me from doing so—

I have therefore given members only a taster.

The £31 million of additional funding will be used to accelerate and sustain investment in new housing developments for affordable rent and to kick-start and unblock private developments to help deliver homes for mid- market rent and low-cost ownership. We are maintaining flexibility in the precise allocation of the funding to ensure value for money for Government and to maximise opportunities to meet housing need and to sustain jobs in the construction sector.

As the member knows, we are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to allocate the rest of the first £25 million that is being made available to kick-start council housing. That £25 million compares with the zero sum that the previous Administration invested in council housing. The member will be delighted to know that, in addition to any moneys that we make available to Aberdeen City Council to kick-start council housing, this year we are starting a record number of 256 new houses in Aberdeen city, through the housing associations and the Devanha programme.

We will announce decisions on the consequentials fairly soon. With regard to the specific areas that Mary Mulligan mentioned, we will take into consideration all factors and allocate resources on the basis of need. I was hoping that the member would welcome the fact that this year we are spending a record amount—£675 million—on affordable housing in Scotland, £90 million more than the record under the previous Administration.

Last December we consulted on proposals for reform to our procedures for investing in affordable housing. We received more than 200 responses to the consultation. We have considered them carefully and discussed their implications with stakeholders, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and Homes for Scotland. Today I will issue a statement setting out revised proposals for taking forward that agenda.

I am surprised that Johann Lamont is not up to date. Last December, when we published this consultation, we said that we did not propose single regional developers and that, in fact, there was the possibility of more than one developer in any one region. We confirm that in a statement today. We will not impose a lead developer on any part of Scotland, although a number of lead developers are in effect already operating on a consensual basis, decided from the bottom up in consultation with relevant councils and housing associations. I agree with Johann Lamont that bigger is not always more efficient and that smaller is often the best way forward. We will encourage housing associations the length and breadth of Scotland to become more efficient, irrespective of their size.

Jamie McGrigor will be glad to know that, after I leave the chamber, I am having a meeting with the three housing associations that specialise in the provision of housing for the elderly, and I will be having detailed discussions with them on that very point. I agree with Jamie McGrigor that we need to ensure that the right quantity, quality and size of housing is available for our ageing population.

For this financial year, the Scottish Government is supporting the building of affordable housing in the Scottish Borders with £7.2 million of affordable housing investment programme funding. That is a 29 per cent increase on the budget that was announced last year. The accelerated funding of £1.16 million that the Scottish Government announced last year for the Scottish Borders helped not only a number of local contractors but to provide much-needed additional affordable housing.

The member makes a valid point, which relates not only to small communities in rural areas; the difficulties can cause problems in urban areas as well. We are currently reviewing the allocations guidance that we issue to local authorities jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We hope to consult on that guidance later this year. I hope that the member will feed into that review so that we can take into account any  particular problems that small communities in rural areas face.

We do not plan on the basis of a fixed percentage of investment for housing for rent or home ownership, particularly because some of the programmes that we operate are very flexible—they give as much choice as possible to the person who is seeking a house. Obviously, the shared equity programme operates in the Borders and elsewhere, and there is investment in housing for rent. The key points are that the mix should be determined by demand and need in the area rather than by a formula or share that we allocate nationally, and that we meet as far as possible the need and demand for the different types of low-cost provision not only in the Borders but throughout Scotland.

We will not only permit that approach—we will encourage it. Obviously, the arrangement in the Borders is proving to be successful just as similar but not identical arrangements in many other parts of Scotland are proving to be effective in delivering affordable housing. I am delighted to endorse Mr Purvis's comments.

I, too, congratulate Jim Tolson on securing the debate on a substantive and worthwhile subject. In my role as the minister with responsibility for veterans' affairs, I am replying on behalf of the Scottish Government. Like Murdo Fraser, I think that it is a matter of regret that no one from the party that is in government in London has been bothered even to sit through the debate, let alone to speak in it. I associate myself with Murdo Fraser's remarks about the Black Watch. Both my grandfathers served in the Black Watch during the first world war and one of them was seriously injured as a young man. Our thoughts are with the Black Watch and all the other serving personnel in  Afghanistan and in the other 19 countries where members of the armed forces are currently serving. I pay special tribute to the work that Major Bill MacKay has done in campaigning for the Gurkhas. It may be helpful if I run through some of the figures concerning the impact of the U-turn by the UK Government. In 2004, the UK Government granted the Gurkhas the right of settlement in the UK if they had served on or after 1 July 1997. Since then, more than 6,000 Gurkhas and their families have settled in the UK. When I became the minister with responsibility for veterans' affairs, I asked my officials to find out, through the Gurkha Welfare Trust, how many of those 6,000 Gurkhas live in Scotland. It appears that not many—if any—Gurkhas are currently permanently living in Scotland. According to the campaigners, the UK Government's ruling denied residency to almost 36,000 Gurkhas. As we have heard, the Home Secretary then made her announcement on 21  May. As a result of the new arrangements, between 10,000 and 15,000 applications are expected to be made over the next two years by Gurkhas who want to come and live in the UK. Those will be in addition to the 1,400 applications that were already outstanding with the UK Border Agency. As Linda Fabiani said, we were promised that the 1,400 applications would be processed by 11 June. We will attempt to find out the exact status of those applications. I shall write to every member who has participated in tonight's debate to update them on the position once we receive that information from the UK Government. As Jim Tolson said, 200,000 Gurkhas served in two world wars and, down the years, 26 of them have received the Victoria Cross. As all members have said, loyalty is a two-way process. For 200 years, the Gurkhas have been very loyal in the fights in which this country has been involved. We owe a loyalty to the Gurkhas. There are few subjects on which the average person in the street feels—almost unanimously—a sense of injustice, but, on the day that Phil Woolas announced that the Gurkhas would not be given the right to settle in the UK, one could almost feel the sense of disgust and anger, let alone disappointment, not just among Opposition politicians but among the ordinary people of this country both north and south of the border. No matter where in the UK they are from, people recognise the debt of gratitude that we owe to the Gurkhas. I am delighted that Joanna Lumley, working with the Gurkhas, was able to gain the support of all the Opposition parties—on this occasion led, to be fair, by Nick Clegg—to secure the reversal of the  decision that was made by Phil Woolas. When I have the pleasure of meeting Mr Woolas in London next month, I will take the opportunity to convey to him—pleasantly—the feelings of the Scottish Parliament about how the Gurkhas have been treated by the UK Government. We are united on the Gurkhas. My only wish is that many more of them would come and settle in Scotland, where they would benefit from all the work that we are doing for all the veterans in Scotland in conjunction with, and with the co-operation of, the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces. Indeed, I had a meeting with John Hutton last month—just before he left the UK Government—to develop further the range of services that we provide to veterans in Scotland. It is with great pleasure that I can say, on behalf of the Scottish Government, that we are at one with Jim Tolson, Murdo Fraser, Linda Fabiani, Christopher Harvie and everyone else who believes in the justice of the Gurkhas' cause.  Meeting closed at 17:28.

Ministers will decide in due course how the consequentials from the UK budget will be allocated.

For the record, I point out that there has been a 13 per cent increase in the allocation to Fife housing associations this year, and that a further £1.6 million is allocated through the council house second homes fund for investment in affordable housing in Fife. However, I acknowledge the points that Marilyn Livingstone has made and I am more than happy to meet her and the housing associations to discuss the situation.

I am delighted to take the opportunity to congratulate Fife Council on that wonderful announcement last week. I hope that we will see many more such announcements, not only in Fife but throughout the country, during the rest of the year. I hear what both Marilyn Livingstone and Tricia Marwick are saying, and I am happy to invite both members to a meeting with the housing associations to discuss the situation.

If a private landlord defaults on a mortgage, the tenant's rights depend on whether the landlord obtained the lender's consent to the tenancy and on the terms of the tenancy agreement. In any case, there is a statutory obligation on the creditor to notify the occupier of the property by recorded delivery that enforcement action is under way. Failure to do so invalidates the action. The creditor must also notify the local  authority when it takes steps to repossess the property, to allow the local authority to offer appropriate support or advice to the tenant.

I have every sympathy with the points that Hugh Henry makes. I am aware of a particular case in the Paisley area, which was mentioned in the Paisley Daily Express last week. The repossessions working group, which reported earlier this week, said that the problem is complex and that there is a need more fully to evaluate it and potential solutions. One option would be to do what happens down south, which would be to guarantee tenancies for a minimum of two months after a repossession. As part of our consideration of the work of the repossessions working group, we will seriously consider the need for further protection of tenants who find themselves in the situation that Hugh Henry describes.

I join other members in congratulating Aileen Campbell on securing the debate, which has been a good, non-partisan debate because we all recognise the importance of town centres not only to our future economy but to our future social development. I must say that, since it was announced that I have responsibility for the town centre regeneration fund, I have had no problem making new friends across the chamber. I should also say to Aileen Campbell that I have been to Irvine in California, and I thoroughly recommend a visit, particularly to John Wayne airport, which is a particularly attractive international destination. Before I deal with some of the specific points that were raised—I will deal with as many as I can—I should address what is almost a philosophical point about the role of our town centres in the 21 st century. With the growth of internet shopping and out-of-town shopping, we can no longer rely on the retail sector for the creation of the buzz that our town centres have had historically. We need to think about our town centres holistically. I live in Ayr, and I am keen on trying to encourage more people to live in the town centre. In the 21 st century, that has to be part of any strategy to regenerate our town centres and make them more dynamic. A lot of points have been raised about the town centre regeneration fund. Karen Gillon made a reasonable point about the tight timetable. To be quite blunt, we had no choice about that because the £60 million of capital spending must be spent this financial year. We are operating within that constraint, and I recognise that there are many interesting and worthwhile projects that will not be the subject of an application this year but which, if we had had more notice of the fund, might have been. On whether we will continue with the town centre regeneration fund, clearly we want to evaluate the benefit and success of the fund before making any decisions in the long term. Of course, we also have to find out what money will be available between this priority and many of the Government's other priorities. In September, when Mr Swinney announces next year's budget, we will  know whether we are in a position to roll forward the concept of the town centre regeneration fund. Mary Mulligan asked about the criteria. We published the criteria about five or six weeks ago on our website. We have tried not to be overly prescriptive because we wanted the applications to reflect the needs and priorities of the communities that are being served, and we felt that, if we were overly prescriptive, that might cut out worthwhile projects that would be beneficial to the towns that would be the subject of those applications, as well as to Scotland more generally. That said, the key criterion is additionality—without funding from the fund, the project would not go ahead or would not go ahead in this timescale or on the scale that is being proposed. Other criteria are leverage, which David Whitton mentioned, and partnership, which is extremely important within the public sector and between the public, private and third sectors. In that regard, community councils, which Jamie Stone spoke about, are relevant. We know that community councils have been consulted in relation to some bids and that at least one bid features a community council as a partner. The other key criteria relate to the economic and social impacts of the money that is spent. For example, one part of the country considered bidding for money to make some retail properties more disabled friendly and compliant with the disability discrimination legislation. I would welcome projects that fulfil that need, as well as those that address environmental impacts. I am glad to say that we have the advisory committee in place. It is chaired by Alan Wilson, the retired chief executive of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry. The private sector is represented by Liz Cameron from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the local government sector is represented by the chief executive of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Rory Mair. I was asked when we hope to take decisions. As members know, the deadline for receipt of the first tranche of applications was last Friday, 5 June. We have a team of about 21 people working on the applications, and we will not have all the envelopes opened and the bids on the system until tomorrow. I hope to update the Parliament through the Local Government and Communities Committee, which I will attend next week, on the number of applications that have been received and their total value. I hope to be able to make the main announcements about the first tranche towards the end of July and to complete those announcements in early August, before the  deadline for the second batch of applications, which is 21 August. However, I can make an announcement tonight about the outcome of one bid, and that is the one from Jamie Hepburn for £60 million for Cumbernauld. [ Laughter. ] I can confirm that Cumbernauld will not receive £60 million from the town centre regeneration fund, although the application is, no doubt, a worthy one. We are cognisant of the need for the town centre regeneration fund to get a reasonable spread of investment across the country and across different sizes of towns. We deliberately set out to try to ensure that not all the money is allocated to small towns, to mid-range towns, or to large towns. Instead, we hope to get a cross-section. One reason why we decided to have two tranches is that, if there is any unevenness as a result of the applications in the first tranche, we will try to use the second tranche to ensure that there is a more even spread. We are also keen to ensure that there is a reasonable spread of town centres within cities. The Presiding Officer is looking at me and is obviously about to tell me that my time is up. I will be happy to answer any more detailed questions that members may have at the Local Government and Communities Committee next week. We can all take credit for the establishment of the fund, which will make a substantive contribution to addressing many of the problems that members outlined.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

I am glad to say that the family return project was launched on 12 May. The first families are expected to enter the project in mid-June. The project will encourage refused asylum seekers to return home voluntarily and is a step towards ending the detention of children in Dungavel.

I can confirm that the Gaye family have now left the UK and that they did so at 8.30 this morning. I share the same concerns as Christina McKelvie about how that family, particularly the four-year-old child, have been dealt with. I underline the Scottish Government's opposition to the detention of children at Dungavel.

The Scottish Government has announced a record amount of funding in 2009-10 to help with the provision of affordable homes for rent in Midlothian. We have awarded £2.5 million to assist the council house new-build programme in Midlothian and a further £5.2 million of affordable housing investment programme funding for housing association new-build properties in the area.

The funding that was awarded to Midlothian Council in the first round of council house funding equates to 15 per cent of all the available funding that has been awarded to date and is the second highest award that has been made in Scotland. I point out how that compares with the record during the time—[ Interruption. ] That is not mine; perhaps it is a second fire alarm.

Just as I was coming to the punch line. The amount of subsidy that was provided to Midlothian Council when Ms Brankin was the Deputy Minister for Communities amounted to precisely nothing.

I do not know exactly what that question has to do with Midlothian, Presiding Officer. I advise Mary Mulligan that there is a clear distinction between the average subsidy target and the level of the housing association grant. Perhaps if she understood the difference, she would realise that there is no planned reduction in HAG funding for housing associations.

We aim to complete the first tranche of town centre regeneration fund assessments around late July, with a view to releasing offers of grant to successful applicants soon after that. Disbursement of funds will vary by project.

I agree with the member entirely. The process helps people to develop a vision for their town centre. I hope that when people make applications they do not just look at individual projects that might qualify for funding but use the opportunity to consider the longer-term vision for their towns and town centres. I know that the member has a special interest in Cumbernauld, where, I am sure, people will take that opportunity.

It is too early for us to consider that prospect, but if the member asks me the question again when we get into the budget cycle, I might be able to give her a more definitive reply.

I shall do my best to answer the questions briefly. First, there is no requirement for match funding, but projects that manage to have some leverage from other sources of funding, such as the private sector or other parts of the public sector, will score extra points in the assessment. Secondly, on towns in remote areas, the advisory committee that we will appoint—I hope to announce the details in the next two weeks—will have a specific remit to ensure that, in the allocation and approval of projects, we get a reasonable spread throughout the country and in the size of the towns involved. We do not want all the money to go to large towns only, to small towns only or to medium-sized towns only; we want a reasonable spread, so that, as far as possible, we invest the money on a fair but effective basis throughout Scotland—including, no doubt, in Dumfries and Galloway, Presiding Officer.

The energy assistance package replaced the central heating and warm deal programmes on 6 April. It takes a more holistic approach that tackles all three sides of the fuel poverty triangle by helping to maximise household incomes through benefits and tax credit checks; reducing fuel bills by providing advice on wise energy use and how to access social tariffs; and improving the energy performance of the poorest-performing Scottish homes by providing a package of measures for those who are most vulnerable to fuel poverty. I am proud that, for the first time, the initiative includes intensive support for low-income families with young or disabled children.

All pensioners in households in which central heating has never been installed and pensioners in energy-inefficient homes who receive a passport benefit or who are aged 75 or over are entitled to benefit from stage 4 of the energy assistance package, as well as the first three stages. The purpose of redesigning the programme was to target it more at the pensioners and families who most require assistance to make their homes more energy efficient and who are at the lower end of the income scale. It would be inappropriate to use scarce resources to provide free central heating systems for some of our retired bankers, for example, who receive substantial pensions.

Ministers will decide in due course how the consequentials from the UK budget are to be allocated.

Since Helen Eadie praised herself as a great socialist, I remind her of what Nye Bevan said about the language of priorities and of how we decide priorities systematically. When Mr Swinney makes his announcement on the consequentials, he will base it on the Government's priorities in achieving our strategic objectives on poverty and the economy. As for the specifics of housing association starts, completions and approvals, when the official figures for last year are published on 26 May, I would like the member to revise her opinion. Perhaps she will be a bit confused when she learns the facts. We announced just this week a record number of approvals—more than 8,100—for new housing association houses. The Labour Party never achieved such a figure.

We are doing everything that we can in that respect. As for the figures, ministers must abide by the statistics code, so I am not allowed to give any numbers until they are officially published by the Government's statistics service.

Edinburgh is close to my heart and is high on our priority list, which is why we  announced a 30 per cent increase in the council's allocation earlier this year and why we will seriously consider the council's application for the totality of the £50 million that we are making available for council housing. That is in contrast to the zero sum that was made available for council housing in the previous Administration's eight years.

I am not saying that I expected those questions, but I have done research on Fife. For equivalent periods, in comparison with the previous Administration, this Administration has increased by 20 per cent the investment funding to housing associations in Fife, and the number of actual and planned units that housing associations in Fife are to build and complete has increased by 22 per cent. We are doing well by Fife, as we are by the rest of the country.

Since April 2006, 142,939 applications for registration have been made under the landlord registration scheme. Of those, 91 per cent have been approved by local authorities. Local authorities have a range of powers to enforce landlord registration. More than 800 late application fees have been applied, more than 600 rent penalty notices have been issued, 10 landlords have been refused registration and one landlord's registration has been revoked. Local authorities are working with landlords to ensure that they are aware of their responsibilities and to help them improve their standards.

First, I will make the facts clear. It is not the case that one quarter of landlords are unregistered; 85 per cent of landlords are registered. We inherited something like 9 per cent coverage from the previous Administration. At my most recent meeting with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I raised the issue of registration, because three local authorities are falling behind the rest and bringing down the national average figure. Through COSLA, I am encouraging those authorities to step up their effort, because our ambition is to have 100 per cent registration before long.

Part 5 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 revises the system of HMO licensing. Among the changes is a provision that makes an owner of a licensable HMO who is guilty of the offence of not holding a licence liable to a fine not exceeding £20,000, which is four times the current maximum. Later this year, we will discuss with stakeholders the options for implementing the provisions in part 5 of the act. We will then draw up a timetable for implementation.

The Government is totally committed to implementing the provisions that Pauline McNeill mentions in consultation with the relevant stakeholders. However, we have consulted our local authority colleagues and have, at their request, implemented the landlord registration scheme first so that it is allowed to bed down. As the member knows, 87 per cent of landlords are now registered. That gives the local authorities the experience that is necessary to implement part 5 of the act successfully when we bring it into force later this year.

As I said last week when various members, including Malcolm Chisholm and Margo MacDonald, asked a similar question, we are considering covering short-term lets in HMO licensing, but there is a clear distinction between short-term lets and holiday lets. The primary way to deal with the problems that arise as a result of antisocial behaviour by a small minority of people who occupy holiday lets is the antisocial behaviour legislation rather than housing legislation.

I, too, congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate. We have seen history in the making tonight, with Christine Grahame congratulating Jeremy Purvis in the chamber. I should explain that winding up this debate is not within my ministerial responsibility—I am standing in for Shona Robison, the Minister for Public Health and Sport, who is in Luxembourg dealing with urgent issues related to swine flu. I do not think that Jeremy Purvis should be apologetic about raising the issue and considering the prevention of a major problem before it happens. Too often, the Government and the Parliament can be left reacting to problems after they have arisen. It is right for members to raise concerns about such possibilities—in this case, the possibility of financial problems in the care home sector—so that we can be absolutely sure that the Government and the Parliament are doing everything that they can to address the issues. Given the ageing population and all the economic pressures on individuals—particularly those in old age—as well as the pressures on government budgets at national and local levels, it is important that we ensure that the appropriate financial standards are adhered to in our care homes. To develop the point that Margo MacDonald raised, we should ensure that care homes are properly capitalised before it is too late and people end up being moved as a result of a possible closure, caused by financial or other problems.

The FSA has perhaps not always been the best at ensuring that such things do not happen. It might be useful if I spell out in some detail exactly what the powers of the care commission are in this regard. As Jeremy Purvis indicated, Scottish Borders Council uses the national care home contract for publicly funded residents. That contract does not currently have a specific clause in relation to financial viability, but it does have a specific clause relating to monitoring, and there are a number of general references to councils' rights to access information for contract monitoring purposes, which enables them to request financial information such as audited accounts. However, when financial viability concerns are apparent, they are difficult to manage, as a home closure obviously means more distress for people. As far as statutory responsibilities are concerned, I should explain that the care commission has certain powers in relation to the financial aspect of care services, which are set out in regulation 16 of the Regulation of Care (Requirements as to Care Services) (Scotland) Regulations 2002. The care commission seeks information as part of the registration process. Any queries relating to the financial viability of a proposed service are taken up with the applicant. That provision is already there. Failure to provide adequate responses to any queries from the care commission is likely to result in refusal of the application to register. That applies at the registration stage.

I do not have a ready-made one, but I am sure that Shona Robison will be happy to write to all members participating in the debate with a detailed reply to that question. The issue is under discussion. On 24 March, the care commission's strategy and regulation committee considered the issue of financial viability. The committee discussed the implications for the care commission and service providers of extending responsibility to include an examination of on-going financial viability. It was agreed that the care commission needs to set out its responsibilities in a broader context in future. We anticipate that the commission will submit policy  proposals to the Scottish Government with a request for endorsement in late May or early June.

I am sure that the minister will be happy to meet Jeremy Purvis and others to discuss the issues. It might be better to do so after we have received detailed proposals from the care commission. I stress on the minister's behalf that although there are fairly stringent financial criteria in relation to registration, the potential weakness relates to homes' on-going financial stability and viability. That is the area on which we want to focus additional effort.

Although fees are related to financial viability, fees policy is not the subject of tonight's debate. However, Mary Scanlon raises a valid issue. Our main concern in the debate is to ensure financial viability, with a view to preventing problems from arising. From what I have gathered in the brief time in which I have been studying the subject, it seems that there are two major potential causes of problems with financial viability, the first of which is a rundown in the number of people in the care home, whatever the reason for that. I suspect that there is a pretty close relationship between the quality of care and the number of people who use a particular care home. I know that that is the case in Lanarkshire and in other parts of Central Scotland. Secondly, I think that care homes in rural areas have a particular problem, for obvious reasons to do with access, because people want to be fairly near their families. Access problems can intensify problems with numbers and, potentially, intensify problems with financial viability. Jeremy Purvis has raised a valid issue, which the Government, the care commission and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities are actively considering. As I said, within the next few months we hope to receive proposals from the  care commission, which will be considered in depth. I am sure that the minister will then be happy to share in detail the outcome of that consideration with members who have a particular interest in the subject.   Meeting closed at 17:38.

Houses in multiple occupation are required to be licensed primarily to ensure that they meet standards that are designed to protect their residents from the risks of that type of accommodation. We have stated that we will discuss with stakeholders the possibility of including short-term lets in HMO licensing, to extend the protection. However, it would not be appropriate to extend HMO licensing to any category of accommodation solely to address antisocial behaviour.

I have two points. First, we will discuss with stakeholders the possibility of extending HMO provision to short-term lets. Secondly, I want to make a clear distinction between short-term lets and holiday lets. Based on advice from the City of Edinburgh Council, we believe that the kind of incident to which Mr Chisholm refers is primarily related to people who are in holiday lets, not short-term lets.

Holiday lets are already covered by part 7 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, so legislation is in place to deal with the problem of antisocial behaviour in holiday lets. For us to extend licensing to holiday lets could do enormous damage to the tourism industry in Scotland, including to the Edinburgh festival, which accounts for a lot of holiday lets.

We are listening to what people say; we have had representation from three MSPs but none from anyone else. We have discussed the matter with the City of Edinburgh Council, which is strongly of the view that holiday lets should not fall under HMO licensing. Although we will deal with the problem of short-term lets, unless we see evidence to the contrary we will not include holiday lets within the ambit of licensing legislation.

I agree that the problem of antisocial behaviour in the centre of Edinburgh or anywhere else has to be tackled, but it is antisocial behaviour legislation that must be used to do so and not, in this case, any additional legislation that relates to holiday lets.

The debate has been a good one. In winding up, I will set out some facts and respond to some genuine points that have been made around the chamber. On housing association grant, I think that I picked up correctly what Duncan McNeil said, which was that the SNP Government is contributing £66,000 less per unit than the previous Administration made available. That would be rather difficult. Last year, the average housing association grant was £78,842—the third highest in 10 years, and that does not take into account the changes that were made in February. In the new tendering rounds, I anticipate that we will give housing associations the second highest level of housing association grant ever, which should be set against a backdrop of reduced land prices and construction costs, as Jim Tolson mentioned. I have three points for Jamie McGrigor. Along with David McLetchie, he wants the Government to build more council houses and then flog them off at a massive discount. They represent the party of thrift, yet such a policy would destroy the finances of local authorities in Scotland.

Mr McLetchie forgets the new debt that local authorities would have to face up to. They would not have the revenue stream to fund such a policy. On the myth about the private sector that was raised in the debate, I make it absolutely clear that whatever decision is made on the investment reform proposals—the response to which we will shortly publish—private developers will have a key role in providing affordable housing and driving forward procurement efficiencies.  I have already covered Jamie McGrigor's third point on the housing association grant. I simply reiterate our commitment that housing associations will continue to be the main provider of social housing in Scotland in urban and rural areas. Ross Finnie made an important point about the burst housing bubble. There should be no return to the days when the housing bubble bubbled away, ready to burst. We have to change the culture to one in which people view a house primarily as a home, not an investment vehicle. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I am very aware of the pressures on the City of Edinburgh Council. That was reflected in the 30 per cent increase in the council's funding allocation that we announced last month. The City of Edinburgh Council has received funding for phase 1 of its application under the council housing bid, but it remains a candidate to receive additional moneys in the allocation of the balance of £8 million. For the record, I say to Mary Mulligan that allocations were made on the basis of recommendations from COSLA's shared services board. If she is complaining about them, let her complain to the Labour members of COSLA, as the recommendations were as much theirs as they were anyone else's. I reiterate to Patricia Ferguson our commitment to second-stage transfer in Glasgow from GHA to local housing associations. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has written to the chancellor about the UK Government scheme for assisting mortgage holders, and we have received confirmation that it will cover Scotland. We will promote that scheme, along with ours, to try to prevent repossessions. Before a myth is created, I state unequivocally our continued commitment—which I mentioned in my opening speech—to reaching the homelessness target in 2012, despite the difficulty of our not getting from the UK budget the resources that would make it much easier for us to meet that objective. We have heard a lot of doom and gloom. Mary Mulligan started her speech by saying that she would be positive, but she was full of doom and gloom about building figures in Scotland. She quoted the latest figures that she had, which were for September last year. She obviously does not keep up with the times, because only yesterday the NHBC published statistics up to March 2009, which is six months after September 2008. What did the NHBC say about affordable homes? First, it said that the number of new homes that were started in the first quarter of 2009 was up by 32 per cent on the same period last year. Secondly, it said that since last year the  number of houses that are finished and ready to be filled has increased—gone up the way, not down the way—by 116 per cent. One questions why Labour spokespeople only quote what they think are the miserable figures. They remind me of a Victorian undertaker, praying for a hard winter and a full churchyard.

Mrs Mulligan should wait for confirmation of the figures, which will bear out the NHBC. The Victorian undertaker wants to look at the bad news, but part of the bad news for Mary Mulligan is that I have been looking at the track record for the past 10 years. I found that the period during which she was Deputy Minister for Communities—the position that I now hold—was the year in which the Lib-Lab pact built the fewest houses in the Parliament's first eight years of existence. Those who criticise the Government should be absolutely sure of their record and wait until the facts come out on 26 May—facts are chiels that winna ding. I am totally confident that, when the figures appear, the Labour Party will have egg all over its face—not for the first time.

I wind up, Presiding Officer, by reiterating our commitment to the future of housing for our people in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

By how much does the member want us to increase the HAG? Which budget will she cut to fund any such increase?

As this is my first debate on housing as the minister with responsibility for housing, I will use the opportunity to analyse the challenges that we face in making housing policy and how the Government intends to tackle such challenges. Looking as far back as the industrial revolution, we have never broken the back of the housing problem in Scotland. Even in the heyday of the 1950s and 60s, when we were building up to 50,000 new houses a year, the emphasis was often on numbers, rather than on quality and community facilities. In some cases, we are now dealing with the consequences of the faceless estates that were built in large numbers during those days. Although we have to increase the numbers of new houses, we should not do so at the price of reduced quality or reduced community facilities. As well as learning the lessons of that period, we should be conscious of the importance of housing policy not just in its own right, but in relation to the other objectives, which all of us in the Parliament have, of improving health and educational attainment and increasing levels of employment and economic growth. Housing policy makes a significant contribution to all those policy objectives. My first priority is to increase the number of affordable homes available in Scotland, especially homes for rent. We have to deal with four basic demands, or four pressures around the need and demand for housing. The first is the achievement of the target to eradicate homelessness by 2012. The figures from September last year showed that 83 per cent of homeless people were being treated as priority cases. We will update the figures after we get the results of the interim evaluation of the homelessness target some time in September. We remain committed to straining every sinew to ensure that we meet the homelessness target throughout Scotland. Waiting lists, along with demographics, are the second major pressure. The number of people per house has gone down dramatically in the past 20 or 30 years, because more people live alone. Finally, there is the impact of the recession, which is twofold. First, there is the impact of potential repossessions as a result of the credit  crunch. Secondly, more people are likely to want to rent, because they cannot afford the deposit for a new house. Last year, deposits averaged 11 per cent, but they now average 20 per cent in Scotland. We have a six-pronged approach to tackling the need for new housing. First, there is the record building programme by the housing associations in Scotland totalling well over £500 million this year. I acknowledge the problems that housing associations face in accessing loan capital at the right interest rate and under the right conditions. We are working with the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and others to tackle those problems. Some criticism has been made of the housing association grant levels and the changes that we have made. However, as a result of the changes that we made in February, along with the reduction in construction costs resulting from the recession, the HAG contribution as a percentage of total cost is roughly where it was when we came to office two years ago.

In fact, housing associations are not borrowing more than ever before as a percentage of total costs. Of course, when we are dealing with a fixed budget, if we increase the HAG level above the amount that it is at, without any increase in the overall budget, we reduce the number of houses that we can build. Those who want to increase the HAG level have to tell us to what level they want it to increase and which budget they would cut in order to fund any increase in the HAG budget. We have taken a dual approach to council house building. First, we are introducing legislation to reform the right to buy, which will mean that up to 18,000 houses are retained in the social rented sector that would otherwise have been sold over 10 years. Secondly, along with the £50 million that we have committed, that will act as an incentive to subsidise further council housing throughout Scotland. We have had the first round of bids—

We want to look to the future, but I will explain the situation to Jamie McGrigor. Those who gave the warning that a reduction in HAG would result in a collapse in house building by  housing associations will be proved incorrect. I am absolutely confident that, when the final figures for last year are produced, they will show that the number of new houses that housing associations built met our targets. It is untrue to say that reducing the HAG contribution had a detrimental effect on the house-building programme. In addition to housing associations and councils, we are considering ways of encouraging the private sector to become more involved. We hoped that the reforms that we proposed in the budget—

I am running out of time, unfortunately.

I will take a quick question.

The figure is based on our experience of what happens in areas that are designated as pressured, where the right to buy is suspended, and on the pattern of sales in recent years. We have said that between 10,000 and 18,000 houses would be retained—that depends on the outcome of our consultation. We have committed to ending the right to buy for all new council houses, but we are consulting on ending the right to buy for all new tenancies, extending the current term for the suspension of the right to buy and delegating to local authorities the decision whether to suspend the right. Which of those propositions becomes law will affect whether we are nearer 10,000 or 18,000 houses. We have taken measures to support first-time buyers through the open market shared equity scheme and the new supply shared equity scheme, into which we are putting £60 million this year. I emphasise that, although we are determined to drive up the number of new houses, we will not compromise quality or energy efficiency in doing so. The second major challenge, particularly this year, has been dealing with the impact of the recession. We have taken a range of measures to deal with the impact of the recession on the housing market. We have not only increased the investment programme, which helps to sustain and create jobs in the construction sector, but provided £50 million for council house building,  which it is estimated will support 3,000 jobs. We have introduced the home owners support fund, given Shelter and Citizens Advice Scotland additional money for their helpline and advice services and increased funding for legal aid and for in-court and other legal services. We have also introduced a more comprehensive energy assistance package for families with children who are under five and families with disabled children who are under 16. We face huge funding challenges in the future. The impact of the United Kingdom budget fell well short of what is needed to tackle the housing shortages that we face in Scotland and in the rest of the UK. The prospect of £500 million cuts in next year's budget adds to the problem. As a Government, we could do a lot more if, like local authorities, we had prudential borrowing powers. That said, we are not simply putting up our hands in despair at the financial situation that London has landed on us for next year and the few years thereafter; we are looking actively at innovative ways of leveraging additional investment into the housing sector. Despite the challenges, we are determined to meet the 2012 homelessness target. We are committed to the 2015 Scottish housing quality standard and we are utterly committed to increasing the housing supply in Scotland to meet demand and need over the short, medium and longer term. I move, That the Parliament notes the steps being taken by the Scottish Government to accelerate and increase the supply of affordable housing in response to the current economic downturn; recognises the record investment being made this year; further notes that housing associations still have to secure through borrowing a significant proportion of the money required to build new housing and are facing challenges from the financial sector; also notes the Scottish Government's initiative to kick-start a new generation of council house building and the increasing contribution that this is enabling local authorities to make in meeting housing need, which complements the high level of social housing built by housing associations over the last 10 years, and supports proposals in the consultation on the draft Housing (Scotland) Bill to reform the right to buy to encourage council house building and to safeguard Scotland's stock of social housing for the benefit of future generations of tenants.

There is no specific legislation with which all landlords who offer short-term holiday lets must comply.

I am always prepared to listen to more evidence, but the current position is that if people are engaging in antisocial behaviour while residing in holiday let flats, they are subject to the legislation relating to antisocial behaviour, and the police and others have powers to deal with that effectively. If the member feels that there is a loophole in the law that requires to be addressed, I am happy to listen to any additional information that she brings to the table. So far, however, we have not seen any information to justify a separate law relating to holiday lets.

There are two aspects to holiday homes. First, in some areas, particularly rural areas, they add to the pressure on affordable housing provision. We are actively examining the impact of that on the supply of affordable housing in rural areas and, in due course, we will decide whether there is anything we can do to relieve it. Secondly, the fundamental way in which we are dealing with the problems of the shortage of  affordable houses is to drive up the number of affordable homes that we are building.

As I have said, there are already provisions for dealing with antisocial behaviour and related matters, but I am happy to listen to any further evidence. So far, we have not received any evidence to demonstrate that a specific law relating to holiday lets would make any material difference.

Yes. I welcome any move to ensure that everyone in Scotland pays a fair price for their energy. We want the advantages of competition to benefit everyone, including the most vulnerable customers. Some of the proposals in the forthcoming consultation seem long overdue. They include action to ensure that prices for different payment methods reflect their true administrative costs. That is particularly important for customers who are on prepayment meters. Measures to ensure that customers are given clear, transparent information about the available tariffs and about switching are also welcome.

I share the member's concerns and we have made it clear to Ofgem that the Scottish Government shares them. The primary responsibility lies with Ofgem. We are happy to  make continuing representations until we find a permanent solution to the problem.

I should point out that insulation is part of the energy assistance package that we announced this week, through which there is now record spending on tackling fuel poverty. I take it that the member is referring to the new home insulation programme that was announced at the time of the budget, to which we committed £15 million. We expect to get matching funding of a further £15 million. We are currently engaged in detailed discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other stakeholders. I hope to be in a position to make a further announcement on the scheme shortly.

On 14 August 2006, the Scottish Government set up a stakeholder working group that comprised representatives of Citizens Advice Scotland, the local authorities, Crisis, the National Union of Students Scotland and many other bodies, with remit to examine the various approaches to improving tenancy deposit practice before we decide how to proceed. The private rented sector review, which was published last week and presented to the working group, gathered, systematically and for the first time, information on tenancy deposits. We will now take the issue forward and actively consider the available options with a view to seeking agreement on the most appropriate way to tackle the issue.

We now have a much clearer idea of the scale of the problem. Based on the tenant and landlord survey that was undertaken as part of the PRS review, we estimate that the actual amount of wrongly withheld deposits in Scotland is somewhere up to £3.6 million per annum, which affects up to 11,000 tenants at any one time, which is up to 4.7 per cent of all tenants. We are actively considering all the implications of the report on the PRS review, including how to take forward the issue of wrongly withheld deposits. I am keen, as the member is, to find a permanent resolution of the problem.

I am aware of the strength of feeling on the issue across the chamber. I will take cognisance of that, which is why I have given a commitment that we will actively and timeously consider the implications and recommendations of the PRS report and make decisions in due course. Clearly, it would be far better if we can achieve consensus and agreement, but if we cannot the Government will decide how best to take the matter forward.

The full details of the town centre regeneration fund will be announced shortly. Every effort will be made to ensure that the information is widely disseminated.

The decision-making process on awards under the town centre regeneration fund will be made by ministers in consultation with other stakeholders, which does not include the Conservative party.

The Scottish Government is committed to helping tackle housing issues in Edinburgh, working closely with the City of Edinburgh Council. Support to the city is provided through a range of measures. For example, the city will receive £46 million in this financial year for a range of affordable housing measures and I recently announced that, next year, the city will receive nearly £50 million. In addition, the city will have access to a share of the demand-led £60 million national open market shared equity scheme. The recently submitted bid to help fund new council houses in the city is being examined. I expect to make announcements on that bid fairly soon.

I have instituted several meetings with COSLA and individual councils. Indeed, I met the leadership of the City of Edinburgh Council this week to discuss the long-term housing pressure on Edinburgh. I have arranged to have monthly meetings with COSLA to discuss the issues to ensure that we move ahead on all aspects of housing policy.

As the member knows, I have arranged in principle to meet Edinburgh Tenants Federation to discuss the issues of concern. As I said to the member two weeks ago, the Scottish Government's position remains firmly that Her Majesty's Treasury should write off the housing debt throughout Scotland with no strings attached. That would make a substantial difference to housing investment in Scotland.

We will make the announcements on the allocations for that financial year at the appropriate time and once the final decisions are made. I should point out that, as I said in an earlier answer, our decision on the bids for the £25 million-worth of investment in council housing throughout Scotland will be announced in the next few weeks. Edinburgh, being an ambitious city with an ambitious council, has applied for only 40 per cent of the total Scottish funding.

On Tuesday, I discussed the issues that Margo MacDonald has raised with the political leadership and housing chiefs of the City of Edinburgh Council. The Government is aware of the particular pressures on housing in Edinburgh and is keen to agree with the council a medium-term plan to address them. The mid-term homelessness target for Edinburgh, starting from a baseline of 75 per cent, was for 87 per cent of allocations to be made on the basis of priority need. Early indications are that the city has reached only 81 or 82 per cent, which underlines the need for us to do more in Edinburgh to meet the homelessness target by 2012.

Our review last year identified that the programmes that we inherited from the previous Administration were not targeting the fuel poor effectively. We re-established the Scottish fuel poverty forum and announced in November that we will adopt its key recommendation, which is to replace the central heating and warm deal programmes with the energy assistance package. The package will start next month and will present an holistic approach, targeting a wider range of fuel-poor groups, better addressing energy-inefficient homes and, for the first time, tackling rural fuel poverty.

Last year we installed a record number of central heating systems in Scotland. When the member gets this year's figures for the warm deal and the central heating programme, I trust that he will be satisfied by another record achievement over the piece in the remainder of both programmes. I hope that he is looking forward to the new programme, which, for the first time, will make the service available to families with children under five and families with disabled children under the age of 16.

I am happy to give that undertaking. The new programme involves a four-stage approach that will ensure that even those who do not qualify for the fourth stage receive advice. If they get to stage 3, they will receive assistance with insulation from energy providers under the carbon emissions reduction target programme, to help to make their homes fuel and energy efficient.

I agree with Jamie McGrigor and share his concerns that the United Kingdom Government is not recognising the particular needs of people in Scotland, where temperatures are colder and the weather is damper. We have taken up, and will take up again, with Her Majesty's Treasury the need to reconsider cold-weather payments and ensure that people in situations such as those in which Mr McGrigor finds his constituents get a fair reward from cold-weather payments in future.

The scheme has four stages. Anyone is free to contact it and get the initial advice that is given at stage 1. In some cases, they will be able to take their inquiry to stage 2 and possibly even stage 3. The issue is that existing programmes are mainly targeted at private sector owners because we rely on local authorities and housing associations to ensure that the homes that they own are properly heated.

I join other members in congratulating John Wilson on raising such an important issue. What has happened in North Lanarkshire is a good example of what can be done. I will try to deal with all the points that members have made, but I do not promise to repeat the promise of Nye Bevan, who Jamie Hepburn might be surprised to learn was the health and housing minister before I was born. Since my appointment as Minister for Housing and Communities, I have made it clear that affordable homes and fuel poverty are my two immediate policy priorities. Within the affordable homes priority, increasing the number of new-build affordable homes, both for rent and to buy, is my number 1 priority. I will deal in some detail with the points that Mary Mulligan made about the programme for building affordable housing.  However, I will deal first with the issue of pressured status—and it is "pressured" rather than "pressurised"; I have to correct people on that. It is clear that pressured area designations provide a useful function in safeguarding social rented accommodation from right-to-buy sales. That is especially relevant at this time of economic uncertainty. It will be important to have a plentiful supply of affordable stock for rent. As members know, the designation process involves councils applying to ministers for pressured status to be granted. The application will be based on the need for local housing and, in particular, on the need for more rented accommodation. At present, designations are in force in 13 areas across 11 local authorities. Three of those designations have been approved in recent months. I am happy to read out the list, because Mary Mulligan asked about the areas. They are in East Renfrewshire, Highland, South Ayrshire, Moray, Fife, Dumfries and Galloway, Fife again, Perth and Kinross, Aberdeen City, North Ayrshire, Aberdeenshire, North Lanarkshire and Moray again. Another area under consideration is in Stirling. We expect further applications from East Dunbartonshire, Argyll and Bute, Falkirk and East Renfrewshire. As we consider the proposals, I will be happy to keep Parliament updated through answers to written or oral questions, as required. I encourage councils that wish to apply for a new pressured area designation, or to renew an existing designation, to make early contact with our officials, because we are conscious of the pressures on councils in some areas. North Lanarkshire Council made a successful application to secure pressured area designations for Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn. I say to Hugh O'Donnell that I am happy to double-check the point he raised about the turnaround time from application to approval. My briefing note states that the assessment process, which was undertaken by the housing investment division, west region, followed receipt of the application from North Lanarkshire Council on 12 November 2008. As members know, we have published a target of three months for turning round applications. We gave North Lanarkshire Council a decision on 27 January 2009, well within the three-month period. I therefore do not know where the idea came from that we took 18 months to make a decision.

I will certainly be keeping a tight grip, to ensure that we meet our target of turning round applications within three months. If any problems arise in future, I would welcome members bringing them to my attention. I am happy to intervene to ensure that we do indeed turn applications round fairly speedily. In North Lanarkshire, there are approximately 2,500 modernised tenancies in the areas affected by the designation. That figure represents 48 per cent of the total social housing stock in those areas. We believe that, in those areas, the designation should safeguard around 300 properties from right-to-buy sales over the five-year period of the designation. The figures demonstrate that, yes, pressured status for designated areas is important in helping us to deal with the problem, but it is no substitute for building new houses. In any area, the best and most effective way of dealing with outstanding demand and the need for new housing for rent is to build more houses. That brings me neatly to the points raised by Mary Mulligan. In the forthcoming financial year, the Scottish Government will invest £644 million in our affordable housing investment programme. That is a record investment—by far—in the 10 years of the Scottish Parliament. I take the point that Mary Mulligan makes repeatedly about the nine-month figures. I say to her that she should wait until she gets the full-year figures, when she will find that we have achieved a record number of completions in the current financial year. Next year, as well as record investment, we will have a record number of approvals, a record number of starts and a record number of completions. I will conclude on the point that has been raised about the housing association grant. There is a misunderstanding. If we consider the HAG as a percentage of total costs, it is as generous today as it has been in recent times. We have not cut back on the HAG. Because construction costs have been falling during the recession, the HAG makes as great a contribution to total costs as it has made in recent times. I am proud of the Government's record, but we need to do more. I have outlined our target of achieving at least 6,500 new starts next year. I hope to exceed that figure, and I am sure that everybody will congratulate the Government when we do so.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

We are currently working on the details of the fund, and we expect to be able to make an announcement by the end of March 2009.

We are happy to listen to any representations from anyone in developing our proposals, but we must move fairly quickly: as I said, we expect to make a full announcement about the fund by the end of March. I acknowledge  the role that responsible landlords play in the communities in our town centres; we do not wish at all to demonise responsible landlords for their role.

The member is correct: the money must be identified and spent in the incoming financial year.

I, too, congratulate Cathy Peattie on securing the debate and I pay tribute to her work down the years on wider equality issues. It is good to see Elaine Smith back in the chamber in full voice. I will briefly outline what the Scottish Government is doing for international women's day and then discuss three of the topics that the motion mentions, because I cannot cover in four minutes every topic that has been raised in the debate. The Scottish ministers are more actively involved this year than ever, building on the success of the previous Administration in this area, with events and activities to mark international women's day. I hope that that demonstrates our commitment to the women's agenda in Scotland and to equalities generally, and to ensuring that we make progress on the issues that have been identified. We are helping to fund three organisations to hold international women's day events: Fiona Hyslop will speak in the chamber on Saturday at the Scottish Women's Convention event, as, I think, will Cathy Peattie; Women@Work is holding an international women's day event on Saturday in Inverness; and Shona Robison is attending and speaking at an event on Friday 13 March, which is organised by the Dundee International Women's Centre. We are funding the organisers of three events that will take place between July 2008 and March 2011. The three organisers are: the Scottish Women's Convention, Women@Work, and the Dundee International Women's Centre. The Government's assistance is respectively £521,351, £258,855 and £160,000. In total, we have committed nearly £3 million to continue to fund nine of our strategic partners to carry out specific work to help us to progress gender equality issues. In addition, in celebrating international women's day, a delegation from Armenia is being met and a range of other activities is taking place. I turn to three substantive issues: violence against women, equal pay and occupational segregation. The subject of the event in the Parliament on Saturday is violence against women. Scotland has been leading the way in developing this agenda over a number of years on the basis of a firm gender-based analysis. We believe that our success comes down in the main to the partnership approach that we have adopted with the organisations that I mentioned earlier.  This work will be developed further during the next stage of the single outcome agreement process, in which we will ensure the full involvement of community planning partners. In turn, that should assist in engaging the multi-agency partnerships that work to prevent violence against women in identifying local priorities. I am conscious of the concerns that what should be going on locally across Scotland is going on locally. The Government has discussed the matter with our national group on violence against women and COSLA representatives. COSLA is keeping a very close eye on the situation to ensure that there is no diminution in service levels or in local network activities in this area. I am keeping a close personal eye on the matter. Over the next three years, the Government will allocate over £44 million to tackling violence against women and children, including domestic abuse. I am making not a party political but a substantive point when I say that that funding more than doubles that of the previous three years. The annual domestic abuse publicity campaign, which runs in December and January each year, is absolutely vital to our work in this area. This year's campaign involved a new television advert, "I Soar". There is also our online work to encourage women to contact the Scottish domestic abuse helpline for support. Recent figures from the helpline reveal an increase of 7.5 per cent in calls over the festive period from last year. We are evaluating the campaign to see how we can further improve it in future years. Given that I am running out of time, or have run out of time—

Excellent.

Yes, I can. I thought that I had only four minutes in total.

We discussed the issue of pornography at the last meeting of the national group on violence against women, albeit briefly. We are taking forward the issue in conjunction with our partners at Westminster. Clearly, pornography is a UK issue. We are aware of it, and we will address it in the months and years ahead.  Given the bonus of another two minutes, I have time to address one final issue, which is that of closing the gender pay gap and equal pay. I say to Cathy Peattie that the civil service undertakes regular pay audits in which it has found no significant equality issues in its pay structure other than in terms of senior civil service pay. That needs to be addressed. Obviously, the issue comes under the control of Her Majesty's Treasury in London, which has the primary responsibility for the civil service.

Absolutely. We are also keen to address that issue. The gender pay gap for full-time workers in Scotland is currently 13.5 per cent, based on the average, or mean, and the median figure is almost 11 per cent. Those figures are far too high. In our view, there should be equal pay—I am old enough to remember Barbara Castle introducing the Equal Pay Act 1970. Although there has been a slight decrease in the pay gap since 2007, when the equivalent figures were almost 15 per cent and 12 per cent, that is still not good enough and we are determined to do everything that we can to help close the gap. The gap is even more profound for part-time work: it is just over 32 per cent based on the average, or mean, and almost 35 per cent based on the median. Because such a relatively high proportion of women work part time, that statistic is at least as important as the one for full-time pay. Although equal pay legislation is reserved, the Scottish Government is trying, through the gender equality duty, to do what we can to address the issues—as did previous Administrations. I hear what members say about the problems associated with single status and about the trafficking of women. Although it has not been mentioned, forced marriage is also being addressed. We are also addressing, with our Westminster colleagues, the issue of no recourse to public funds; it does not affect a large number of women, but someone who is affected can find themselves in a desperate situation. I had much more to say, but I have run out of time. I recommit the Scottish Government to the gender equality agenda and I commit this Government to do everything that we possibly can—working with the campaigners in the Parliament—to promote in the months and years to come not only international women's day but equality for women in pay and in every other respect.   Meeting closed at 17:42.

The Scottish Government has discussed the issue of moving-in delays with Homes for Scotland and has provided input to the Office of Fair Trading report on house building. The OFT report calls for consumer protection issues, including moving-in delays, to be addressed through the new code of conduct that the house building industry is developing. We are pressing for quick and effective implementation of the new code.

I share the member's concerns. Following the OFT's report, we are working intensively with the OFT, the UK Government and the house building industry in Scotland—in particular, Homes for Scotland—to make progress on the issue. I hope that the code of conduct will be put in place before we consider legislation. We would have to wait until we could pass legislation, which would take time. The situation is urgent.

The Scottish Government is committed to increasing the availability of affordable housing in Edinburgh. That commitment is demonstrated by the Scottish Government's investment of £46 million this financial year in a range of affordable housing mechanisms. In the next financial year—2009-10—the Government's affordable housing programme throughout Scotland will amount to a record £644 million, which represents an increase of £113 million or 21 per cent on this year's budget.

I agree entirely with Shirley-Anne Somerville. The UK Treasury should write off the £2 billion of debt without strings in the same way  as, only yesterday, it gave £2 billion to failed private finance initiative projects south of the border. If the Treasury can do that for failed PFI projects south of the border, it should be able to invest money in housing north of the border.

Like other members, I pay tribute to Robert Brown not just for securing this debate and making a fine speech at the start of it, but for the  work that he does as the convener of the cross-party group on visual impairment and in relation to macular degeneration and related issues. He is to be commended for his work in all of those areas. This has been a short but helpful debate; being new to my job, I found it informative. I invite Mary Scanlon to write to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing about some of the points she made, as I am sure that the cabinet secretary would be interested to hear about the experiences that people are having. We want to be absolutely sure that we are providing the maximum quality and range of services for people with any kind of sight impairment. Mary Scanlon mentioned that there are 20,000 blind people in Scotland. In total, 180,000 people in Scotland are blind or visually impaired. We must try to maximise the quality and range of services that are available to those people. I take Mary Scanlon's criticisms on board, but recent developments in the health service such as the provision of free eye examinations will, in time, contribute to the prevention of some cases of blindness and enable us to treat certain kinds of blindness before it is too late. The Government and I are keen to do that. I am particularly interested in stem cell research as a means of providing solutions not just to blindness but to some of the wider health problems that we face. I requested as part of my briefing for today's debate a note on current developments in stem cell research and on the contribution it can make to tackling the problem of blindness. Scotland is leading the way on stem cell research in that area. Along with Scottish Enterprise and the UK Stem Cell Foundation, the chief scientist office in the Scottish Government is co-funding a grant application to examine the development of safe and effective corneal stem cell transplantation. That is a welcome development. I hope that we are successful in getting funding for the project, because it could help us to make substantial progress towards preventing blindness. More important for many people, we are close to getting a cure for certain types of blindness. We want to play a part in ensuring that that becomes possible. The project for which the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise and the UK Stem Cell Foundation are seeking funding has the potential to restore sight in some people. Recent press coverage has highlighted some of the astonishing advances that have been made in medical treatment based on stem cell technology. Last week I read in the Daily Express about a lady who started to lose her sight in her 20s. As a result of stem cell technology, she has received an implant in one eye, in which she has already regained 70 per cent sight. The Government and I are keen to  pursue progress in that area, as it offers the solution to the problem and is part and parcel of our wider strategy, along with the provision of Braille services. We also fund the communication aids for language and learning—CALL—centre at the University of Edinburgh, which Robert Brown is aware of. The centre provides specialist advice, expertise and training in technology for people in schools throughout Scotland who work with children who have speech, communication and/or writing difficulties. CALL is working with Learning and Teaching Scotland to produce an online database of adapted curriculum materials. We are encouraging that development. The Scottish books for all database will be available to all schools via glow—the Scottish schools intranet—or Scran and will allow teachers to obtain adapted curriculum materials and make them available to any pupil in Scotland. I am glad to say that we also support the Royal Blind School, which has grant funding of more than £5 million from 2008 to 2010 as a grant-aided special school in Scotland. The school teaches Braille to pupils who are not print users. It has up-to-date technology: there are computers in each classroom, and special programmes and peripherals mean that all pupils gain skills. Pupils are provided with any equipment—such as large-print materials, computers and sloping boards—that are necessary for them to access the curriculum.

I do not think that there is universal provision but, through Learning and Teaching Scotland, we are trying to make more provision not only for Braille but for other learning aids in school. It is right that we do that and one of the matters that I intend to examine once I have been in this job a wee bit longer is to determine whether we can make more substantial progress. I will call on Robert Brown and the cross-party group to advise me on what some priority areas might be, in which we can try to improve the quality and range of services for blind people, including young people in school. We all agree about the importance of independent living for all our citizens, including those who are blind or have a visual impairment, irrespective of where they work and live or any other factor. This is by no means a party-political issue. Everybody is entitled to live independently, and it is a right for every blind or visually impaired person to enjoy as far as possible the quality of life that the rest of us enjoy. That objective is clearly shared by everybody in the Parliament.  I welcome the debate. I have read a short biography of Louis Braille, which I had not done before. It was interesting indeed. He must have been a strong-willed and capable individual to achieve what he did. I reaffirm our commitment to equality, inclusion and, particularly, the disability equality duty. We will try to deliver the best quality of service to people in Scotland who are disabled in any way. This is the first debate that I have handled as a minister, and it is a particular pleasure to participate in a debate that is of such importance to so many people.   Meeting closed at 17:33.

As this is my maiden answer, I take the opportunity to thank members from all sides of the chamber for their kindness and congratulations on my appointment. The Scottish Government's £60 million town centre regeneration fund will be available in 2009-10 to support our town centres and local high streets. We are currently working on the details of the fund, which will be announced by the end of March 2009.

As I have said, the fund will be available during the next financial year. I expect that we will receive requests from members of all parties and from all parts of Scotland who have pet projects for the fund. It is quite right that members should promote the areas that they represent. Nevertheless, we must first make strategic decisions about where in Scotland the fund can have the greatest impact. One of our endeavours will be to ensure that we adopt a fair approach to the distribution of the fund and maximise the economic and social impact that it can have.

As part of our consideration of the criteria, I am prepared to listen to representations from all members on what they think those criteria should be. At this stage, I can make no commitment on any individual town or city or on any individual application. However, I have an open mind on the criteria that we should apply.

One of the first decisions that we will have to make concerns the definition of "town" for the purposes of the town centre regeneration fund. We will also have to define what is meant by "town centre". My colleague Bob Doris, from Glasgow, has already made the point to me privately that Patricia Ferguson makes to me publicly. We are in the early stages of working up our proposals, but I am prepared to listen to representations from members on the criteria without, at this stage, making any commitments on either the criteria or the final recipients.

We are currently updating the 2012 modelling work in conjunction with local authorities, and we will work with local authorities over the course of this year to assess progress in meeting the 2009 interim targets. That will include a qualitative analysis of factors affecting progress as well as statistical information.

I say to Malcolm Chisholm that I am already making a name for myself because, in the budget for affordable housing next year, I will spend 15 per cent more than he did when he was the housing minister. I am conscious of the pressures in Edinburgh and in other areas. On the phasing out of priority need, against a baseline of 75 per cent, the target for March 2009 was 87 per cent and the outturn looks like being 82 per cent, which is 5 per cent short. I am aware that we must make more progress in Edinburgh to achieve the 2012 target. I have asked my officials to arrange an early meeting with those who are involved in housing development in Edinburgh, so that we can discuss that issue among other matters. I am keen for us to do whatever we need to do to ensure that we meet the 2012 target.

Harold Wilson once said: "A week is a long time in politics." I can hardly believe that it is only a week since I was attacking my good friends in the Liberal Democrats and in the Labour Party for their proposals. However, they have made great strides in the intervening week in reaching agreement with the Government. At the end of the day, this is not about what any party or individual achieves in the negotiations, but about what is best for Scotland as a whole, and for the particular requirements of different sections of our community and the different geographies of Scotland. Last week, David McLetchie made one of the best speeches in the chamber; he has done the same this week. The first point that he made last week was about the amount of discretionary spend that the cabinet secretary has at his disposal. As Angela Constance very articulately pointed out earlier, when the commitments on local government, salaries, meeting our European Union obligations and all the rest are pared away, the amount that remains to be divvied out in a different way from the previous year is very limited. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on becoming almost a magician in trying to meet the demands of all the parties—with the possible exception of the Greens—in order to achieve a near-unanimous vote. I share Margo MacDonald's concern: it would be a terrible tragedy if the budget debate ended up setting one part of Scotland against another. The basic principle is that resources need to be allocated on the basis of need. There are particular needs in Edinburgh that result from its status as a capital city, and the cabinet secretary—

I will come to Andy Kerr in a minute. The cabinet secretary has tried to meet those needs. As I represent Lanarkshire, I know that there are similar needs in Glasgow and Lanarkshire, and I hope that those will be reflected in the additional spend on health, housing and other services. I also hope that the review of local government funding and allocation of resources will help to improve the formula and ensure that  allocations are based on economic and social need.

I did not accuse Labour or anyone else of trying to divide us; I just expressed the hope that none of us will fall into the trap of trying to set, or accidentally setting, one part of Scotland against another. Another important element is the Liberal Democrats' point about borrowing powers. The Northern Ireland Assembly represents a smaller population and has a smaller budget than the Scottish Parliament, but it has the power to borrow up to £2.2 billion. It makes sense, particularly in a time of recession, to give us the flexibility and the additional resource that can come from having the power to borrow. I draw a comparison between what happened last week south of the border and our current limitations north of the border. Quite rightly, Lord Mandelson announced a package of support for the car industry, which is concentrated south of the border; that support, which amounts to £2.2 billion, comprises a combination of different types of borrowing and guarantees. Just as that support is justified for the car industry in the midlands and elsewhere, it would be entirely appropriate for such funding, if necessary, to be made available from borrowing to help the Scottish economy. For example, it could help us to meet the cost of the new Forth crossing. Scotland requires such support. I hope that, when we discuss borrowing powers, not just in the context of tomorrow's debate but in relation to the direction that the Parliament should take, we will achieve a consensus on the principle that we should have such powers. However, the debate on borrowing powers is not a naked debate, because it relates to powers over taxation. A Parliament's ability to borrow is enhanced if it also has the power to raise its own money for its own spending. Therefore, I argue, as the Steel commission did, that as well as considering borrowing powers we need to consider revenue-raising powers, even in a devolved situation, because the two go hand in hand. We all recognise that we are living in difficult times. Last week's International Monetary Fund forecasts were not encouraging for Britain as a whole, and we take our share of those. It is therefore incumbent on every one of us, irrespective of our particular priorities and views, to support the budget at 5 o'clock, not for the sake  of any party or individual but for the sake of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that the member will clarify her comments. At no point have I ever made a sectarian remark.

That was yet another wasted opportunity for the Liberal Democrats to tell us where their £800 million-worth of cuts would come from. I listened to Jeremy Purvis—something that I do on a regular basis. He said that he wanted a fiscal stimulus for Scotland from the budget, and that he wanted to get it by reducing tax by 2p and cutting spending by £800 million. Does he not know that, to get a fiscal stimulus, a net injection into the economy is required? We cannot get a stimulus by robbing Peter to pay Paul. The Liberal policy, far from being a net injection, is more like a lethal injection for the Scottish economy. However, let us not waste too much time on irrelevancy—

Talking of irrelevancy, I will allow Mr Whitton to intervene.

Because if we consider the revenue raised, it involves a deliberate cut in revenue and a fiscal stimulus to the Scottish economy, to make us the lowest-taxed economy in the whole of the United Kingdom. Let us consider Labour's record on this budget. At 10:33 on 11 January, Andy Kerr, the economic guru of Scottish Labour, ably assisted by Arthur Bleak Midwinter, told us in a press release: "The Supporting Documents for the Scottish Budget Bill show increase in staff spending of over £20 million". Just over an hour later, at 11:40:08, the same Andy Kerr, the guru of mathematics and economics, put out a news release in which he said:  "The Supporting Documents for the Scottish Budget Bill show increase in staff spending of over £15 million". According to Andy Kerr, we are cutting bureaucracy at a record level—£5 million-worth an hour.

Today we had a press release from Iain Gray, although no doubt it was approved by Jim Murphy, the real leader of Labour in Scotland. Mr Gray criticises the SNP for not increasing the health service's share of the budget by more than we propose to do. What a short memory Mr Gray has. Labour Party policy was that the additional money that Westminster gave us only 18 months ago was all to be spent on education, with not a penny going to the health service. Had Labour been re-elected along with its Liberal poodles—[ Interruption. ] The Liberals are good at that; they have had a lot of practice. If Labour had been re-elected, the health service would have had millions less than it has.

I will let the member bark, because I know that he will not bite.

Of course it does. I am always co-operative, especially when the member speaks common sense, which is a rare commodity for a Liberal Democrat. In a week when we are celebrating Rabbie, my message to the Liberal Democrats is: "O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us To see oursels as others see us!" It wad frae monie a stupid budget free us an' foolish notion. I have been analysing the suggestions in Labour's plan, "Helping Scotland weather the international economic storm". If Labour wants to help, suggestion 1 should be to sack Gordon Brown. It is interesting that the Labour Government in London yesterday announced a package of £2.5 billion for the car industry south of the border but will not give a penny to the new Forth crossing north of the border. Is interesting that the Labour Government in London will spend millions of pounds on bailing out the banks but will not let us inject into the Scottish economy our own £120 million from the fossil fuel levy. In suggestion 8 in its plan, Labour has the cheek to call for measures to help the banking system and HBOS, when the attitude of Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling to the HBOS takeover is costing 40,000 jobs throughout the UK—

Only £18 billion of the £113 billion that the UK Government is borrowing this year is for stimulus. Perhaps a large part of the problem and the reason why we are in the mess that we are in is that Gordon Brown has misspent the other £90-odd billion.

Does the member welcome today's announcement that MRSA has reached its lowest ever recorded level?

We are all agreed on the severity of the economic downturn and the increase in unemployment that we are seeing. Today, Honeywell has announced further job cuts in the plant in my area in North Lanarkshire. Despite some disagreements on detail, it appears that all the parties—bar one—as well as the independent member, are prepared to work together to get a budget that will maximise our efforts, within the very limited powers of the Parliament, to minimise unemployment and the other effects of the economic downturn. It is ironic that the party that at Westminster is generally regarded as having a superior economic spokesman who talks a lot of sense about British economic policy has, as its spokesman here, the Herbert Hoover of Scottish politics. If Vince Cable had listened to the speech that Jeremy Purvis has just made for the Liberal Democrats, he would have been absolutely appalled at the level of economic illiteracy that was demonstrated. Mr Purvis talked about saving front-line services, but how could he save front-line services when he intends to cut £800 million a year from front-line services? The Liberal Democrats have not told us what they would cut. Does Jeremy Purvis want to cut the Borders railway or the budgets of Scottish Enterprise or Skills Development Scotland? What do the Liberal Democrats want to cut? At a time when we face an economic downturn, the last thing that the party of Lloyd George and Beveridge should be advocating is a deflationary policy. The real irony is that even if the Liberal Democrats got their way, it would be this time next year before they could make the cuts they want to make, because it would take a year to cut the variable rate of income tax. The idea that the Liberal Democrats could do anything this year is absurd; they have the most ridiculous economic policy in Scottish economic history. The most sensible thing the Liberal Democrats could do is to go home and think again—

—or they could, as has been suggested helpfully by my colleague, disband. No one would notice. The priority of all members—except the Liberal Democrats—is the level of employment in the months and years to come. Whoever is to blame for the current situation, and whatever forces are at work, we must do everything within our limited powers to bring more jobs to Scotland, and to save as many of the jobs that are already here as we can. Within our fixed budget—within the Scottish block-and without the borrowing powers that even the Northern Ireland Assembly has, there are two things we can do to assist the situation, both of which this Government is doing. The first is to try to reallocate expenditure from areas that cannot make a big contribution to those that can. The announcements in the six-point plan and elsewhere are classic examples of how the Government is using every spare penny to maximise spend on investment and jobs. The second approach, which required Westminster's permission—to be fair, we have received that permission—was to bring forward capital expenditure from future years into this year and next year. As the finance secretary said, in addition to bringing forward European moneys, we have nearly £300 million of additional capital expenditure this year and next year, which will help the Scottish economy to weather the storm. I hope that we can get unity before we get to stage 3 of the budget bill—we have given up on the Liberal Democrats, but I am sure that we can get unity among the other parties and the independent member. I would not like to be Jeremy Purvis explaining to Margo MacDonald why she cannot get the city supplement for Edinburgh next year; that supplement will not be available if the bill is voted down. We must do everything we can—this is no time for petty politics. People out there are losing their jobs day in, day out. It is the responsibility of all members to do everything they can to minimise economic dislocation—to use the technical term—or, in terms of the humanitarian consequences, to minimise the prospect of people ending up on the dole. I appeal to every member to vote for the budget for Scotland, even if there are differences about the detail.

Does the First Minister agree that, in a period of economic downturn and rising unemployment, the worst possible measure that the Scottish Government could take would be to implement £800 million-worth of public spending cuts, as has been proposed by some? Equally damaging would be  any prospect of Mr Swinney's budget being voted down by Parliament, because that would also lead to higher unnecessary levels of unemployment.

I thank the minister for that comprehensive reply. I ask him to draw to the attention of Ofgem the fact that wholesale prices have been reduced by around 40 per cent while retail prices have only been reduced by around 10 per cent, and that there is a need, in all fairness, to close that 30 per cent gap.

I agree with Margaret Smith's comment that we should try, as far as possible, to put aside party differences in relation to education and try to reach agreement on the best way forward. It is a matter of regret that the Labour Party has taken a destructive approach in its contribution to the education debate in recent months. I find it ironic that Labour's amendment states that "it is unacceptable that fewer than half of primary 7 pupils are well established in reading". Who is to blame for that? Labour education ministers have been in office for 10 years, so if there is still a problem in primary 7, the blame for that lies fairly and squarely with Labour. Perhaps Labour members should learn lessons from their failed past.

I will do so later. I will concentrate on a number of key issues. We do not know what Labour's position is, but I think that there is broad consensus among the other parties, albeit that there are some differences on the detail, on the way forward. I do not intend to go over that, as I would like instead to add a bit of value to the debate that has taken place. On the reforms that we are discussing, we have to learn the lessons of the early 1990s, because—as Liz Smith rightly said—aspects of the introduction of the reforms at that time could have been handled better. The evaluations that were undertaken in 1999 and 2003 on behalf of the Scottish Executive into the implementation of the higher still reforms clearly indicated that there was a major failure on the part of previous Administrations adequately to consult employers, in particular. One of the problems that resulted from that is that many employers have not fully understood the importance of some of the reforms, which has tended to force them down the road of relying on standard grades rather than other qualifications. The time has come for us to replace standard grades and intermediate qualifications with a new qualification. However, I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that, when that change is implemented, employers and other stakeholders are properly consulted. If the system is to work, we must  ensure not only that employers are consulted but that they fully understand the reforms that are being implemented.

That was a helpful intervention. We are all agreed that there is a need for better assessment with regard to literacy and numeracy and that those areas must be treated as high priorities. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that the key demand from employers and others is for enhanced learning in relation to literacy and numeracy. The issue is not only about assessment and accreditation; it is about the teaching and learning of literacy and numeracy. I am sure that the cabinet secretary is looking at ways of enhancing literacy and numeracy. Professor Gordon Hayward and others have suggested that engineering be included in the curriculum for excellence. That is an excellent idea that is worthy of serious consideration. Engineering is fundamental to our ability to build the kind of economy that we want to have, and people will need to have qualifications in it. I know that the cabinet secretary is sympathetic towards that view. I agree with David McLetchie that we need to expand the baccalaureate beyond modern languages and science, and I note that the cabinet secretary has said that she will do that. However, we should not think of the baccalaureate as being simply the end part of a school education. One of the benefits of the baccalaureate, apart from the fact that it is an internationally recognised qualification, is that, because of the level at which the subjects are taught, it helps to make the transition from school to higher and further education much smoother. As we all know, most of the problems in education arise during periods of transition, so anything that makes the transition easier at such a crucial stage in a young person's education is to be welcomed. My final point relates to resources. Of course we need more resources for education—but this Government has put in a record amount of resources. Karen Whitefield, who represents the Labour majority in North Lanarkshire Council, should consider the way in which that council misused its resources and maladministered its education budget.

No, I will not. The problem is not a lack of resources—in that case, it was maladministration by the Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council.

Did the member pass?

In the interests of clarity and transparency, will the Liberal Democrats follow the example of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and tell us where their £800 million-worth of cuts will come from?

He is really muted now, as he has left the chamber.

How much of the £800 million cuts that are proposed by the Liberal Democrats will come from capital expenditure?

I shall, of course, try to keep within that time—as usual. I will begin by helping out Mr Purvis. The Liberal Democrats, who have not today advanced their conference policy of a 2p reduction in taxation, have been somewhat dishonest on two counts. First, Mr Purvis keeps comparing a 2p reduction under the taxation powers of this Parliament to what is possible at Westminster. That is a dishonest comparison because if taxation is reduced at Westminster, the revenue can be made up by borrowing money without any reduction in service. That is not a luxury or power that is open to this Parliament because we have a fixed budget that is laid down by Westminster. Therefore we must, if we cut 2p off the income tax, cut expenditure by about £800 million, not in one year but every year. It is dishonest of the Liberal Democrats to pretend otherwise. Secondly, the Liberal Democrats have repeatedly been challenged—as we are being consensual, I will say that they have been "asked repeatedly" rather than "challenged"—to tell us what expenditure they would cut to reach a total of £800 million a year. Does Mr Purvis want to cut the Borders railway project? Does he want to cut out Scottish Enterprise and its £300 million budget? Does he want to cut Skills Development Scotland's £200 million budget? Can he not tell us? At the Finance Committee, he neither made his proposal nor told us how he intends to fund the cut. It is utterly dishonest of the Liberal Democrats to continue with that pretence. I will say a word or two about Mr Whitton's consensual, if somewhat unusual, speech. He said that he and the Labour Party want to be helpful. I will suggest a way in which Labour members can be helpful: they can persuade their colleagues in London, at numbers 10 and 11 Downing Street, to give the Scottish Government the money to which it is entitled. They could persuade them to give us the £120 million from the fossil fuel levy without counting it against departmental limits, which would allow us to increase expenditure by £120 million in a way that will safeguard and protect jobs while ensuring that we can make further advances with renewable energy. Another way for Mr Whitton to assist would be by persuading the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer to redo their figures for 2010 and 2011 so that the Scottish Parliament is not subject to an annual cut to its budget of £500 million in real terms. The Labour UK Government has put forward that proposal, so I am responding by trying to be helpful to Labour  Party members. Can they tell us where the £500 million in cuts in Scottish Government expenditure should be made in 2010 and 2011? Do they want to abolish free school meals, which I would have thought was a good Labour policy? Do they want to charge for prescriptions again, although free prescriptions was a Labour policy for the eight years from 1999 to last year? Do they want to cut the extra money that we are putting into housing and education? Do they want to proceed with their plan to cut the accident and emergency units at Ayr hospital and Monklands hospital? It would be extremely helpful to us all if Mr Whitton could say from where £500 million in cuts should come in two and three years. Beyond 2011 we will suffer from a decline in real growth in spending in the UK, which will go down by a third, from 1.8 per cent to 1.2 per cent, so the £500 million of cuts that the Scottish Government would have to make in the face of the demands of public spending would have to be carried on. It is high time the Liberal Democrats and their good friends in the Labour Party started being honest with the people of Scotland by telling us which budgets they would cut.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr McNulty did not come into the chamber until the seventh minute of the minister's statement.

It is inappropriate—

Do we not need land to build on? If we do not buy the land, we cannot do the building.

I appreciate the seriousness of the situation. However, in all seriousness, does Jamie Stone not agree that having £800 million of public spending cuts to fund a 2p reduction in income tax would mean that we would end up with more schools in the same state that Wick high school is in and that that kind of policy would be absolute lunacy in the current conditions?

Is the difference between the UK's efficiency savings and the Scottish Government's not that we are reinvesting the money in front-line services, whereas that is not the case south of the border?

Is it not a bit daft to take all measures to protect jobs while allowing 40,000 unnecessary redundancies if the proposed takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB proceeds?

We have had from Wendy Alexander new Labour's message to those who are unemployed or facing the prospect of unemployment—"New Labour isnae gonnae get you a job, but they'll get you a new economic forecast, and I'm sure you'll be happy with that." I suggest to Wendy Alexander that she should look at Alistair Darling's forecasts  on debt, growth or jobs from April and compare it with his forecast from two weeks ago—quite frankly, I would not put much faith in forecasting if I were her.

As usual, Wendy Alexander misses the point. The point of this back-bench member's reply is that, no matter what one forecasts, in the current atmosphere forecasts are utterly meaningless from week to week, never mind from month to month or year to year. The reality is that Britain is on the brink of bankruptcy. That is not a cause for celebration—far from it. After 11 years of Gordon Brown in Downing Street, we now face the prospect of the UK national debt reaching £2 trillion. We have the official forecast—

It is the current forecast, but perhaps we will get a new one in January. Darling's current forecast is £1.1 trillion. If we add to that outstanding public-private partnership figures and the money to save the banks, we get a Neil forecast of £2 trillion of national debt. That is the position that Gordon Brown will pass on to upcoming generations in the UK. The consequences in Scotland will be horrendous. We will suffer a minimum of £500 million of cuts in the money that we will get to spend on vital services in Scotland in 2010. It gets a lot worse after that, because Labour promises to cut the increase in public spending by a third, from 1.8 per cent a year to 1.2 per cent. That will have a horrendous impact on vital services both north and south of the border. Andy Kerr says that such cuts are realistic because what we do today must be funded tomorrow. I say to him that if he needs to find the money to prevent us from going into that level of debt and pay for the expansion announced today, why not annul the contract for the successor to Trident, which will cost a minimum of £75 billion over the next 20 years, much of it front loaded? Why not cancel the stupid identification card programme, which will cost billions of pounds to create a new bureaucracy and cause further damage to our civil liberties? Why not stop trying to be an imperial power, with armed forces in 20 different countries around the world at any one time? We should recognise that we are no longer a first-rate military power and we should stop  trying to force our people to pay the price of imperialism in return for cuts in vital services. The answer to the problem is that there should be no cuts in vital services and a cancellation of weaponry that we do not need and which I hope we would not use in any case. It is a fact of life that the UK economy faces the worst prospect that it has faced in the past 150 years. Some of that is due to global factors beyond our control, but the reality is that a large chunk of it is the result of the mismanagement of the British economy and the Scottish economy for the past 11 years. No matter what Wendy says, Gordon Brown is the guilty man and for years to come everybody who is made unemployed will have Gordon Brown's signature on their P45.

Can the member tell us how much of the £800 million a year that he proposes to cut will come from the capital budget and how many schools will not be built as a result?

Does the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth agree that the measures that the chancellor announced on Monday demonstrate the dire financial consequences of managing the Scottish economy from London? Now that the UK has a credit rating second only to that of Italy, is it not the case that an independent Scotland would be far better off than it is under this miserable union with London?

I give a general welcome to the energy assistance package but ask the cabinet secretary to examine some of the criteria and rules in the programmes. For example, whether a central heating system is working is apparently defined by whether it heats two or more rooms. I have a case in which two bedrooms are heated but the main living area—

It seems that that applies to back benchers but not front benchers, with all due respect, Presiding Officer.

I ask the cabinet secretary to review the rules and criteria to make them more flexible in such cases.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Two weeks ago, when you made a ruling about brevity, you quite rightly made no distinction between back benchers and front benchers. However, in the 30 minutes allowed for questions on this statement, the first three questioners got 14 minutes between them, with the back benchers yet again squeezed into the balance. I ask you to review the situation in the light of your own ruling, and ensure that back benchers are treated more fairly in the future than they have been to date.

Will the member take an intervention?

I do not agree with Tom McCabe on many issues, but I regret that he is no longer a member of the Finance Committee because he brought a great deal of intellectual power to its work. The case that the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats have put today is based largely on the mythology that they are trying to spread throughout Scotland. The first myth is that we are not matching their record on the provision of schools. The reality is that, in the first 18 months of the SNP Administration, the Government has given the go-ahead for 49 schools, which is more or less equal to the number that got the go-ahead in the last 18 months of the previous Administration.

When the previous Administration started, it inherited projects as well. That is the on-going life of Government. There is no big secret about that. We made a firm commitment that we will build or refurbish 250 schools in the four-year period, and unlike the previous Administration we will keep that promise. The second big myth is that there is a black hole in the flow of projects since we came to power. Let me confuse that argument with some facts. The reality is that the value of projects for which contracts have been signed since the SNP came to power in May 2007 is £1.8 billion. The value of projects that have been approved since we came to power is £2.5 billion, and £1.4 billion-worth of those will be funded under not-for-profit models. The value of projects that have been announced since May 2007 is £5.7 billion. That is an unprecedented record and one for us to be proud of. I defy any member of the Labour Party or the Liberal Democrats to identify an 18-month period in the first eight years of devolution in which they announced £5.7 billion-worth of projects. We heard some other myths. Margaret Smith made the incredible statement that no new schools have been contracted since we came to power. She does not know her facts. The fact is that £870 million-worth of schools have been contracted since the SNP came to power.

The member says that that is what she intended to say, but when she checks the Official Report tomorrow she will find that she actually said that no schools had been contracted. That is factual nonsense, because £870 million-worth of schools have been contracted. Much mention has been made of the £22 million that has been committed to the Scottish Futures Trust so far. However, those who made the point typically looked at only one side of the income and expenditure account; none of them mentioned that when the SFT is fully up and running it will save up to £150 million every year. For those on the Labour and Liberal benches who cannot make the calculation, that means a saving of £600 million over four years. As Jim Mather has been quoted as saying, £600 million is roughly the cost of dualling the A9 between Inverness and Perth. As a  result, the savings made by the SFT will far outweigh the costs of setting it up. I say to Labour members in particular that one of the reasons why we have to use instruments other than normal mainstream funding for investment is that their Government at Westminster is denying us the right not to money that we are not entitled to, but to money that we are. If the UK Government gave us our fossil fuel levy money with no strings attached, our share of the Olympics regeneration money and our share of the prison money, investment in Scotland would be even higher than it already is under this successful SNP Administration.

Does the member agree that the downfall would be that Mr Purvis would not get the performance bonus?

To ask the First Minister what further discussion the Scottish Government has had about the proposed  merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB and the impact that this will have on jobs. (S3F-1173)

Is the First Minister aware that within minutes of the United Kingdom Government being informed confidentially of the Bank of China's interest in bidding for HBOS, that information appeared in the blog of Robert Peston of the BBC? That is hardly the proper way to do business. Given the apparent attempts by the UK Government to sabotage any possible alternative to the Lloyds TSB bid for HBOS, will the First Minister remind the Prime Minister of his promise to treat any rival bid for HBOS on a level playing field with Lloyds TSB? Will he ask the Prime Minister to keep a promise for once?

There is no extra money.

rose—

Can the member give three specific examples of the cuts that he would make to fund the 2p income tax cut that he proposes, which would cost £800 million a year in total?

If the Liberal Democrats were being straight with the Parliament, they would tell us that the £800 million of spending cuts that they would impose in Scotland would add substantially to the levels of unemployment. On a note of charity, I congratulate Gordon Brown on keeping at least one promise in relation to the economy. He promised that he would put an end to boom and bust, and he has done so, because all that we have now is bust and no boom. Before turning to broader issues, I want to comment specifically on the proposed takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB, which will have a damaging effect not only on the Scottish economy but on the British economy, particularly in places such as Edinburgh and Halifax. In doing so, I pay tribute to Barry Sheerman, the Labour MP for Huddersfield, who has called for a stop to the merger and for HBOS to remain as an independent bank, as that is the only way to minimise job losses. I was amazed this morning to read a comment from the Unite union, which said something to the effect that it did not expect a lot of job losses from the merger. The Lloyds prospectus, however, forecasts minimum job losses of 20,000. If the cost cuts are considered, the total number of job losses is more likely to be nearer 40,000. That will have a very damaging impact on the economy. There is little point in having a reflationary package if the merger policy is driving that number of people into the dole queue the length and breadth of Scotland. If the Lloyds TSB corporate policy is implemented and the merger ever goes through, many of the 2,000 jobs in Fife—John Park's constituency—are likely to be relocated offshore to India, because Lloyds TSB has a policy to relocate back-room jobs to such places. I believe that Gordon Brown gave an undertaking that those who made a rival bid for HBOS, or those who came forward with alternative proposals, as Sir George Mathewson and Sir Peter Burt have done, would be treated fairly and given a level playing field with Lloyds. In reality, the opposite is happening. The way in which the rival proposals to save those jobs are being  treated by the UK Government indicates that every effort is being made to stifle anything other than the Lloyds TSB bid. That is being done for political motives, rather than on the basis of what is best for HBOS.

Not at the moment. Any approaches to the UK Government about possible rival bids have so far been given short shrift, even before they have been properly examined by the Treasury. The minute a potential rival bidder talks to the UK Government, information is fed to the BBC's Robert Peston—even before the bidders have reached the exit door of the Treasury. History is repeating itself. As Richard Branson pointed out on page 206 of his book, "Business Stripped Bare", in relation to the Northern Rock fiasco, the UK Government's way of doing business with senior business people is through the medium of Robert Peston. The whole process reeks. It is clear that the UK Government is trying to sabotage any alternative to the Lloyds TSB bid because Gordon Brown cannot afford to lose face. The rubbishing of Sir George Mathewson and Sir Peter Burt, coupled with the disinformation and the misinformation that is being put about in relation to the Lloyds bid is further proof that there is something very suspect in the way in which the matter is being handled. Even if there are just 20,000 job losses if the merger goes ahead, once the multiplier effect of that is applied to every other sector of the economy, the potential job losses throughout the UK could be up to 50,000 or 60,000, according to even the minimum calculations. It is a disgrace that Unite and the Labour Party, aided and abetted by the Tory party, are standing by silently, allowing all those livelihoods to be lost for no good reason at all. The only way to save those jobs as part of a reflationary package is to put a stop to the merger and either keep HBOS as an independent entity, or allow someone to take it over who will run it properly and protect the jobs and livelihoods of all those who are employed in both organisations.

I absolutely agree with the member about the concerns that have been raised. However, given that, if the merger goes ahead, the Government will control 43 per cent of the shares, has Mr Park put those concerns to Gordon Brown and Alasdair Darling? If so, what are they going to do about them?

I congratulate the Lib Dems on copying my motion word for word and suggest that if they made more of a habit of that, their standing in the opinion polls might rise substantially. On the face of it, the debate is about banks: in fact, it is about people. Up to 40,000 people could lose their jobs as a result of the merger. We all know and expect that there will be significant job losses in the banking sector, and the two banks that are involved in the merger will not escape that. However, on top of the natural—if you like—job losses that will result from the financial tsunami, there will be many thousands of unnecessary job losses as a result of the merger. Those job losses will not occur only in Edinburgh and Halifax, and I am as concerned about job losses in Halifax and elsewhere south of the border as I am about job losses north of the border. If Lloyds TSB's corporate policy of offshore and backroom activities is carried through, many thousands of jobs will be lost in Scotland, and many of those will be in Fife. The two unionist parties say that politicians should not interfere, while the reality is that the merger has been driven by two politicians: Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling. Now that we, as taxpayers, have a major investment in both banks, including £7 billion in Lloyds TSB, we are entitled as shareholders to require them at the very least to minimise job losses and the damage that they can do unnecessarily to people's lives. Let us not kid ourselves by hiding behind the idea that this is a decision only for the private shareholders. It is a decision that affects the public interest and, especially since recapitalisation, the public interest should be properly represented, which means that the UK Government must act. With all due respect to John Park, he did not mention that Gordon Brown has it in his power to stop the merger going ahead. There are three possible scenarios for the future of HBOS. One is to allow the merger to go ahead, which is the worst possible scenario from the point of view of competition, and the impact on Scotland and on every high street the length and breadth of the UK. It is what the Labour and Tory parties have been arguing for this morning. Many of Mr McLetchie's constituents will be directly affected by the merger that he supports, so I hope that he can explain to them why he did not defend them.

I do not have time, unfortunately. The second scenario is for someone from outside the UK to come in and take over HBOS, which would be better than the first scenario. Coming from outside the UK, the chances are that they would keep HBOS's headquarters in Edinburgh. Not only that, but by taking over HBOS entirely, or a bit of HBOS—particularly the "BOS" bit—they would reinforce those headquarters. I and many others have been working towards that solution. We have said from the beginning that if there is to be a takeover, it would be better to have a takeover from outside the UK, from an institution that does not have its headquarters in London. The third, probably optimal, solution is to allow HBOS to remain as an independent organisation. According to Hector Sants, the chief executive of the Financial Services Authority, that is a perfectly workable solution. The decision on the merger lies with Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling. Every unnecessary P45 that is issued as a result of the merger will have their signatures on it, as well as those of their Tory poodles.

Is the member aware that this morning an eight-person senior management team for the merged organisation was announced? Only one member of the team is from HBOS and all will be based in London—not one will be based in Edinburgh.

I bring more good news to the First Minister on that front. This morning, Labour-led Falkirk Council confirmed that the Scottish Government has made the money available without cutting any other service.

Does the First Minister realise that North Lanarkshire Council failed to count its houses properly and underestimated its council tax revenue by £4 million, which would pay for free school meals in Lanarkshire for four years?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is satisfied with the independence and robustness of school inspections by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education. (S3O-4552)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her comprehensive reply but draw her attention to the recent inspection of John Paul II primary school in Viewpark, Uddingston. Only 36 per cent of parents were invited to reply to a questionnaire, and only 16 per cent did so, which means that 84 per cent did not reply. The Scottish Public Services Ombudsman's recent report on the headteacher's activities and the complaints by parents that were brought to the inspectorate's attention were ignored. Will the cabinet secretary ask the inspectorate to revisit that inspection and take those factors into account?

I thank the member for giving me another opportunity. The point is simply that, if the Bank of England had pumped in the liquidity on Monday instead of Friday, HBOS would still have been with us, without the threat of merger.

Will the member give way?

With all due respect to the member, the figure would have been entirely different depending on which day the liquidity was pumped in. If it had been pumped in on the Monday, the  bank might not have needed as much as on the Thursday.

In the past three days, I have talked to several senior bankers in Scotland who, almost to a person, have told me the same thing: that we should not be in the present situation in the first place. I do not want to dwell on this, because we need to look forward rather than backward, but they highlight the fact that, had sufficient liquidity been available at the beginning of last week through the Bank of England's special liquidity scheme—not just to HBOS, but to other banks—we would not be in the position that we are in today.

I do not have time, I am afraid. It was important for the Bank of England to fulfil its full role as a central bank but, with all due respect, it was too slow off the mark. However, we are where we are, so we must look forward and decide how to deal with the situation in which we find ourselves. I agree with Annabel Goldie that the next two or three months will be absolutely critical for HBOS, because the merger is not yet a fact. That means that HBOS will, at least for the time being, continue to trade as a separate entity, and that its shares will continue to be traded on the stock market as those of a separate entity. It is therefore important that everything possible be done to ensure that nobody, either in Government or in the banking sector, does anything that could in any way further undermine the situation. The deal on the merger with Lloyds TSB is the only deal on the table, but it is critical that we all back the efforts of the Parliament, the Scottish Government and the First Minister to ensure that Scotland gets the best possible deal if the merger becomes consummated when the shareholders vote in two or three months. Let us be clear that a lot of water has to flow under the bridge before the shareholders get to vote, and that they must approve the merger deal by 75 per cent of them voting for it. It is already clear that, although some institutional investors initially welcomed the proposed merger, they have concerns. Furthermore, the suspension of the competition  rules has to go through the House of Commons, and there is always the possibility of a legal challenge from other sources to the suspension of those rules. We must ensure that we get the best deal for Scotland if the merger is consummated, but there is a possibility—only an outside one—that someone else will come in with a rival bid for HBOS or with alternative proposals, along the lines of, or as a variation on, those that were outlined this morning by Sir Donald MacKay in an article in The Scotsman . When a bid is made by one company, particularly at a low price, it is always possible for another company, spotting what it perceives to be a bargain, to make an alternative offer. That has happened before. Irrespective of who ends up owning HBOS, there is no doubt that five issues need to be addressed as we move on. There is an issue about the spivs and the speculators. If members do not believe me, I advise them to listen to what Gordon Brown said to the BBC on Sunday when he highlighted the issue of the irresponsible dealing in pension stocks that went on last week and for weeks beforehand. We have to deal with the failure of regulation, not just of short selling but of, for example, the 10,000 hedge funds operating in the City of London that are barely regulated. The FSA needs to be overhauled and to have its powers enhanced. The Bank of England failed to act quickly—that, too, needs to be addressed. There is also an issue around funding through wholesale finance at a time when there is a credit crunch and practically no interbank lending. That requires study and resolution for the future. Finally, there is an issue about the merger process and decision making to see whether they can be done much better and more efficiently in the future. We have to address all those issues, but the overriding concern is not to make petty party points. We must instead ensure that Scotland gets the best deal for our people, pensioners, depositors and shareholders.

In the light of the First Minister's reply to Annabel Goldie regarding the headquarters of the new merged company, will he ensure, in his discussions with the chairman of the new company, that the commitments that were made at the time of the previous merger in respect of headquarters functions for HBOS on the Mound are maintained during this merger, and that the headquarters operations that are currently functioning on the Mound are at least maintained, if not expanded?

I am the deputy convener of the European and External Relations Committee and, in winding up the  debate on behalf of the committee, I shall be my usual consensual self. Although there may be differences of detail among us, members of this chamber are totally united in believing in our need to be able to make a contribution—as a Government and as a Parliament—to international development. I commend Jack McConnell on his work in setting up the Malawi project and—as Michael Matheson pointed out—on his defying people from other places who would rather that we were not involved in this kind of activity. I also commend the Government—Linda Fabiani, Alex Salmond and others—on doubling the budget allocated to international development. The budget is modest in the international context, but it nevertheless sends out a clear signal—not just from the Scottish Parliament but, more important, from the Scottish people—that we are keen to do what we can, whenever and wherever we can, to help relieve poverty in the international community. I begin by placing in context the committee's report and the committee's role in international development. The first thing to understand is the global scale of the challenge. We all know the figures on international poverty, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. We also know about poverty in South America, in Asia, including the Indian sub-continent, and in many other parts of the world. We must consider not only poverty but its consequences. AIDS has been mentioned, but we can also consider many diseases that can be cured, such as tuberculosis. Far too many children are dying of TB—a disease long since wiped off the map of this country. Across the world, many children have no educational opportunities, and rates of infant mortality are high. Although we have made substantial progress in recent years, certain events make the future challenge even greater. Two of those events are population explosion and climate change. The population of Egypt is growing by a million every year. We do not often think of countries such as Egypt when we think of poverty, but the poverty figures for Egypt are not that much better than those for many other African countries that receive aid. The real irony of world climate change is that the people who will suffer the most from its impact are those who have contributed the least to its cause. The debate has been primarily about aid, but we should not forget the importance of trade. The European Union has estimated that a 1 per cent improvement in the terms of trade between Africa  and Europe would benefit the African economy more than all the aid that Europe—both as the EU and as individual countries—currently gives to Africa every year. The collapse of the Doha round of trade talks is more detrimental to the interests of people in Africa than it is to the interests of people in Europe. As members have said, although many promises were made at the Gleneagles summit, particularly on the millennium development goals, many countries that signed up to the agreement at Gleneagles have failed to deliver on their promises. It is fair to say that the UK Government is not one of those countries and has been exemplary in following up the Gleneagles agreement. Scotland has a long history of showing concern for our fellow human beings. I think that all members support Rabbie's mantra: "That Man to Man the warld o'er, Shall brothers be for a' that." Members have talked about David Livingstone's contribution, in particular to Malawi and the countries that surround it. In considering a way forward for Scotland, the committee wanted to get across three or four key themes. First, because we are dealing with a small amount of money, our role should be to add value to international development where we can, not to compete with or cut across what DFID or anyone else is doing, as Linda Fabiani said. We should work in partnership and collaboration with DFID, aid agencies and international bodies. A budget of £8 million—or £9 million when we reach that figure—represents a drop in the ocean compared with DFID's budget, let alone the global budget for international aid. It would be counterproductive to try to use our budget other than to add value to work that is going on. Secondly, the committee grappled with what we should do with the money: should we try to spread the jam more thinly across a bigger piece of bread or should we focus on a particular geographic area or on sectors such as education and health? We recommended geographic and thematic focus, given the amount of money in the budget. There has been a debate about whether we should focus on wider sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian sub-continent or whether our focus should be narrower. Our view was that a policy of putting money exclusively into Malawi will benefit neighbouring countries, because Malawi does not have closed borders. We should more proactively help such countries, as part of our contribution, but it would be absurd to try to focus on the rest of Africa, wider Asia or the Americas, given the resources that we have.  Thirdly, as members have said, the issue is not just how we use the money that we have set aside but how we can use wider resources in Scotland, in particular human resources, to make a greater contribution. We can punch above our weight. For example, the youth enterprise programme that is starting up in Malawi used about £68,000 of public money from the Scottish Government's fund to leverage in substantially more money and—perhaps more important—expertise from the business community in Scotland, with a view to setting up in Malawi the equivalent of the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. That is a good example of how we can get a much bigger bang for the buck. There is always a dilemma in international development policy: should we put our resources into the immediate crises, such as a tsunami, or into long-term growth, particularly economic and agricultural development? The answer is not an either/or; we have to do both. When there is a humanitarian crisis, we must be able to play our part in relieving and ameliorating the situation. Simultaneously, we have to keep our eye on the long-term ball, which is to make the Malawis of this world economically proficient and able to feed their own people, to play their part in international trade and the international community and to ensure that their children do not die needlessly at the age of three, four or five. At the end of the day, that is what it is all about.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many renewable energy projects have been the subject of an objection to the relevant planning application by Scottish Natural Heritage in each of the last three years. (S3O-4146)

I draw the minister's attention to the Bankend Rig wind farm project in South Lanarkshire, where SNH has taken up to two years to respond one way or the other. Will ministers seriously consider placing a deadline on SNH for turning around decisions on such matters, so that it can join the rest of the Government machine in promoting renewable energy rather than acting as a hindrance?

Does the First Minister agree that, in looking at the policy, a proper balance should be struck between the rights of under-21-year-olds and the rights of people who have suffered in the past from antisocial behaviour and who have benefited from the reduction in antisocial behaviour in their area? [ Interruption. ]

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to two of the downsides of the Lib-Lab PFI: the imposition of car parking charges for sick people in, and visitors to, PFI hospitals; and excessive charges for, and restrictions to, out-of-hours use of PFI schools. Will he give us an undertaking that, under the new form of funding, such charges will no longer be permissible?

The Government has announced one of the most substantive legislative programmes that Scotland has had in the past 30 years. I welcome in particular the proposed abolition of the council tax  and the additional support for learning bill, which will rectify many of the significant deficiencies in the current legislation. As the First Minister rightly said, our number 1 priority has to be the economy—that is where I agree with Johann Lamont. Although I would not copy her on anything else, I agree that economic growth and social justice, which go hand in hand, are our number 1 priorities, as has been spelled out by the First Minister and the Government day in, day out in the past year. If we look at what has happened over the past year, during which inflation has more than doubled in the official figures and the real level of inflation for pensioners—which is nearer 10 per cent than 5 per cent—is taken into account, it is cause for immediate worry. So, too, are the increases in petrol prices at 22 per cent and diesel at 38 per cent. Energy prices are already up by 38 per cent and are rising further, and weekly grocery bills have gone up by 23 per cent in the past year. We have heard from Gordon Brown over the past 10 years that he did not want boom and bust. What we have had is Brown and bust—the UK economy is nearly bust now. The economic situation that we face has demonstrated two things in Scotland. First are the importance and benefits of having a Scottish Government that will make maximum imaginative use of our limited powers to influence the Scottish economy. Secondly, it has shown up that until this Parliament has sovereign powers over economic policy we will never realise the full potential of the Scottish economy or the Scottish people. We could debate forever how we got here. Every country is facing an element of global influence as a result of the international credit crunch. However, a large part of the problem in Britain is the making of Brown. The chickens are coming home to roost in terms of the real results of having him as Chancellor of the Exchequer for 10 years and Prime Minister for one. We saw yesterday the limits of his Government's ambitions, when it announced a programme of activity that comes nowhere near matching the scale of the challenge that faces the UK economy. Indeed, some of the measures that were announced yesterday will not be implemented until April 2009, while we face a situation in which families require immediate substantive action on the right scale to deal with the problems that they face. That is why we have called, rightly, for a reflationary policy to expand the UK economy by £30 billion a year, about £3 billion of which would come into Scotland to deal with the economic situation in which we find ourselves. Part of that programme should be giving Scotland our fair share of our oil money to invest in social housing, infrastructure, new jobs and new industry.  The other thing we need—I hope that we will get it—is immediate help for pensioners and people on low and fixed incomes to deal with their fuel bills. We need action on two levels: first, to deal with the energy companies and the excessive prices that they are now charging, not to mention the cowboy activities that were exposed by The Sunday Times last Sunday; and secondly, a substantial increase in the winter fuel allowance to ensure that our pensioners can see through this winter without—literally, in some cases—freezing to death. That is what we would be doing if we had the power to do it. The great tragedy is that the current situation demonstrates the link between the constitution, the economy and social justice. If we had the constitutional powers to do it, we could grow the Scottish economy and deliver real social justice for our people.

In welcoming the settlement of the Shell oil tanker drivers' dispute since my question was framed, I ask the First Minister what contingency plans are in place to deal with the consequences of any possible future disruption.

I thank the First Minister for that detailed reply. For the longer term, given that we have had two disruptions to oil supplies recently, are there any lessons to be learned on how the companies and employees might settle their disputes before they reach the point that they reached on both those occasions?

Is there a question?

Not true.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Not at all. Will the member confirm that, according to its evidence to the Finance Committee, the Liberal Argyll and Bute Council decided to go down the NPD road after examining the costs of PFI and concluding that, despite what Labour members have said, NPD was a less expensive model?

Will the member give way?

I find it strange that Mr McArthur puts so much stress on the Forth road bridge. When his colleague Tavish Scott was Minister for Transport—and Mr McArthur was a special adviser—in the previous Administration, we got no commitment to any Forth crossing during eight years. The Liberal Democrats should look in the mirror.

I will in a wee minute—I will give you time to recover.

Absolutely—I apologise. I should address Mr McArthur through you, Presiding Officer. I will give him time to recover. I will start on a consensual point, as usual. We all agree that major investment in Scotland's infrastructure is a prerequisite to achieving our key objective of boosting economic growth, and to ensuring that we have a smart, successful Scotland and that we are a competitor in tomorrow's world. We recognise that 10 per cent of the Scottish Government's budget for the next four years is already allocated to capital investment. That 10 per cent, however, is not enough in itself. We need funding above and beyond that, and the question in this debate is how best to fund additional capital investment above and beyond that which has been committed from the Government's revenue. Iain Gray's speech highlighted the intellectual vacuum at the heart of new Labour. I will consider the various models for borrowing money for capital projects in the public sector, starting with the model that has been around the longest: the Public Works Loans Board.  The Public Works Loans Board borrows private money on behalf of the Government to fund capital projects. It has done that for more than 200 years and will no doubt continue to do it for another 200 years. Nobody in the Scottish National Party—or, I suspect, in any other party—has any objection to the fact that the board goes to the market to raise the money. The important point is that it raises that money on the basis of value for money for the taxpayer, paying the minimum amount, not the kind of return that has been paid on the Edinburgh royal infirmary project, for example, in which private equity of £500,000 produced a return of £168 million for the equity holders. That cannot be called value for money for the taxpayer; it is simply profiteering at the taxpayer's expense.

I always take people in turn, so I must let Mr McArthur in first.

We have clarity and will get clarity. More important, we will get a bridge. We would never have had a bridge had we waited for the Lib-Lab pact to deliver it. If Scotland and the Scottish Parliament had Scotland's share of Scotland's oil, we would be able to build as many bridges as we like over the Forth. That is why are having the debate. Members might have seen a programme on the BBC last night that highlighted the fact that £230 billion-worth of revenue from North Sea oil has gone into the United Kingdom Treasury in the past 30 years. Even under the Liberal Democrat policy of sharing that revenue across the UK for investment in capital projects—a good Liberal Democrat policy—we in Scotland would have been far better off today than we are. We would not have needed to entertain PFI, PPP or anything else because we would have been able to fund our infrastructure almost entirely from oil revenues.

The great tragedy for Scotland is that we have to borrow money through PFI, but we would not need to do so if we had control over our own resources. I had much more to say but, unfortunately, I have run out of time. [ Applause. ] Well, I have time enough to say that the difference between the Scottish futures trust and the Lib-Lab PFI or PPP—or any other name that we want to give it— is that, with the Scottish futures trust, we will deliver infrastructure projects that are value for money. That is why the Tories can support us today. We are not in favour of excess profits; we are in favour reasonable profits in return for a good job well done.

Does the member agree that the key issue is excessive profit? Even under the traditional method of the Public Works Loan Board, the people lending the money still make a profit, but they do not make an excessive profit and they provide value to the taxpayer.

Under the Scottish futures trust, will there be no repetition of the extortionate profits that were made under Labour's PFI? At Hairmyres hospital, in return for £100 equity, dividends of £89 million were paid out. There was also extortionate profit on refinancing. Will the cabinet secretary guarantee that, under the Scottish futures trust, we will never see a repeat of that daylight robbery of the taxpayer? [ Interruption. ]

I hear what the member says, but is it not also the case that, in a supply-driven strategy, we end up with, for example, far too many lawyers who cannot get a traineeship?

Again, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report from four years ago specifically recommended that modern apprenticeships should not be restricted to SVQs but should include City and Guilds qualifications and other qualifications. That recommendation was specifically rejected by the then Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Jim Wallace.

We should not take a narrow view of skills but look at the Government's total skills strategy. For example, the work that it is doing to expand the number of pre-school nursery places by 50 per cent is part of a skills strategy because, as we know, the more children who start earlier with pre-school education, the greater the number who are likely to end up in higher and further education.

I will give way in a minute. I ask Rhona Brankin to give me a minute to get into my speech. We should not think of skills only in terms of modern apprenticeships, important though they are. For example, the proposals in the consultation document on the reforms to secondary education—particularly those for a baccalaureate—could have a huge impact on how we manage not only secondary education but the transition from secondary to tertiary education. Professor Hamnett, the principal of the University of Strathclyde, is on record as saying that one way to increase flexibility and participation rates in higher education—the universities—is to introduce a baccalaureate-type system in secondary education. The creation of Skills Development Scotland, which was foreshadowed in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report four years ago, is of major significance. It is more than a bureaucratic restructuring.

In a moment. The careers service, which has been moved from pillar to post in the past 15 to 20 years, has now got a secure bolthole and is tied in with the rest of the skills strategy and with learndirect Scotland. That is another reform that was foreshadowed four years ago, in the report of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, of which I was the convener and Marilyn Livingstone—to whom I now give way—was the excellent deputy convener.

A number of parallel reviews and discussions are going on, such as the review of Scottish colleges and various other activities that are being undertaken by the funding council and directly by the Government. At the end of the day, they will all form part of the national education and skills strategy. We must address three or four major challenges and, where possible, we must reach agreement in this chamber about how we can best address them.

My time is restricted, and I have given way a lot.

God, they queue up. I said that I would give way to Rhona Brankin, and I always keep my promises.

I do not agree with that, so I will turn to the key challenges that face us. The first challenge involves the need to ensure that we have the education and skills base to facilitate the highest possible level of economic growth and development. Given that we have scarce resources, tough choices must be made about where we prioritise our skills resource.  One of the criticisms that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee made in its report three or four years ago was that the skills policy was totally divorced from the smart, successful Scotland policy. I believe that the cabinet secretary is right to try to tailor our skills strategy to the objectives of the economic growth and development strategy. That is why it is important to put more resources into key sectors that will drive the future growth of the economy. The second major challenge, which has hardly been mentioned by the Labour speakers this morning, is the question of access, particularly to higher education.

The statistics show—as was confirmed in a recent report by the funding council—that, in the past 40 years, we have not increased the chances of people from the lowest income groups going to university. We must meet that challenge, as well as the challenges of fairness and of people who are not in employment or education. Unfortunately, I do not have time to expand on those challenges, but I am willing to give a lesson on the issues at coffee time later on.

The member praises the figure of 34,000 modern apprenticeships. Is not the reality that less than 50 per cent of those who participated actually completed their apprenticeships?

Will the First Minister ensure that, under the Scottish futures trust, there will be no repeat of what happened at Hairmyres hospital, which is in Andy Kerr's constituency? [ Interruption. ]

There, the PFI company put in £100 million in equity and got in return £89 million in dividends. In other words, we got one hospital for the price of two.

Bill Aitken said that his one regret in supporting GHA was his agreement to the transfer of stock wholesale to a single organisation. If the member is in favour of the policy, does he think that the Treasury should be flexible enough to allow debt to be written off in return for transfer to numerous housing associations?

No wonder you are confused.

I believe that housing, along with health and education, must be up there at the top of the list of priorities for the Government and Parliament. Indeed, a successful housing policy is a prerequisite of achieving our objectives in health and education policy. From the beginning of the industrial revolution in the 19 th century to today, no Government has broken the back of the housing problem in Scotland. Even in the 1950s and 1960s, when up to 50,000 new houses were being built, Governments may have achieved the numbers, but they did not achieve the quality of build. Today—50 years later—we are still grappling with the lack of quality in much of that housing. We have inherited multistorey buildings and damp housing. Much of the blight that afflicts housing today is the result of a dash for numbers and not quality housing. We need to reconcile the need for a substantial increase in the number of houses that can be made available with the need for a dramatic improvement in housing quality that includes energy efficiency.

Absolutely. It is a significant part of this Government's policy, as outlined in its regeneration strategy and housing policy.

I need to continue. I welcome the Government's commitment to increase the house building rate in Scotland by 40 per cent over the next few years. In many of the areas that I represent, including North Lanarkshire, the chances of someone getting a house are slim, particularly if they have special needs. People are in despair. It is almost impossible to guarantee that the many people who are desperately in need of a house will be able to get one. In Scotland, up to 230,000 people are on the waiting list for rented housing and yet we are building only 24,000 new houses. Even allowing for Patricia Ferguson's valid point about the need to make more use of existing property, the reality is that current supply is nowhere near to meeting the level of demand. I welcome the fact that a central plank of the Government's strategy is to increase substantially the number of new houses that are to be built in Scotland for sale and social housing.

I agree that there is a need to ensure that we meet the demand for social housing, and the minister intends to do that. The obsession with targets is a problem: very often, targets are used to distort policy. The key thing for the Government to do is to provide the level of social housing for first-time buyers and the rented sector that is required to meet social and economic demand. The strategy that the minister has outlined, both in "Firm Foundations" and in his speech this morning, satisfies that requirement. Over a number of years, I have—undoubtedly and rightly—stated my belief about the financial black hole in the funding of second-stage transfer. In reports that were commissioned by GHA and the previous Executive, independent consultants have estimated the shortfall to be anywhere between £200 million and £500 million. The major debate between GHA and the housing associations in Glasgow on the methodologies that they are employing to estimate the real cost of second-stage transfer is clear to see. I welcome the minister's announcement that he is asking the independent regulator to assess the Mazars report. I say to him that, once that assessment is available, he should take a page out of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's book and appoint an independent scrutiny panel, as she did in resolving the issues around the closure of the accident and emergency units. Once we have the regulator's report, the logical next step will be to have the equivalent of an independent scrutiny panel. We need a panel that will listen to both sides, examine professionally the methodologies that both sides applied and come up with a set of firm recommendations for the way forward. I appeal to both sides—GHA and the housing associations—to agree to accept the recommendations of such a panel. GHA was a costly mistake, but we are where we are and we are all keen to move forward to second-stage transfer, so the minister should consider now how we should act on the report from the independent regulator, with a view to reaching a firm and satisfactory conclusion to an on-going problem.

Will the member take an intervention?

Absolutely. I would be the first to say that Lloyd George's 1909 budget was excellent for Scotland.

I find it strange that Mr Gray still talks about fuel poverty, 10 years after the election of a Labour Government in oil-rich Scotland. That is a damnation of Labour's record. He says that we will hear from Jackie Baillie on the whisky industry. We have already heard from Jackie Baillie on the whisky industry. She lodged a motion in March 2006, and again in March 2007, welcoming the freeze on whisky duty. However, there was no motion in March 2008. Let us remind ourselves what she put in her motion in 2006. The motion welcomes a freeze in whisky duty, and "considers this to be a progressive move which helps support the industry's competitiveness and productivity; notes that a fairer alcohol duty regime helps support a key British industry in its home market and sends a message of tax fairness overseas, as distillers look to develop new opportunities in emerging markets such as China, and congratulates the Labour Government on maintaining this freeze on duty". I presume, now that Labour has unfrozen the freeze, that all of that no longer stands.

Yes, because we lodged our own motion at the time. I note that Pauline McNeill and Ken Macintosh both signed Jackie Baillie's motion, but that Mr Kerr, of course, did not. Any budget has to be measured on two key criteria—growth, and poverty and what we do about it. I am sorry to say that the 2008 budget from Mr Darling fails on both counts. Let us consider the impact of the UK budget on growth, jobs and investment in the Scottish economy. As Mr Swinney quite rightly said, the impact on small companies—which are the backbone of the Scottish economy—will be adverse, because the corporation tax that small companies pay will be increased. At a time when the tax rate for Shell and BP will be reduced from 30 per cent to 28 per cent, the tax on small businesses will increase from the small business rate of 19 per cent, initially to 21 per cent. It is surely perverse that when companies such as Shell and BP are making record profits on the back of record oil prices, we are imposing additional taxation on the companies that make up  the backbone of both the Scottish and British economies. Let us consider oil and an issue that is much derided by the unionist parties. We may be at or near the peak of oil production in the North Sea, but we are nowhere near the peak of revenues. Indeed, some estimates suggest that the price of oil could go up to $200 a barrel. That will result in a huge revenue bonanza for the UK Treasury, but it should come to a Scottish treasury.

I will in a minute, but I add that we have not yet taken into account all the oil that is still to be taken out on the Atlantic side, outwith the North Sea fields. We should compare how we are being denuded of our oil revenues with how we are subsidising huge investment in the south-east of England. For example, as a public expenditure analysis by the UK Government shows, we in Scotland make a net contribution of more than £500 million a year to the cost of running UK departments. If that money were spent in Scotland, it could, with the multiplier effect, add well over £1 billion a year to the gross domestic product of the Scottish economy. If we consider just three projects in the south-east—the Olympics, London crossrail and the Channel link—we see that investment from the public sector totals around £40 billion. I do not begrudge investment by people in the south-east, but it is ridiculous that that huge investment is going into the south-east when we are suffering the lowest ever revenue grant for vital services from Westminster, here in this Scottish Parliament. Another issue is interest rates. If we were in charge of our own economic policy, our rates would be far lower than they are now, compared with the euro zone and the federal funds rate. In the United States of America, the fed rate is now 2 per cent, whereas here the interest rate is two and a half times that, at 5 per cent. A 5 per cent interest rate is not good for business or home owners, or for the Scottish or British economies. We can reach only one conclusion: the Brown bandwagon has come off its wheels, and the reality is that, far from having 10 years of success, we are now paying the price for Gordon Brown's failure as chancellor and as Prime Minister.

Does the member still hold the view that he expressed at the Confederation of British Industry dinner, that the increase in whisky duty was a bombshell and would not raise any additional revenue for Scotland or the Treasury?

Will the member tell us about the phone calls between Nicol Stephen and Tavish Scott about the Aberdeen western peripheral route?

At the start of her speech, Johann Lamont said that the issue was quality of judgment. I think that the quality of judgment of the unionist majority on the committee is what needs to be called into question. They are the people who have given an inquiry into child  poverty in Scotland a much lower priority than this spurious inquiry.

I will later. Placing child poverty as a poor secondary issue behind this blown-up nonsense is an incredible feat. As someone who served as a committee convener for eight years, I believe that this inquiry is in danger of bringing the whole committee system into disrepute. The role of a committee is to act as a watchdog on the Government, not to engage in a witch hunt, which is what this committee has very clearly done. Johann Lamont talks about the perception test. The perception out there in the country is that this inquiry is completely spurious, is a waste of time and presents entirely the wrong image about Scotland being open for international business. I find it amazing that the only charge that there seems to be against the First Minister is that he was acting in a "cavalier" fashion. Can anyone imagine Mike Rumbles accusing someone else of being cavalier? Andy Kerr was cavalier with life and limb when he wanted to close the accident and emergency departments at Monklands and Ayr. That was not just cavalier; it was reckless. Those members have a cheek accusing anyone of being cavalier.

I will take a short intervention from the cavalier Mr Rumbles.

My defence is that the First Minister has acted on behalf of his constituents as he is supposed to. According to the parliamentary code, all members are under the obligation to stand up for their constituents' interests. As the committee said, the First Minister has done nothing wrong under the law or the ministerial code. The only charge that I have heard today is that he has been cavalier.

I do not have time. As the cabinet secretary pointed out in his response to the committee, the report is full of inaccuracies.

The report says that the chief planner endorsed the suggestion that the development is not of national significance, which is a misinterpretation. Also, despite what the committee alleges, the chief planner did not say that the Menie estate application required "'one in a million' treatment". Those are just two examples. We heard my good friend Mary Scanlon say that the First Minister refused to talk to all the stakeholders, but the whole point is that the First Minister, acting as the MSP for the area, spoke to everyone who had a declared interest in the project. The Opposition goes on about access. If the First Minister was at the Scottish Trades Union Congress and happened to take the same position on an issue as the STUC did, would that make him cavalier or guilty of some misdemeanour? Let us look at the Lib-Lab planning record and at the article in the Sunday papers about a planning decision that was made by Johann Lamont when she was a minister. In order to defend a public-private partnership project, she rejected her officials' advice to call in the application—a very cavalier decision indeed. She then refused to release the information and even got to the point of going to the Court of Session to avoid transparency and to keep the matter secret. We will be taking no lessons from these unionist chancers on any aspect of the report, which is not worth the paper that it is written on. It is entirely a unionist plot to undermine the Scottish National Party Government. The reason why we are at 40 per cent in the polls and the Opposition is trailing is because the people know a scam when they see one, and this report is one.

The member said that the minister did not meet all parties who requested a meeting. Can she name a party that was not granted a meeting?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the performance of Historic Scotland. (S3O-2878)

I draw the minister's attention to the Rowallan development in an unemployment blackspot in East Ayrshire, where Historic Scotland has done severe damage to the fabric of  the old castle but is still holding up £60 million of development. It has employed what can only be called heavy-boot tactics in dealing with the developer. Will the minister try to resolve the situation, and will she introduce a policy for the disposal of properties in care?

Presiding Officer, I draw the First Minister's attention to the successful cross-party parliamentary delegation to the United States and Canada, which you led. In particular, I draw his attention to our key findings from Canada—from Toronto and Ottawa in particular. Enormous business opportunities are open to Scottish business in energy and life sciences, particularly in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario. However, given that our inheritance from the former Deputy First Minister was only one full-time person in SDI in Canada, will the First Minister consider resourcing SDI in Canada to ensure that we exploit all the huge business opportunities for Scotland there?

The First Minister mentioned yesterday's report from the FSA. I compare that report and the regulation of financial services in southern Ireland. Does he agree that Scotland could learn many lessons from southern Ireland and that when we get control of the regulation of financial services here we could use southern Ireland as a model for how to promote our industry?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has any plans to alter the date of the local government elections in Scotland. (S3F-619)

As the First Minister knows, the Gould report recommended, and—on 10 January—the Parliament approved, the decoupling of the elections. The Parliament agreed with the Gould report's recommendation that executive and legislative powers over electoral law, including that relating to local government, should be transferred from Westminster to the Parliament. What progress has been made on electoral law in respect of local government elections?

We will not take any lessons on education policy or social justice from the Labour Party—particularly not from Cathy Jamieson. Between 2003 and 2006 alone, Labour and the Liberal Democrats closed 33 schools throughout Scotland, six of which were personally authorised by Cathy Jamieson as the  Minister for Education and Young People—a minister for education without schools. As far as East Ayrshire is concerned, we heard nothing from Cathy Jamieson or any Labour councillor or representative when we led the campaign to save St Paul's primary school in Hurlford. She is the same member who sat in the Cabinet that planned to shut Ayr hospital's accident and emergency unit, so we will not take any lessons from her. I am sure that members agree that the key component of educational performance is how well off pupils are, not only in school but at home. After 10 years of Labour government, the folk in the Doon valley, in Girvan and in Maybole are living in relatively more poverty, not less. If anything damages educational performance, it is the concentration of poverty and deprivation. Labour looks after its big pals in the city.

Sit down. I will not listen to more rubbish—I have heard enough. Members should consider the money that has been wasted on PFI. We understand that the Tories want to make a buck or two out of education and hospitals, but Labour and the Liberal Democrats have wasted millions. Not only have they done so over the past eight years, but they have saddled future generations with millions of pounds of debt through profiteering PFI schemes that are being used to finance schools and hospitals. If we did not have PFI, we would have £100 million extra to spend on education in Scotland this year, next year and every year hence. We will not take any lessons from Labour. It is no wonder that it is languishing at 27 per cent in the polls. People recognise the sheer hypocrisy of Labour's position. It has presided over the situation for the past 10 years. Labour members are merely playing politics with the schools of ambition programme: they do not really care about the folk involved. They have demonstrated in the past 10 years that they do not care about socialist principles. Cathy Jamieson remained a member of a Cabinet that supported the Iraq war. We have spent £4.5 billion as a nation on the Iraq war; Scotland's share is £400 million. How many schools of ambition could have been built with £400 million? The fact is that it is right for a Government to have the ambition to make every school in Scotland a school of ambition. With the changes that we are making—de-ring fencing, allowing local authorities to keep the money from efficiency savings for reinvestment in front-line services, and  making savings by getting rid of the hated PFI—we will ensure that the money is available.

They are shouting from the unionist benches, "Where is the money?" What about giving the Parliament our share of our oil money? No child in Scotland would have to worry about ambition.

Does the member accept that the increase in the allowance was 2.5 per cent compared with an increase in energy prices of around 40 per cent?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the minister agree that the UK Government should earmark the additional revenues that result from higher energy and oil prices to tackle fuel poverty?

I agree with every word that the member has said so far. Does he agree that the measures announced yesterday in the chancellor's budget are wholly inadequate for dealing with the current crisis?

Does the member agree that the burden of debt on students was created by the Labour Government between 1997 and today? Student debt prior to the election of Tony Blair's Government was never a big issue—it was Labour that plunged students into dire poverty.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the health secretary confirm that her decision is based on recent research, unlike that of her predecessor, which was based on 20-year-old United States research that was totally out of date and irrelevant to the needs of Lanarkshire? Does the health secretary agree that the difference between the decision that she has confirmed today and the decision of her predecessor is that somebody who has a heart attack in Monklands will be able to go to Monklands accident and emergency unit, unless there is a specialist requirement—[ Interruption. ]

That is unlike the decision of the cabinet secretary's predecessor, under which people may have had to go to Glasgow or, in some cases, to Dundee for treatment.

Does the member not think that it would be much better to have a commission rather than a review on this matter? [ Laughter. ]

In all the budget debates, the Liberal Democrats have not explained why they did not propose any amendment on additional funding for universities despite the promises of Tavish Scott's deputy leader, Nicol Stephen.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does it follow that Glasgow Labour's council tax freeze means that money will be given to the rich and taken from the poor?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on another successful Up-Helly-Aa celebration in Shetland. Last year, he was successful as a fighting Norseman, and this year, according to Sunday newspaper reports, he was equally successful in playing the back end of a camel. All that I can say after his speech is that the camel must still be stuck in the desert. His speech contained not one new idea and not one scintilla of congratulation on Mr Swinney's achievements or the announcements that he made today. Following my speech two weeks ago at stage 1 of the budget bill, Ross Finnie accused me of hyperbole because I spelt out the consequences of voting down the budget. It is no exaggeration to say that the consequences would be very serious indeed. Mr Swinney mentioned that one of the consequences would be a 22 per cent increase in council tax. Another consequence is that there would not be an extra 300 police on the beat in Scotland next year.

One thing we know is that Wendy Alexander will not be the successor First Minister. We also know that a big fight is already going on in the Labour Party about the succession. Indeed,  Mr Kerr was quoted last week as saying that he is prepared to take over tomorrow. My question to Mr Kerr is, why wait until tomorrow? We hear from Mr Mike Rumbles that it will not be a serious proposition if the budget is defeated. If the budget is defeated, there will be no new dental school in Aberdeen. Does Mr Rumbles want to tell his constituents that? Does he want to tell them that prescription charges will not be abolished?

It is a lot better than what was produced in eight years of a Lib-Lab pact—that is for sure. If the budget was defeated, the abolition of bridge tolls would not be funded, not to mention all the other things that we would lose if the budget goes down. Pauline McNeill was critical of our amendment on the police. The difference between our amendment and Labour's proposal is that Labour sought to fund the proposal by reducing the budget for drug enforcement and counter-terrorism. That would be not just irresponsible but highly dangerous. The difference between Labour and the SNP is that we are prudent in our amendments. Unlike the Labour Party, we have thought through how to fund the changes that we propose. Labour members have criticised the council tax freeze. They have been scaremongering throughout Scotland—even George Foulkes has done so in the House of Lords—but yesterday the Glasgow City Council Labour group was happy to announce that it would freeze the council tax in Glasgow for the third year running. If it is okay for Labour to freeze the council tax in Glasgow, why is it not all right for us to freeze it in the rest of Scotland? Again, the Labour Party has double standards. Labour members have accused us of being in a right-wing conspiracy with the Tories. All I will say about that is that Mrs Thatcher was not invited to tea at Bute house—she was invited to tea at 10 Downing Street by Gordon Brown. Labour talks about social justice. Two weeks ago, I asked why, if that party's members were not shedding crocodile tears about social justice, they did not stop raiding Scottish charities to the tune of £184 million. We are talking about a direct attack on the poor and vulnerable in Scotland over the next few years. Now Labour even has a minister in London talking about social justice. That minister is saying, "If you can't find a job, you're going to  lose your council house." Even Margaret Thatcher would not have been so right-wing. The budget has shown up the Labour Opposition for the sham that it is and the Liberal Democrats for the poor Opposition that they are, but much more important than that, it has shown what we are capable of in Scotland. It has shown that we can devise a budget that will cut taxes, boost spending, and prioritise the vulnerable, the weak, the unemployed and our small business people. It is a budget to be proud of.

Will Iain Gray give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

To Margaret Curran, I point out that the difference between the SNP and the Labour Party is that the Labour Party pays lip service to social justice, whereas we are taking practical measures to achieve it. Margaret Curran referred to tax cuts. She seems to be critical of the council tax freeze, which will help many thousands of ordinary families in Scotland, but she did not say anything about the reduction in capital gains tax from 40 to 18 per cent, which will primarily benefit the fat cats in the City of London. Labour has double standards. If Margaret Curran cares about social justice, why did she vote against a budget that included the abolition of prescription charges? If the vote against the budget had been carried, council taxes would have increased by 22 per cent, which would have driven many people in Scotland into poverty. Margaret Curran said that the SNP will drop the use of absolute and relative measurements of poverty. I want to correct her on that. I, too, was at the Burns supper last night that was mentioned, and I know my Burns. He said: "facts are chiels that winna ding". Margaret Curran should read paragraphs 31 and 32 of the discussion paper, in which we make it absolutely clear that we will continue to use the standard poverty measures to measure year-on-year progress.

I do not have enough time, unfortunately. Broadly speaking, poverty is heavily concentrated in five groups in our society. There is child poverty, and poverty among disabled people, which often does not receive the attention that it merits.

I do not have enough time. There is pensioner poverty, and poverty among people in work. The most recent reports show that 50 per cent of people of working age who are classified as being in poverty are in employment. Many people live in poverty as a result of low pay.

I do not have enough time.  Finally, it is obvious that unemployed people often live in poverty. Poverty has different aspects. Fuel poverty is a major form of poverty in Scotland. Only a few years ago, it looked like we might begin to see the end of fuel poverty in Scotland by around 2016, but the recent increases in energy prices have set back our ability to achieve that objective in a short timeframe. I hope that the UK Government will consider rechannelling the extra £175 million of VAT receipts that the Treasury will receive next year as a result of the increases in energy prices to deal with fuel poverty both north and south of the border. There is a link between the Parliament's powers and our ability to deal with the fundamental causes of poverty. Some aspects of the UK tax system contribute to inequality and unfairness. Employees' national insurance contributions are an example. A low earner contributes 11 per cent of their total income in national insurance contributions, but a person who earns £100,000 a year makes national insurance contributions of around 6 per cent of their total wage. That is not fair. Removing such unfairness would help to tackle the escalation of inequality in our society. Many of the weapons that are available to the devolved Government have been mentioned. In that context, I congratulate Ross Finnie on suggesting practical and useful ideas about what the Parliament can do. The three major causes of poverty in our society are unemployment, low pay and bad housing. The Government's commitment to increase the number of houses that are built from 24,000 to 35,000 units a year will contribute greatly towards alleviating poverty in Scotland. Not only will that help to solve the housing problem, but it will create many more new jobs throughout Scotland.

We are taking many practical measures that are within our devolved powers, but we will not be able to solve poverty in Scotland until we have the freedom and the power in the Parliament to do so.

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to one of the budget priorities—that of reducing fuel poverty in Scotland—and point out to him that, as a result of the recent energy price increases, the additional VAT revenue obtained by the Treasury next year will be around £175 million. Will he urge the United Kingdom Government to use that money—and to give us our share of it—to address the increasing problem of fuel poverty that has resulted from the energy price increases?

Can I point out to—[ Interruption. ]

I point out to the First Minister that, after 10 years of Labour Governments in London and Edinburgh, the chances of a young person from a poor background in Scotland getting to university are no higher today than they were 10 years ago. I ask the First Minister whether the concordat will address Labour's miserable record on that issue.

Will the member take an intervention?

Andy Kerr is like the Liberal members in that he wants more information and transparency, but was he not one of the Cabinet ministers who suppressed the Howat report for six months?

Can the member tell us why, despite the promises, there have been no amendments from the Liberal Democrats on university funding or renewable energy?

Will the member give way?

I lived in America when Congress vetoed the President's budget. The consequences were horrendous: hundreds of thousands of people were laid off and tens of thousands of small businesses went to the wall. We should consider the consequences of voting down the budget today. Those who are thinking of doing so would vote down: the abolition of prescription charges; the first extra money in years for free personal care; reduced waiting times; capital investment in hospitals; new homes and regeneration; investment in the prevention of illness; the new Aberdeen dental school, as I would tell Mike Rumbles if he were in the chamber—

They would vote down extra teachers and investment in nursery education and in schools.

I will later. If the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party are irresponsible enough to vote down the budget, they will deserve the electoral consequences. I will deal first with Labour.

The key point is where the money would come from to fund all that. It would come from reducing the budget for counter-terrorism, from the budget for the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and from the budget for capital works.  Labour talks about the Government doing deals with the Tories. Will it deny that it tried to do a deal with the Tories? Labour's complaint is that the Tories didnae do a deal with it. The Labour Party has done a deal on the proposed constitutional commission, so it might as well do a deal on the budget as well. In his speech, Iain Gray made a lot of social justice. The Labour Party would have more credibility on social justice if last week the Labour Government had not passed a measure to rob Scottish charities of £184 million to pay for the London Olympics. We will not take any lessons about social justice from new Labour. I thought that one of the Labour members was going to intervene, but none of them wants to. To defend the £184 million—

Ross Finnie has intervened for Labour. [ Laughter. ]

No, I do not concede that. Voting down the budget would have horrendous consequences here in the same way as there were horrendous consequences in America. The two main criticisms in the Lib Dem amendment are that not enough information has been published. Ross Finnie and Tavish Scott were two of the guilty men who suppressed the Howat report for month upon month, and they have the cheek to call other people to account for not releasing enough information.

I have given way enough. Then they talk about broken promises. When he was on "Newsnight Scotland" one night, along with Iain Gray and Derek Brownlee, macho Tavish Scott said, "I am going to move an amendment to direct more money into renewable energy."

Where was macho Tavish's amendment? We have not seen it—although, to be fair, as Zsa Zsa Gabor said, men who claim to be macho usually haven't mucho. I will let Mr Scott intervene.

I have not counted them lately but one thing is absolutely clear: the Liberals say that our budget proposals are opaque, but if we look at the votes in the Finance Committee, we find that all the Liberals did was abstain. That is not opaque; it is just fake.

Will the member take an intervention?

On alternative proposals, I remind the member of the guarantee that Nicol Stephen gave on "The Politics Show" two months ago that the Liberal Democrats would lodge an amendment to restore some of the additional budget to the universities in Scotland. No such amendment has ever been lodged. Is that not a broken promise by the Liberal Democrats?

Answer the question!

Where is the amendment then?

If Iain Gray genuinely believes what he has just said, why did his colleagues on the Finance Committee not vote against the move to accelerate the cuts to business rates?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

That was only because I was running out of time. The member's interventions are always productive. How much additional money does the member want to give to the universities? What would he cut to fund that spending?

This morning, we have learned from members on the Labour benches that an intellectual vacuum now pervades new Labour in Scotland. During the summer, we were promised a swathe of new bills from the Labour Opposition, which would flood the Parliament with new and exciting proposals to implement Labour's manifesto commitments. In eight months, the party has produced one bill, on tanning. That is the sum total of its effort on that front.  During the summer, Labour put forward a whole range of proposals for amendments to the budget, but this morning we have not heard one substantive proposal or one new idea from members on the Labour benches. The party talks about social justice, but where are its proposals for additional expenditure on social justice? What does Labour want to spend more money on, and what will it cut in order to fund that expenditure?

I agree that more money should be spent on dealing with health inequality, and more money for that is already in the budget.

One way of dealing with health inequality is by making substantial additional investment in housing.

We have to deal with the causes of inequality, not just with the consequences.

Members should compare our proposals to build 35,000 new houses with the miserable 24,000 new houses built under the Lib-Lab pact—an increase of nearly 50 per cent.

I will let Iain Gray, in his frustration, come in at this point.

That is comparing apples with oranges. Iain Gray talked about our housing budget but compared it with Labour's money on housing and regeneration. Anyone who cannot see through that should not be a finance spokesman. A big race is going on in the Labour Party to see who will succeed Wendy.

After Iain Gray's contribution this morning, my money is on Malcolm Chisholm.  One thing that the Labour Party did not mention is that, since the summer, the price of oil has gone up to $100 a barrel. If we are talking about budget revision, fairness and the distribution of resources, we should say that we would have an additional £3 billion to spend in each of the next three years if we had control over our own money. The Labour Party has made a big thing about ring fencing, but the party does not understand two fundamental points about the removal of ring fencing. The first concerns a vote of confidence in local democracy. Every other major party in this chamber—the Tories and the Liberal Democrats as well as the SNP—has faith in local democracy. The Labour Party leadership wants to return to the Stalinist centralism that it has practised for the past 30 years.

No, I have taken enough interventions. The second point that the Labour Party does not understand relates to single outcome agreements. It has missed the point entirely. Single outcome agreements do not apply only to areas that were previously ring fenced; they apply to the whole scope of local government funding. We therefore now have a far better and more appropriate balance between local government and the Government, which allocates resources to local government. It should be noted that, like the universities, local government now has, over the three-year period, a higher share of total Scottish Government expenditure than it had under the previous Executive.

I do not have time for more interventions. We now have a proper balance between allocating resources from the centre and allowing people in local areas to decide how to spend their budget. If a local council wants to ring fence its funding internally, it is entitled to do so. If it wants to shift expenditure from one priority to another, it is entitled to do so. A council is best placed to know its community's priorities. Decisions should not come via some centralised diktat from Edinburgh. The logical conclusion of Labour's argument is that we should not just ring fence what was ring fenced but should ring fence all local government expenditure. Why do Labour members not totally destroy local democracy while they are it? That is the logic of their argument. That is why, on this budget, their arguments are vacuous and their intellect is a vacuum.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although the committee reports are still private, is not it the case that any party is free to put forward in the debate its own ideas, if it has any?

Can Iain Gray give us three examples of amendments that he will lodge and tell us where he will make cuts to fund the additional expenditure?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to rule 7.3.1 of the standing orders, which covers conduct in the chamber. It calls on all members to be "courteous and respectful" at all times. I would like to raise two points about the events at First Minister's questions today. The first is that, during her questions to the First Minister, Annabel Goldie stated that, on 3 December, the First Minister was accompanied by a Government special adviser in his meeting with the Trump Organization. That turns out not to be true. Therefore, I hope that Miss Goldie will take the opportunity to correct that assertion. [ Interruption. ]

Secondly, and much more seriously, in his questions to the First Minister, Nicol Stephen alleged that Aberdeenshire Council had to ask for the Trump representatives to leave the chief planner's room during a phone call last Thursday, implying that there was something improper in the chief planner's behaviour. This afternoon, the chief executive of Aberdeenshire Council, Alan Campbell, issued a press release in which he categorically states: "There was no question of the Trump organisation being with the chief planner at that time."

It is one thing for members to attack others in the chamber when they can reply, but to attack a civil servant and official, who does not have the right of reply, is unacceptable. [ Interruption. ]

I put it to you, Presiding Officer— [ Interruption. ]

Presiding Officer, I put it to you that, in the light of the press release from Aberdeenshire Council, which totally contradicts the allegations from Mr Stephen, he has breached rule 7.3.1. He has not been courteous or respectful and he should withdraw the allegation and apologise profusely to the chief planner.

I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on her statement. Those who founded the NHS 60 years ago would be proud of its content. In particular, they would be proud that, after eight years, we have, at last, a serious strategy for dealing with health inequality in Scotland. My question is on tackling health inequality and the transition from the Arbuthnott formula to the new NHS Scotland resource allocation committee funding regime, which we expect will come into being in 2009. I seek an assurance that boards such as NHS Lanarkshire will not lose moneys in the transition from Arbuthnott to NRAC.

Can I draw the First Minister's—[ Interruption. ] Presiding Officer, if Labour members listen, they will learn. Can I draw the First Minister's attention—[ Interruption. ]

For the third time, I draw the First Minister's attention to the evidence that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, led by Labour's Pat Watters, presented to the Finance Committee on Tuesday. COSLA confirmed that the council tax freeze will save the average family more than £70 in year 1 and more than £200 a year by the end of the three years.

Is it not the case that if the Labour leadership's attempt to sabotage the agreement with COSLA succeeded, average families would not benefit from that money?

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on travelling over 10 years from being anti-devolution to being pro-devolution. At that rate of travel, will she be in favour of independence in 10 years' time? As former minister Allan Stewart pointed out, independence is more logical than devolution.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During her questions to the First Minister, Wendy Alexander said that she  had checked with the Electoral Commission and found that I did not spend any money in the SNP leadership contest in 2004. The reason for that is that I was not a candidate for the leadership in 2004. [ Interruption. ]

For the record, I publicly backed Mr Salmond. I have no doubt that that was a major factor contributing to his success.

I remind the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that, contrary to what Mr McNulty said, one inquiry recommended taking criminal action against the officers concerned. When the cabinet secretary draws up the inquiry's remit, will he ensure that it does not make the same mistakes as the parliamentary inquiry and that it considers all the issues around the misidentification of the fingerprint?

Does the member accept that the route development fund in its present format cannot continue to exist because of European rules?

I welcome the general review that has been commissioned by the cabinet secretary, and I ask him whether it will consider best practice from elsewhere in Scotland and in the UK—best practice that we can learn from—on the transmission of information between different agencies.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's timetable is for implementing the replacement of council tax by a local income tax. (S3F-290) [ Interruption. ] If Labour members listen, they will learn.

I ask the First Minister whether the proposed local income tax will give Scotland the lowest effective rate of tax in the United Kingdom and what impact that will have on retaining and attracting new talent and new business to Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member has backtracked on the comments that he made on Sunday. Can he tell us about his policy—as opposed to that of his leader—on finding more money for renewable energy? What does he want us to cut to fund that?

Will the member give way?

Does the member support the Labour Party policy down south of university tuition fees of up to £3,000 and the possible lifting entirely of the cap on such fees?

I acknowledge Marilyn Livingstone's long-standing record of campaigning for more money for skills, but will she support the Lib Dem plan to find more money for the universities by mutualising Scottish Water?

First, I say to Iain Gray that if Scotland had been independent and John Swinney was the finance minister in an independent Scotland, John Swinney would not have made the fist of the banking system that Alistair Darling has made in the past two months or so. To be fair to Alistair Darling, perhaps he is missing his former dynamic adviser, Iain Gray, which is why he is making such a fist of it.  Iain Gray has a cheek to talk about young people who are not in employment, education or training when his Government has presided over the worst level of NEETs in Europe for 10 years.

He wouldnae take me, so I'm no taking him. Let me turn to the Liberal Democrats—better known as Wendy's poodles.

Wendy Alexander's poodles, then—they are still poodles, Presiding Officer. When John Swinney asked Liam McArthur about paying for the funding for the universities, he would not answer the question. However, on "The Politics Show" on Sunday, Tavish Scott's deputy leader, Nicol Stephen, said that the Liberal Democrats would give the universities every penny that they ask for. Maybe Nicol's nickel isnae worth a dime—who knows? He then said, when asked how he would fund that investment, that he would mutualise—that is, privatise—Scottish Water.

With respect to Tavish Scott, I heard the broadcast and heard Nicol Stephen say that he would mutualise Scottish Water. In my mind, mutualisation is equal to privatisation. In that regard, I wonder whether the Labour Party will tell us whether it will support its pals in the Liberal Democrats in that bid to mutualise Scottish Water. In any case, Nicol—and, by that, Presiding Officer, I mean Nicol Stephen, who was talking to Glenn Campbell—did not seem to realise that it is impossible to mutualise Scottish Water in a budget bill. Further, he did not mention the calculation—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I would have thought that the universities and Scottish Water would be central to the economic strategy of any Government. If Scottish Water were mutualised, £250 million could be taken from Scottish Water to give to the universities. However, if that were done, every pensioner in Scotland would be driven into dire poverty. Nicol Stephen did not tell us—and did not seem to realise—that on "Newsnight", three nights before he was speaking on Sunday, his leader, Tavish Scott, said that his priority in the budget changes was not the universities but giving more money to renewable energy. When he was pressed to tell us how much more money he wanted to give to renewable energy—which, to ensure that I stay within the terms of the motion, I point out is another essential part of the economy—he could not tell us. Further, when I asked him how he would fund that investment, he could not tell me. The Liberal Democrats are all over the place. They do not know what they want to do. They have not worked out their economic strategy for Scotland. Given that they were part of the eight years of failure that has just passed, that is not surprising. They still have not got a clue what they want to do. As John Swinney rightly said, we are facing the toughest financial settlement from Westminster since devolution. However, the irony of the situation is that the price of oil is heading towards $100 a barrel. That means another bonanza for the Treasury in London. It is a ridiculous situation for a nation such as Scotland to be in—to have to squeeze our spending to a rise of 1.4 per cent, when Norway's is rising by five times as much and when our people are producing the riches to fund all the infrastructure programmes in London and the south-east of England. It is high time that the unionist parties got their economic priorities right, like us, and started fighting for Scotland instead of their unionist pals south of the border.

rose—

I remind the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth of the old election song, "Things Can Only Get Better." Let me say that they just have. Things have just got much better for Scotland.  Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Pat Watters and his colleagues on signing an agreement that freezes council tax while bringing about a 13 per cent increase in the capital spend of local authorities? Finally, given that oil is now up to $100 a barrel, will the Scottish Government go back to Westminster to demand the rest of our oil money so that we can spend even more on not only meeting but exceeding our promises to the Scottish people?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for taking a quick intervention. He mentioned the contribution to yesterday's meeting of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee by the leader of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, but he forgot to mention the point that Jamie Hepburn made—that the leader of the fishermen told the committee that, since the SNP Government came to power,  London has listened to the fishermen for the first and only time.

Nothing illustrates better than the history of the fishing industry in Europe the need for Scotland to be independently represented at the top table. If we study the history of the Scottish fishing industry over the past 35 years, since Ted Heath threw away many of our fishing industry's rights and protections in return for very minor concessions, we see that, during the intervening period, the Scottish fishing industry has been the giveaway part of the negotiations by Westminster at every cut and turn. Fishing does not matter all that much in the English economy, but in the Scottish economy it is vital. It is a vital Scottish national interest, although it is not such a vital interest south of the border.

I will not give way just now. The result has been that, in the intervening 35 years, fishing—one of Scotland's key industries—has been the main area to suffer in negotiations in Europe.  Iain Smith and Malcolm Chisholm describe the issue of a seat at the top table as a nicety, but that nicety means that we get votes. If we have votes in Europe, we have power. If we have power, not only can we defend the fishing industry and other vital Scottish national interests, we can promote our interests as well as our wider view of how Europe and the wider world can develop. Let me give members a very good example of where the argument that the big countries in Europe decide matters falls down: who supported George Bush on Iraq and who did not. Tony Blair, the leader of one of the big four countries in Europe, was George Bush's biggest supporter, but he could never persuade the other member states to support and pursue Bush's policy in Iraq. That is a good example of why Malcolm Chisholm and Iain Smith were—as usual—talking nonsense when they said that only the big boys have any influence in Europe.

I will take an intervention from somebody who never talks nonsense: Mike Rumbles.

When we listen to the fishermen, I do not think that we find them thinking that Europe or the UK has been in the right position. We have a minister down in London who will not even answer a phone call from our Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on vital Scottish interests. When it comes to other areas of policy, many of the developments in Europe are vital to Scotland's economic interests. A seat at the table is not just a nicety. Malcolm Chisholm tries to rubbish people who say that the so-called reform treaty is the constitutional treaty by another name but, as Ted Brocklebank pointed out, the recent report by the House of Commons European Scrutiny Committee, which is chaired by Michael Connarty and has a Labour majority, stated that the reform treaty was "substantially equivalent to the Constitutional Treaty." It went on to say that it was "likely to be misleading" for the UK Government to claim that the treaty no longer had the characteristics of a  constitution and warned that the special UK opt-outs and protocols that the Government has secured to protect its so-called red lines may not prove effective in practice. It also criticised the secretive process by which the draft of the new treaty was compiled. Criticism of the process and substance of the so-called reform treaty is not confined to the SNP or Tories but is shared with many Labour MPs in the House of Commons. It is important that Scotland is at the heart of Europe. Many of the big decisions that were previously made in London are now made in Brussels but, until Scotland gets a seat at the top table as a member state with a vote and the power that goes with it, we will not be truly at the heart of Europe.

Will Ted Brocklebank take an intervention?

Can the member clarify the Tory position on the common fisheries policy? Is it still that Scotland should come out, or is it that Scotland should stay in?

What impact will the Westminster-imposed financial squeeze have on the money that will be available for local authority services? Now that the price of oil has reached $100 a barrel, will the SNP Government submit an additional request for our share of the oil money to help fund services in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

What representations did the member and his colleagues make to number 10 about bringing forward the comprehensive spending review?

Elaine Murray is the deputy convener of the Finance Committee, which had a meeting with John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, at the beginning of September. At that meeting, the cabinet secretary outlined his timetable and the process and procedures for the consideration of the forthcoming budget. At no time did the deputy convener or any other committee member—Labour or Liberal—raise any objections; indeed, they endorsed the cabinet secretary's proposals.  Therefore, how can they come to the chamber now trying to undermine what they agreed to at the beginning of September?

I have to laugh at the likes of Robert Brown, who was a minister in the previous Executive, which suppressed the Howat report for months. He and his colleagues now want a debate, but they would not have a debate on Howat and would not even publish the report. Now, they call for an open-ended debate on the Government's spending priorities. When we invited them to publish the Howat report, they refused to do so until after the election. Every Labour and Liberal member in the chamber endorsed that policy. They have a cheek preaching openness and transparency when what they did with the Howat report was reminiscent of the practices of the Kremlin in Moscow. I will not engage in hyperbole, but Labour and Liberal members are telling us that they want a debate on the responsibilities of every cabinet secretary, and that that was always intended. I have been a member of the Scottish Parliament since 1999—which is regrettable for some—and remember the first two comprehensive spending reviews. I remember that Donald's Cabinet had nine members, Henry's Cabinet had 10 members and Jack's Cabinet had 11 members, but I do not remember Labour and Liberal ministers proposing nine, 10 or 11 debates on each Cabinet member's responsibilities. What is good for the Lib-Lab goose is good enough for the SNP gander.

I will in a wee minute. Poor Jackie.

Jackie has fouled up again. The rumour is that Wendy is sending her to read the caterpillar book to find out whether she can improve her performance. She talks about consensus, but she did not even talk to the Tories about the draft of her motion—or did she? Did she try to stitch up a grubby deal? I sit next to the Greens in the Parliament so that they can keep an eye on me, and I can tell members that Jackie was parading on the floor last night trying to do a grubby deal with the Greens. It seems that the only deals that are not allowed are deals that do not involve the Labour Party. Word is that the Labour Party will need to move to new headquarters because of its financial crisis. Why does it not call its new headquarters "Tammany hall"?  Labour has the cheek to complain about the timetable, but that timetable resulted from Gordon Brown's refusal to have a comprehensive spending review while Tony Blair was Prime Minister, as they did not talk to each other.

I am in my last minute, Jackie. I suspect that, in your job, you might be too. There was a delay in the comprehensive spending review for the same reason that we did not have an election—so that Gordon could be Prime Minister and could tell all of us about his vision. We are still waiting for that. The only vision that I have seen is the vision of stuffing the Government and not giving us the money to which we are entitled for the Scottish people. Is it not ironic that we are having this debate on the day that oil reached $100 a barrel?

Why did Wendy Alexander insist that I appear after her on "Good Morning Scotland" this morning and why did she refuse debate with me on the programme?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it is satisfied with the running and effectiveness of the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman's office. (S3O-1288)

I draw Mike Pringle's attention to the time that it is taking for the ombudsman's office to process reports and complete investigations. It often takes longer than the problem that it is investigating lasted. Can something be done to speed that work up, either by providing additional resource or by improving efficiency? I also draw his attention to the percentage of people who, according to the ombudsman's annual report, are denied the prospect of having their complaints investigated because of the time bar of a year. Could the corporate body consider  that issue and determine whether we can change the legislation to remove the time bar?

I regret to say that in the North Lanarkshire area the needs of a significant number of children, particularly those with autism or Asperger's syndrome, are not being dealt with properly. Indeed, the prevailing consideration appears to be cost rather than those children's needs. I ask the First Minister to look into the situation in North Lanarkshire to ensure that children with special needs get the service that they merit.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can I draw your attention to a press release that was issued this afternoon by Labour in the Scottish Parliament? It was issued at nine minutes past one o'clock and was about your decision not to allow Nicola Sturgeon to make her statement on housing. The press release states: "Following representations from Labour's Business Manager Jackie Baillie MSP, the Presiding Officer has decided to cancel the Health Secretary's statement to Parliament." Is it right, Presiding Officer, that the Labour Party should issue advance notice in that way, before you have had the opportunity to impart your decision to the full Parliament? Is it in order for anyone in this Parliament to try to give the impression that your decision is based on their representations rather than on your own independent powers of judgment?

I congratulate Michael McMahon on obtaining this evening's debate.  Let me start by saying a word or two about North Lanarkshire. As the minister and many others will know, North Lanarkshire still has a number of areas of concentrated deprivation and poverty, with pockets of high long-term unemployment affecting a range of age groups. Every kind of model of delivery of economic growth and jobs in both the private and public sectors is, therefore, to be welcomed. The innovative PSP programme is particularly welcome not only because it has created the 12 jobs to which Michael McMahon referred but because it has brought a number of other benefits to the local community. It has brought environmental benefits, because materials that are perfectly usable but which would previously have gone to landfill are now being recycled in the community. The initiative has also brought major social benefits, particularly to the 62 families who have been the recipients of the services of the PSP pilot. Another tremendous benefit is the building of capacity in these fragile communities. Such capacity building—although very much an in phrase—is an important element. If communities are to be self-sustaining in the long term, we need to build indigenous capacity within them. The North Lanarkshire pilot ticks every box—the jobs box, the environment box, the social box and the capacity building box. As well as complimenting those who have been involved in the design and delivery of the programme, we should mention the funding that the European Union has provided through Equal, which is a useful source of funding for such projects. A similar project that is running in Renfrewshire has also benefited from European Union funding. The other big benefit is to the wider community. As the McClelland report on public procurement showed, there are many areas in local authorities, central Government and central Government agencies in which procurement can be improved, so that it has greater impact on the Scottish economy. A large council such as North Lanarkshire, with a significant budget, is a good place to start channelling at least a share of the procurement budget back into the local community, to provide economic and social benefit. No matter how we look at the pilot, it is proving to be an excellent model for the delivery of economic and social benefit in communities such as North Lanarkshire. I strongly recommend it and support Michael McMahon's motion.

I want to ask about a practical issue concerning patients in NHS Lanarkshire who phone up to postpone an appointment with a consultant. In one case, a patient who had to postpone her appointment because of flu was offered a second appointment two days after the original one. When she refused the offer on the ground that she did not know whether she would be cured of the flu by then, she was told that, under the new SNP Government policy, as she had been offered two appointments she would have to go to the back of the queue. Can the cabinet secretary clarify that position?

I welcome the First Minister's acceptance of all the recommendations in the Gould report. In particular, I seek his assurance that candidates and agents will in the future have the democratic  right to examine rejected papers. That right was refused them last May. I draw the First Minister's attention to the apology that was issued this morning by Douglas Alexander, who had the primary ministerial responsibility for the fiasco. Does the First Minister agree that an apology is not sufficient in this instance? When someone uses ministerial power to try to manipulate an election for their own party, it should be a matter for resignation, not just for an apology.

Can I take it from what the member just said that he will not vote for the Labour motion?

I find it interesting that the first two speakers from the Labour benches are former failed ministers who failed to deliver and, in Johann Lamont's case, who failed to keep the biggest housing promise of the lot. In 1999 to 2000, the Labour Party promised second-stage transfer to the people of Glasgow and set up the Glasgow Housing Association. She now talks about accountability to Parliament, but Parliament is not entitled to ask a lot of detailed questions about GHA, which has spent hundreds of millions of pounds of taxpayers' money. Second-stage transfer is the biggest broken promise in the political history of Scotland. Labour had eight years to carry it out. Johann Lamont last week said that she did not believe that there was any financial black hole. If she could remove it by waving a magic wand, why did she not wave the magic wand when she was a minister?

The reason she did not is that second-stage transfer was neither costed nor funded. Labour knew that at the time, and it made a false promise to the people of Glasgow. We will not be taking any lessons from Labour members on broken promises. We have had 10 years of Labour in London and nothing but broken promises.

I will in a minute, Johann. Contain yourself—I will let you in. We have had 10 years of broken promises. Remember that when Labour stood for election in 1997 the mantra was: "Education, education, education."

I am delighted to do so. What is Labour's record? Iraq, Iraq, Iraq. That is a broken promise: it promised to deliver education but instead committed £10 billion to the folly of Iraq—and Labour has the cheek to criticise us.  Let us look at the promises that have been implemented. We have implemented the decision to keep the Monklands and Ayr accident and emergency units open, when we had the ridiculous spectacle of Nye Bevan's party campaigning to close accident and emergency units. Nye must be birling in his grave when he looks at the Scottish Labour Party today.

One thing Nye Bevan would not be doing is birling in the House of Lords—that is for sure. On free school meals, Labour approached the Tories to try to stitch up a deal to scupper free school meals for the poorest children in Scotland. That is the modern-day Labour Party. Labour members talk about broken promises, but they have not only broken promises—they have breached every principle on which the labour movement was founded more than 100 years ago. The Labour motion says that we have failed "to implement smaller class sizes in every primary school" in Scotland—in five months. Labour members promised constructive opposition, which represents not one broken promise but two: it is neither constructive nor opposition. They are criticising us because we have not, in five months, delivered our four-year programme. No Government in history—not even Harold Wilson in his first 100 days—has done anything like what this Government has achieved in its first 100 days. The reality is that Labour members are jealous. We can see the envy in their faces, when there is announcement after announcement about promises being kept, because they did not think of it first.

I will take Marilyn Livingstone.

John Swinney and Jim Mather have done in five months what Iain Gray, Jim Wallace and Nicol Stephen all failed to do as ministers. They were supposed to be enterprise ministers,  but they showed not one ounce of enterprise when they were in office. The reality is that we have set an ambitious programme. We do not moan and groan like the three old unionist parties. We are about the future and they are about the past, which is why in our first five months we have set the agenda in Scotland. If Mr Brown does not call an election on Tuesday, it will be because he knows that the SNP is going to give him a hammering in Scotland.

Regarding the electronics industry, will ITI Techmedia continue to have a wide enough remit to help to build up and expand the leading-edge aspect of the electronics industry in Scotland, which—despite the difficulties of recent years—still makes a significant contribution to the Scottish economy?

Will the member take an intervention?

At the beginning of this week, Wendy Alexander apologised for six years of Jack McConnell. She owes Glasgow tenants a huge apology for the mess that she and her successor communities ministers have made of Glasgow housing. Glasgow Housing Association is the housing association that Wendy built. She should apologise for making wholesale housing transfer a precondition for writing off Glasgow's, or any local council's, housing debt. The money that has been wasted in the exercise could have built hundreds, if not thousands, of new homes, or refurbished thousands more. From day 1, there has been a financial black hole at the heart of GHA's business plan, originally written by the Executive and Wendy, the minister.

Labour promised second-stage transfer but did not cost or fund it.

I will in a minute. When Wendy Alexander, as the Minister for Communities, and her successors, were told about that black hole, they chose to ignore and deny it.

In a minute. We have seen report after report. In October 2005, PricewaterhouseCoopers's report, which cost the Executive £100,000, told us that there was a big financial black hole. A month later—

I will let Johann Lamont in soon. In November 2005, Savills reported that there was a big black hole. In March 2006, the Auditor General's report said that there was a big black hole, but on 25 May 2006, Johann Lamont, as the Deputy Minister for Communities, denied that there was any black hole. When I published a research paper a month later, she said that I was scaremongering. Then, a couple of months after that, another £100,000 report commissioned by the Executive—from Deloitte this time—said that there was a £500 million black hole. Then—lo and behold—Malcolm Chisholm admitted that there is a big black hole but, even today, Johann Lamont contradicts Malcolm Chisholm and says that there is no black hole.

I remind Johann Lamont that the ministerial group that was announced in January 2006 as an urgent measure did not meet for three months. Its members talked and talked for months and months after that, but the group did nothing but produce some financial models that were commissioned from another set of consultants, which showed that the minimum cost of second-stage transfer would be £190 million and, under certain scenarios, could be as much as £500 million. I am sure that the reason for the silence among the Labour back benchers is that they know the truth of the matter. We have to face up to reality. We are in favour, as the cabinet secretary has said, of stock transfer to community owners, but we must acknowledge  that we are where we are. I am no apologist for GHA—far from it. However, despite what Robert Brown and Johann Lamont have said, the reality is that it is Labour's big black hole rather than GHA's. We have been left to clean up Labour's mess—but the Scottish National Party Government will do that.

Does the member still agree with her statement, which she made on 25 May 2006 as the Deputy Minister for Communities, that there is no financial black hole in relation to second-stage transfer?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on demonstrating courage and vision, which his immediate Liberal Democrat predecessors as ministers with responsibility for enterprise failed utterly to do. Local businesses will now have much easier access to enterprise support. They will no longer have to go through a revolving door, only to be shoved from pillar to post. Will the minister strengthen the industry boards? As the former Enterprise and Culture Committee made clear in a report last year, one of the reasons for the success of our competitors is the so-called triple helix—the partnership at national level between the public sector, private sector and academia.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Perhaps Jackie Baillie should do more research, as I submitted evidence as part of Lanarkshire health united. I drafted and led that submission. Unlike Jackie Baillie's Labour colleagues, I stuck by our principle of saving the accident and emergency unit in Lanarkshire when Labour wanted to shut it.

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on the way in which he has rolled out his strategy for dealing with such a serious policy area over the past two or three months. I welcome in particular the announcement that the replacement for Low Moss prison will not be a privatised prison like Kilmarnock, but will be run as part of the public sector prison system. My experience of Kilmarnock is that we cannot reconcile profiteering with community safety. I also welcome the establishment of the independent commission on  the penal system and the role of prisons, and I welcome the appointment of the former First Minister, Henry McLeish, who is ideally placed to lead the review. In the five minutes available to me this afternoon, I will concentrate on two areas that it would benefit the commission to research and consider in great detail, building on the excellent report of the Justice 1 Committee in the previous parliamentary session. As a non-expert in the policy area, I am struck that the people who go through the penal system consistently share three major characteristics. As Pauline McNeill mentioned, the vast bulk of the people in the system tend to be young males between 16 and 30. The second major characteristic is that a drink or drugs problem is involved. The third is that such people come, as the cabinet secretary mentioned, from one of the small number of postcode areas that have the worst poverty and deprivation in Scotland.

I accept that mental health problems are also involved. They are often related to the drink and drugs problems. I hope that the commission's remit will be wide enough to consider what can be done in the communities in those postcode areas to help, in particular, young men with drink, drugs or other problems that might lead them naturally into a life of crime. We can also build on a number of current initiatives that are being undertaken in a way that is spasmodic, unfocused and lacking in strategic direction. I draw the chamber's attention to research that the Justice 1 Committee undertook into the social crime prevention strategy model that is followed in the Nordic countries. Under that model, resources for education, drug treatment and rehabilitation services are concentrated on areas with a heavy concentration of budding criminals in order to tackle deep-rooted problems such as the consequences of learning difficulties. I commend the work of organisations such as the Prince's Trust Scotland in that regard. I also draw attention to Working Rite, an organisation that has been going for only three or four years, but which now plays a major role in stopping young men in particular from getting into trouble by placing them with a tradesman on a one-to-one basis. Working Rite has an 80 per cent success rate in Leith, Govan and Perth, where it operates at present. Rolling out that kind of programme into areas of greatest need would pay enormous dividends.

Unfortunately, I do not have time to do so. We must never forget that a place in a young offenders institution costs £30,000 a year. Under the Working Rite programme, young men get £100 a week for six months. On completion of the programme, 80 per cent end up in a full-time job or training and go on to have a normal non-criminal life. The Working Rite programme is not only a much cheaper option but a more humane one. Instead of dealing with the symptoms of the problem, the programme gets to the root causes. I hope that the commission will consider what can be done for such young people before they get into trouble. At present, the return to the community of long-term prisoners is not planned until a few months before they are due to leave prison. We need to start planning for return almost from the first month of sentence. From day one, services such as education, mental health support and drug treatment could be brought together to prepare the prisoner for the day that they leave prison, get a house, find a job and all the rest of it. If we were to put resources into that area, it would pay back and bring enormous benefits by further reducing reoffending rates among those who have served time in prison. I hope that the new commission will examine all those issues in detail.

Does the member agree that the outcome is what is important? Surely what really matters is the fact that the reoffending rate for those in prison is 75 per cent, while the rate for those who have done community service is 42 per cent.

I support the call to build Airdrie health centre. The proposal has been around for 10 years but nothing has happened so far. If the project is not high on the priority list that NHS Lanarkshire publishes in October, will the cabinet secretary consider that when the list reaches her desk?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I state categorically that the statement that the member has made is not true.

It is not.

Will the minister consider the operation of the presumption against building on flood plains? South Lanarkshire Council, supported by the previous Executive, gave the go-ahead for the construction of a new school on a functioning flood plain. That  will give rise to major problems once the school is constructed.

Does the member agree with me—

But everybody agrees with me these days. Does the member agree with me that the biggest political broken promise was when Mr Blair was elected on a promise of education, education, education, and we ended up with Iraq, Iraq, Iraq?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order. The member might have softened what he planned to say, but surely words such as "deceit" and "duplicity" are unparliamentary language. [ Interruption. ]

Does the First Minister agree that Edinburgh and every other part of Scotland would benefit from the transfer of powers over Scotland's oil and gas resources to the Scottish Parliament? Will he continue to pursue his worthy campaign for the transfer of those powers?

I congratulate the First Minister on the brilliant start that his Administration has made during its first 112 days. It has achieved more in those 112 days than the previous Administration did in eight years. On a consensual point, when the First Minister is publishing his economic development strategy, will he include specific proposals to encourage the 180,000 people who are currently looking for work—some are on benefit or incapacity benefit—and who are willing and able to work, to get work in Scotland?

I welcome the First Minister's announcement of the creation of the council of economic advisers and the national economic forum—the subject of recommendations that were unanimously agreed by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee last year and particularly supported by the Scottish Trades Union Congress. I want to ask the First Minister about two areas of policy that the council should examine. Can the council examine the dearth of reliable statistics on the Scottish economy and examine whether something can be done to rectify that anomaly? Will the council consider the damaging impact of some aspects of UK macroeconomic policy on the Scottish economy, which result in there being much higher interest rates than we need and—according to the UK Government—our subsidising the running of UK departments to the tune of £550 million a year? If that money were to be spent in Scotland, it would add a great deal to Scottish economic growth.

I welcome the new strategy of tax and spend instead of tax and waste, which we had under the previous Administration. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider two points to which I know he cannot give a detailed reply today. First, on improving economic growth, eliminating poverty and dealing with the housing crisis, will the Cabinet give higher priority to affordable housing than did the previous Administration? In Scotland last year, we built only 25,000 houses, compared with the Republic of Ireland, which built 93,000 houses. Secondly, will he examine schemes such as the excellent proof of concept scheme, which dishes out money only in the form of grant and provides no return on capital for the taxpayer? There is  scope to improve private investment leverage and the return to the taxpayer in a number of areas. I urge my friend the cabinet secretary to consider those matters as well.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I must point out that the first words of the motion are: "That the Parliament endorses the Government's transport priorities". The member's point is that underground is a priority.

To ask the First Minister what progress is being made in re-establishing joint ministerial committees with the United Kingdom Government. (S3F-83)

Does the First Minister agree that it is an indictment of the previous Administration that the joint ministerial committees, which the late Donald Dewar carefully established, were allowed to fall into disrepair? After the joint ministerial committees are re-established, will the First Minister take an early opportunity to raise the need to transfer powers under schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 from Westminster to Holyrood, starting with the repatriation of Scotland's oil and gas revenues to this Parliament?

I draw the minister's attention to the fact that the lack of sufficient public transport connections between different points is a barrier to economic expansion in Ayrshire. Will he consider the possibility of setting up, on a pilot basis, a bus route development fund similar to the successful air route development fund, to try to remove those barriers to economic development in Ayrshire?

If the member has read the article in question, he will have noticed that my proposal is not a substitute for a local income tax, but an interim measure. I suggested a cash—rather than a percentage—discount, which would fair and progressive, unlike the Tory proposal, which would be unfair and regressive.

Will the member give way?

Could it be that the people whom Jamie McGrigor quotes might be in the same position as the Tory party, which utterly opposed devolution, but whose members were crawling over each other to get into Parliament once it was created? Could it be that once Scotland has an Olympic team, they will want to join it?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is only fair, as she mentioned me.

I thank the member for taking my intervention after some persuasion. How much is she prepared to forgo in lottery funding for good causes in Scotland in order to subsidise the London Olympics?

Within the past three years, I staged a members' business debate on the Olympics, at which I remember no Liberal Democrat being present. What did Liberal Democrat ministers do about the issue when they were in government and had the chance to do something?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement as the first step in implementing our manifesto commitments. I remind her that, in 2003, the Scottish Tories' manifesto contained a commitment to get rid of the graduate endowment. If the Tories flip flop again, they might support the cabinet secretary's legislation when it comes before the Parliament. Following on from the point that Hugh O'Donnell made, I remind the cabinet secretary that a report that was produced last year by a group led by Jim McGoldrick of the Scottish funding council pointed out that about 14 per cent of people from working class backgrounds—the same figure as 30 years ago—get to university. Will the cabinet secretary monitor the policy on improving access for people from the lower income groups?

Is this a clear breach of the concordat on justice and home affairs, which was signed by Donald Dewar in 1999? Does the Scottish Executive have any legal redress when such breaches occur? If there is such a process, will the Executive follow it? If there is not, should there be one? If the issue cannot be resolved properly and a guarantee obtained about relationships in future, should the matter be referred to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You will notice that we have four minutes left of the time allocated for First Minister's question time, yet during the earlier questions a number of members were not called. I ask you to review the role of the business team in vetting supplementary questions. Its job should be to collect the names, not to act like the Politburo in deciding what can go forward and what cannot. Will you publish the criteria that are used to decide which questions are acceptable supplementaries? From a back-bench point of view, the situation at the moment is entirely unsatisfactory.

rose—

It is only in recent months that the practice of the business team asking for details of supplementary questions has crept into the system. For the first three, four or five years of the Parliament, only members' names were submitted. We are now almost asked for our curriculum vitae  before we can get a supplementary question.

I welcome the statement by the cabinet secretary and tell her that the people of Lanarkshire and Ayrshire will be dancing in the streets with joy tonight. It is sad to see the party of Nye Bevan complaining because we refuse to close down essential services in the national health service. I have two substantive points. First, does the health secretary agree that it is a myth that clinical opinion is unanimously in favour of the closure of these A and E units? Opinion among consultants is divided, but nurses and those in the ambulance services are almost unanimous in agreeing with us that the units have to be kept open. Secondly, in the light of what has happened, particularly in Lanarkshire, will the health secretary review the consultation process? It was farcical that the decision was taken to reduce the number of A and Es in Lanarkshire from three to two without any consultation. It was also farcical that the decision was then taken that the choice would be between Hairmyres and Monklands. Is it not the case that a political decision was taken and that the A and E in Jack McConnell's constituency and the A and E in Andy Kerr's constituency were always going to be kept open?

I congratulate the minister on his excellent statement. At long last, we have the beginnings of a sensible and comprehensive energy policy for Scotland. I particularly welcome his commitment to giving clean coal technology a major role to play in future. Will he upgrade the Scottish Government's representation on the DTI's energy forum and coal forum from that of an official to that of a minister? Secondly, will the minister pursue a change to Ofgem's remit? In some respects, its current policy and remit are contradictory to the development of an energy policy for Scotland that is based on our needs and our resources. Finally, will the minister look into the problems that currently beset the management of ITI Energy with a view to resolving them as quickly as possible? ITI Energy has a major role to play in developing new technologies.

I ask Iain Gray to clarify Labour's policy. Would any reduction on business rates be dependent on a business undertaking R and D or saving energy, or would the Labour Party have a reduction in business rates without those conditions?

I have never argued for a 50 per cent cut.

I pay tribute to all the maiden speakers from every side of the chamber—the calibre of their contributions proves that this chamber is more than equal to Westminster and indeed can surpass it—but perhaps some of them need a gentle reminder  that, having made their speeches, they are supposed to wait to hear the rest of us. I welcome John Swinney's challenge to everybody in Scotland, not just those in government, but the trade unions, the business sector, local authorities—our whole society—to try to meet the challenge of increased economic growth and the well-being that comes with it between now and 2011. I have no doubt that closing the eternal gap between the growth rate of Scotland and that of the rest of the UK is the right priority for Scotland and our people—not just to make us wealthier, but to create a fairer society. To close the gap, we need to increase our long-term growth trend by one third. As John Swinney said, the long-term trend for the UK is 2.8 per cent whereas the long-term trend for Scotland over the past 30 years has been 2.1 per cent. That gap of 0.7 per cent might not seem a lot, but it is a lot and it represents one third of our 2.1 per cent rate to date. Closing the gap is a major challenge, but it is one that we should accept and welcome.

Right across every year and every quarter from the past 30 years—

I ask the member to let me answer—this is not the caterpillar she is talking to. On most occasions when we have come close to the UK growth rate, it has been because the UK rate has decreased, not because Scotland's rate has gone up. I accept the importance of education in the debate—I presume that that is why the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will wind up for the Executive—but we can help to close the gap with new initiatives and strategies from the new Government in three priority areas. First, we must give higher priority to affordable housing and the expansion of the construction sector in Scotland. There are huge opportunities in the construction sector—not just in Scotland, but in preparation for the London Olympics and in many other major projects throughout the UK. There is no doubt that there is a major skills shortage in Scotland. The industry estimates that we are about 27,000 people short of the number we will need in the building trade over the next few years to meet the demands of the investment programme in the private and public sectors. One way we can close the growth gap is to take whatever action is needed to boost the construction sector and affordable housing in particular, which needs to be put much higher up  the list of priorities for this Parliament in future years. The second major priority area is youth unemployment. One of the great targets Gordon Brown set when he took office was to eliminate youth unemployment. I draw members' attention to a very informative treatise published this month by the Labour MP Frank Field, in which he points out that youth unemployment is on the rise again, that much of the money spent on programmes such as the new deal has ended up as wasted money and that the programmes have put young people on a carousel—on a scheme, off a scheme, back on a scheme—rather than equipped them with the skills they need to find permanent and fulfilling employment. Major decisions are yet to be made about the future of the careers service, the modern apprenticeship scheme, the new deal in Scotland and the challenge of NEETs. They, too, are key areas in which a big difference can be made. The final priority is, as John Park pointed out, research and development. We are trying to be smart, successful Scotland in the knowledge economy, but one Finnish company—Nokia—spends three times as much on research and development as the whole of Scottish industry put together. Sorting out that issue and getting private sector spend on R and D up to UK levels would take us a long way towards closing the growth gap. I make those suggestions in a constructive spirit; I believe that we are right to make growth the number 1 priority and to set the target of closing the growth gap once and for all over the next four years.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With all due respect, I feel that if front benchers overrun their time, the number of back benchers who are called to speak should not be cut as a  result. Instead, you should ensure that front benchers stick to their time.

I congratulate the two brand new members and the  rebranded new member, Iain Gray, on their speeches. Liam McArthur, from Orkney, and Alasdair Allan, from the Western Isles, used their speeches to advertise their respective constituencies, so perhaps I should extol the virtues of Lanarkshire and, in particular, the Bellshill maternity hospital, which produced such excellent Scottish characters—national institutions, even—as Craig Brown and Margo MacDonald. I invite members to Bellshill any time—

I will make some serious points about our approach to government, First, I agree in general with Margo MacDonald's point that we must address the question of the Parliament's future powers, irrespective of our point of view on the matter. The decision on carbon capture that BP announced yesterday will have a major impact on our ability to lead in a key technology in Scotland and I firmly believe that the decision would not have been made if the Scottish Parliament had had full powers over energy policy. We must find the right mechanism for discussing such matters and we must make advances on the accretion of powers to the Parliament, not in four or five years' time but in a far shorter period. Gordon Brown has made a commitment to consider a written constitution and to reform the UK public appointments system, and developments are taking place in the context of the proposed EU constitution. As an institution, the Parliament cannot ignore such external developments. Some kind of mechanism, be it a cross-party committee or whatever, must be established sooner rather than later, to consider all the issues to do with power and governance in Scotland. Secondly, I will make a series of suggestions about how we improve the efficiency of government in Scotland. I welcome the speech from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney. The Howat report makes a worthwhile contribution to the debate, although I do not agree with everything in it. From my experience in dealing with Government as a parliamentarian and as a businessperson, I think that major savings can be made to the benefit of the taxpayer in six key areas. I will list the areas in which we can get a bigger bang for the buck. Evaluation has become a new industry in Scotland. Every time someone in Scottish Enterprise sneezes, it costs about £30,000. Then a consultant is brought in, at a cost of £10,000, to evaluate the sneeze by deciding how far it went and how big an impact it had. A considerable amount of money is wasted on unnecessary and useless evaluation. Across the whole Government  we need just one evaluation unit that can compare performance between departments and consider Scotland's performance against international benchmarks. Financial and quality audit is also a major area of waste. When the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in the first session of the Parliament conducted an inquiry into lifelong learning four or so years ago, one of the most astounding facts that we learned was that some colleges were being quality audited 28 times every year by different parts of the Scottish Executive and its agencies. That was complete nonsense. We can have an audit system that cuts across the whole Government; every nook and cranny does not need its own audit function. Huge amounts of money are spent on public relations and advertising. Sometimes the democratic process is undermined by agencies that do not agree with decisions made in the Parliament or the Executive. There is massive scope for improvement in that regard. Recruitment is another area of waste. When the intermediary technology institutes were set up, £300,000 was spent on recruiting the first three chief executives, all of whom resigned within a year of being appointed—£300,000 went down the Swannee. Consultancy—of which I have some knowledge—is another area in which savings could be made. As Alex Salmond pointed out the other day, £100 million has been spent on consultancy by one agency in the past four years and much of that work has ended up on the shelf and has not been followed by action. Finally, computer systems are another area of waste. Scottish Enterprise is just about to spend megabucks—up to £7 million—replacing a computer system that is working perfectly well and which was installed only three years ago at a cost of £3 million. Such matters can be addressed. Across those six areas alone, I believe that we could save between £200 million and £300 million over the next four years, which could be redirected into front-line services. That is where the emphasis must be. The Government should go ahead with the efficiency drive—we need a bigger bang for the buck—but the purpose of doing so is to improve the quality of service delivery and to redirect resources. It is not simply a question of making Government smaller. Just as important is the redirection of resources away from bureaucracy into service provision. If we do that, Scotland will be a lot better off for it.

Wendy Alexander will need to do better if she wants to succeed Jack McConnell within the next year. Does the member agree that one thing that people want is more efficient Government decision making, so that we do not lose multimillion-pound new technology projects such as carbon capture because of the total incompetence in London?

Like Roseanna Cunningham, I welcome every word that the First Minister has said. [ Applause. ] I am always open to support from all parties in such matters. First, I draw the First Minister's attention to the dreadful inheritance or legacy that he faces of the increasing level of youth unemployment in Scotland and to the need, in making economic growth a high priority, to tackle much more ambitiously than the previous Administration did the grotesque situation in which 35,000 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland are either without a job, not in education or not in training. Secondly, again on the aim of promoting economic development, will the First Minister give early attention to considering the expansion of the Scotland House model, which is in place in Estonia and India, as an effective way in which to promote Scottish tourism, technology, investment and exports for the benefit of the Scottish people?

To ask the First Minister whether any of the additional £1.8 billion to be made available to the Scottish Executive, as announced in last week's budget, will be earmarked for tackling child poverty. (S2F-2806)

The union dividend is 4 per cent of the oil revenues; the independence dividend would be 100 per cent of the oil revenues. Does the First Minister realise that the level of child poverty in devolved Scotland is 10 times what it is in independent Denmark? Does he realise that the level of child poverty under Blair, Brown and McConnell is two and a half times what it was under Harold Wilson? After 300 years of the union, 10 years of a Labour Government and eight years of a Labour-led Executive, when will he actually try to do something about child poverty in Scotland?

When we wake up on 4 May, we will realise that the outstanding message from the election is that 50 years of Labour rule in Scotland will have ended. It is not only the Scottish National Party that wants an end to those years of Labour rule in Scotland—many of my good Liberal Democrat friends and my good friends in other parties share that ambition. New Labour's chickens are coming home to roost. The First Minister has said only one positive thing about Labour's record in the campaign so far: he made a proud boast about the smoking ban. He is right to be proud of that ban, but the irony is that such a ban was originally proposed in the first session of the Parliament in a member's bill that Nicola Sturgeon introduced, which the First Minister and the Executive opposed.

I will take an intervention in a minute. We are happy for good ideas that we put forward to be taken up and included in legislation, but with all due respect, the smoking ban—which I voted in favour of—should be compared with the much bigger challenges that society faces. We have heard about tackling climate change, which is a huge challenge for every country, and Shona Robison talked about the huge challenges that we face in tackling child poverty.

I will in a minute. How will the country face up to those and many other challenges? It is my fundamental belief that not only is it important that the Parliament has additional powers, but that it makes perfect sense to redefine our partnership with the rest of the United Kingdom by becoming an independent member of the European Union, which is the much bigger economic and political union that these islands are members of. We could then go to the top table and exercise the same influence and  have the same power that all the other nation state members exercise. Margo MacDonald rightly pointed out that that would not mean that we would rupture the social union with England. It would not mean that there would be barriers at the border and all that kind of nonsense.

No. Scotland and England are part of the European Union, and we want to continue—we will continue—a close working relationship with the Government in London, because England is our largest neighbour. We should not be subservient to the Government in London—there should be equality of esteem between our Governments. We support the approach that the nordic countries take. We support the development of the council of the isles, because many issues in Europe and further afield will continue to have a British dimension. We should unashamedly work not only with the Government in London on those issues, but with the devolved Governments in Cardiff and Belfast and the independent Government in Dublin. That is the kind of future that we envisage. It is nonsense to use the words "separatist" or "isolationist". Indeed, one of the reasons why I am a nationalist is that I feel too isolated at the moment. I feel that, whenever I want to reach the wider world, I have to go through London—often physically, if not legally. I want to be able to reach out to the world directly in every sense. I want Scotland to play the same role in dealing with poverty in the developing world that Norway, for example, plays. Norway is one of the most successful contributors. It is significant that none of the big countries has ever provided the Secretary-General of the United Nations and I do not think that any of them ever will. The position of small countries in the international community is such that they occupy a special niche. They can do things that big countries cannot do. That is why l believe that Scotland the nation can make a much bigger contribution as Scotland the state. I do not have time to go into issues such as shipbuilding, but there are clear answers to the questions. Of course we will make mistakes, just as the devolved Parliament has made mistakes, but they will be our mistakes and we will be responsible for our destiny. No nation can wish for more. No people can wish for more than for their freedom, their sovereignty and the right to decide their future.

I will deal with that bit of scaremongering. As the member knows, the policy of the UK Government is, and the policy of an independent Scotland and a London Government would be, to have a single market in shipbuilding. That is Gordon Jackson's Government's policy—if he does not know that, it is his problem. I tell Gordon Jackson that under an SNP Government our shipbuilders would be able to compete more effectively because they would pay corporation tax at a much lower rate than at present.

On a point of order, Presiding Order. Is Mr McConnell speaking as the First Minister or as the leader of the Labour Party? He has been billed to speak as the First Minister, but he is speaking as the leader of the Labour Party.

I will keep my comments brief, to allow Fergus Ewing to speak. I am happy to vote for the reappointment of Alice Brown as the ombudsman, but, like many other members, I have a number of concerns. One is that we do not have a more systematic way of ensuring that the ombudsman is held to account more regularly by the Parliament for her work. I hope that, in the new session of Parliament, both the Parliamentary Bureau and the corporate body will consider how we can improve that interface. There are currently four problems with the ombudsman's office. First, to be fair, the resources required to do the job, to date, have not been made available to the ombudsman. We are going some way towards solving that problem, but I suspect that we need to go further. Secondly, the turnaround times for cases are far too long. It has taken more than a year for the ombudsman to decide whether to investigate a case that I am dealing with. Thirdly, the variability of the quality of the service is, frankly, not acceptable. It depends too much on which particular investigator handles the case, rather than on overall quality control in the office. The fourth problem, which I hope that the Parliament in the new session will consider as well, is the ombudsman's remit and powers. We have given her too narrow a remit, compared with the remits of ombudsmen in other countries, and not enough powers to enforce her recommendations. I hope that all those issues will be addressed after 3 May.

At the risk of repetition, I repeat what I said last week in the chamber: as a resident of Ayr, I vouch that Phil Gallie is the best member of Parliament that Ayr has ever had and, as Fiona Hyslop said, that is a great compliment, because Sir Thomas Moore and George Younger were very good constituency MPs before him. As a constituency member, Phil Gallie has been absolutely outstanding. I also pay tribute to Janis Hughes and wish her all the best in the future. Unlike Phil Gallie, she will not be retiring; she is going to pastures new. I am not tempted by this morning's poll to comment on those who might not be here involuntarily after 3 May, but we wish them well, too. The committee's work and its report are an exemplar of the way in which a private bill committee should work. Not only did it produce excellent reports, listen carefully to witnesses and take into account fairly and objectively all the points that were made in evidence to it, it influenced heavily the behaviour of Network Rail in particular, about which I will say more in a minute or two. I do not hesitate to congratulate the committee on its excellent work on the bill.  As every speaker from every party has said, the project ticks all the right boxes. First, it ticks the economic box, because it will benefit the West Lothian and Lanarkshire economies, and by expanding the labour market throughout the west central belt it will benefit others outwith Lanarkshire and West Lothian. Secondly, it ticks the environmental box, because it will expand our railway network and, as Fergus Ewing mentioned, hopefully divert some traffic from our road network, and the M8 in particular. Thirdly, the project also ticks the social box. After all, surely it is socially beneficial to have a rail network that not only links Bathgate and Airdrie but strengthens links with Edinburgh, Glasgow and places as far afield as Helensburgh.

Of course I do. Indeed, that will be a very important consideration, particularly over the next five weeks. This project, which will involve public sector investment of about £300 million, is excellent and will provide real value for money. That said, I have three points to make. First, as the committee has pointed out, we must monitor the long-term provision of local integrated bus services to maximise the project's economic and social potential. The Executive and local constituency and regional members will keep a close eye on progress in that respect. Secondly, I hope that, during the bill's passage, the Parliament has learned a lesson about Network Rail. I have attended a number of meetings on the issue of Network Rail's treatment of constituents and organisations, such as the angling club that uses Hillend fishing lodge in Airdrie. I have to say that the senior management of Network Rail in Scotland have a lot to answer for. Their attitude to individuals and local organisations has been dictatorial, unreasonable, secretive and uncompromising, and their handling of the community with this project has been totally incompetent. Thanks to the committee, Network Rail has been forced against its wishes to come to a compromise or reach a deal on many issues, particularly with regard to the fishing lodge and the compulsory purchase of houses in Caldercruix. The minister needs to keep an eye on Network Rail's senior management, because if that is how they think people should be handled, they need a lesson in democracy, transparency and accountability. My final point, which underlines a wise comment that Phil Gallie made in his speech, relates to Network Rail, Transport Scotland and the Executive. We will keep a close eye on proceedings to ensure that all the commitments that have been made are kept and implemented,  because only by doing so will we ensure that not only central Scotland but the whole country experiences the real, major benefits that the project can bring. In any case, that is exactly the sort of thing that this Parliament and an Executive should be doing.

I agree with much of what the member says, but does she agree that it reinforces the lunacy of closing the accident and emergency department at Monklands hospital?

I simply want to confirm what I said last week about Phil Gallie. We support the amendments, for similar reasons to those that David Davidson outlined.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I see that Mr Lyon has suddenly appeared in the chamber. Will he explain his comments in The Herald today, given that what he said was flatly denied by the Minister for Parliamentary Business this morning?

rose—

Why does it make sense to waste up to £4 billion on the profiteering from PPP? How many extra schools could we have if we saved that £4 billion instead of wasting it on profiteering as the Executive is doing?

I draw the member's attention to Glasgow Housing Association, which has a legal status similar to the trusts that we propose, is able to raise money on the market and has done so successfully to fund part of the housing programme in Glasgow. Why cannot we fund schools and hospitals in the same way?

It is not. Hugh Henry does not know what he is talking about.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the light of previous correct strictures from the chair about members who participate in debates sitting through them, is not it rather offensive to Parliament that the Minister for Education and Young People has not been present for at least half an hour and that we are now at the summing-up speeches but he is still not present? Oh—here he comes at long last.

I, too, pay tribute to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton; the House of Lords' gain is our loss. I hope that when Scotland becomes independent he will come back here. We look forward to both those things happening.

Mr Davidson will be disappointed to know that we are not planning to have an unelected house in an independent Scotland. I want to go back to the opening speech by the Minister for Education and Young People. At the time of his appointment, it was said in the press that he was not Jack McConnell's first choice for the job. Having listened to his speech, I can understand why. Perhaps Jack made a mistake; perhaps Rhona Brankin should have got the job instead. I want to deal with the nonsense that was put forward by the minister, and then by Iain Smith and Elaine Murray, about PPP—profit, profit and profit; profiteering, profiteering and—

I will in a minute. If Hugh Henry will let me finish my point, I will give him a chance.  Audit Scotland has assessed the impact of PPP on the cost of school building in Scotland over a 30-year period. It found that, compared with the traditional ways of funding capital projects in the public sector, the additional cost to the taxpayer over a 30-year period of using PPP was up to £134 million a year. Over 30 years, we will be paying up to £4 billion over the odds because of the PPP way of funding. Given the number of schools that we could build with £4 billion, I would argue that it would be far better not to use PPP but to use the traditional method of public sector funding. That would allow us to have all those extra schools. I will let the minister in now.

It is amazing that the Executive is making such a meal of this. If we consider one of the largest infrastructure programmes not in Scotland but in the whole of the UK—namely, the regeneration of the London underground—we see that the vast bulk of the programme is being funded through the kind of bond mechanism that we are recommending to replace PPP. The idea that we cannot do that for Scotland's schools and hospitals, but instead have to allow the level of profiteering that we have seen under Labour, is nonsense. The minister has a long history in local government. Has he never heard of municipal bonds? Municipal bonds have been used for 100 years to fund physical projects in the public sector. All the evidence shows, and all the expert opinion outside shows, that not only can it be done, it should be done, because it is a lot cheaper than using PPP. The price tag on schools alone is £4 billion for PPP under Labour and the Liberal Democrats—and I shall now let the Liberal Democrats come in as well.

The documents that we have published make clear two fundamental things. First, any agreement that is already signed and sealed cannot be reversed; we cannot reverse a contract, no matter how daft or costly it is. Secondly, every project in the pipeline for which a contract has not been signed will be funded by our funding mechanism, which will be far cheaper.

Nothing will be stopped. We have said that the same projects will be delivered brick for brick and within the same timeframe. I notice that one of the people jumping up and down is Mr Smith, who has just told us that the Liberal Democrats want to introduce a local income tax that is not capped. How much will that cost every taxpayer in Scotland? The reality is that we are hearing all the scaremongering again from a second-rate Administration that cannot add up. PPP has been a disaster for schools and hospitals. We will replace it with a system of funding that is cheaper and will allow us to use the money saved on more schools and hospitals, not just for the next four years but for the next 30 years.

Does the First Minister realise that, as a result of Gordon Brown's budget yesterday, low-paid workers earning only £7,500 a year will see their income tax bill rise from £232 to £416 a year, which is an increase of 78 per cent, while Gordon Brown, earning over £130,000 a year, will see his tax bill go down by 5 per cent? Is that what Labour is about: robbing the poor to pay the rich?

I totally agree with what the minister has said about Dennis Canavan and Jim Wallace, but we should not forget that next week we will also lose Phil Gallie. Now that Mr Gallie is not standing again, I can say—as someone who lives in Ayr—that he is the best member of Parliament Ayr ever had.

Not even from the Liberal Democrats.

Will the member give way?

There has been some improvement, but does the member agree that, after 10 years of Labour Government, there are still 180,000 people in Scotland who are fit, able and willing to work but who cannot find jobs in Scotland?

Has it escaped Charlie Gordon's notice that we would never have had Thatcher had we been independent?

Peter Peacock argues for Scottish solutions to Scottish problems in education, but I do not understand why a policy of finding Scottish solutions to Scottish problems is appropriate for education, health, housing and justice, but not for the economy, tax policy, social security policy, defence, foreign affairs and all the rest of it. There was one sentence in Margaret Curran's opening speech with which I entirely agree. She said that we in Scotland should work in partnership with the rest of our neighbours in the United Kingdom. I agree 100 per cent, but the question is what the nature of that partnership should be. Should we continue with a partnership in which Scotland is subservient to London or should we pursue a partnership in which our status is equal to that of London? The word "partnership" was not used anywhere in Margaret Curran's speech in relation to the European Union. The reality is that we are not just part of a political union called the United Kingdom; we are also part of a much bigger union—a political and economic European Union that now encompasses 500 million people. Our relationship with London must be based on our relationship with the EU.

One reason why is that our being part of the UK has resulted in one in four of our children living in poverty. After 10 years of a Labour Government in London, eight years of a Lib-Lab pact in Edinburgh and 300 years of the union, child poverty in Scotland is 10 times the level of child poverty in Denmark, for example. After 10 years of the Labour Government, child poverty in Scotland is four times higher than it was under Harold Wilson. That is the measure of the record of the union and of Labour in London and Edinburgh.

No—I have already taken one. The main thrust of my remarks is the EU. We now have three centres of power: Edinburgh, London and Brussels. All the other successful small countries in Europe, including Sweden, Finland, Ireland and Austria, have control over their own affairs when it comes to macroeconomic management, defence policy, foreign policy and all the rest of it.

I will give way in a minute. If we look at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development table for the 10 richest nations in the world—

The UK is not up there—it is 17 th on the list. I would have thought that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning would have known such facts. Eight of the 10 richest OECD nations are small countries that are similar in size to Scotland, and many of them have nowhere near the quantity of natural resources that we have. Why is it that even though we have vast natural resources—not just oil and gas, but many others—our economy and our society have been mismanaged to such an extent that the level of child poverty is so high? That is not to mention the fact—to pick up on what Christine May said—that a fifth of our pensioners in Scotland are also living in poverty.

The SNP did not support the final draft of the EU constitution because it would have given the House of Lords more control over Scottish fishing than this democratically elected Parliament would have had. There were many other reasons why we were very critical of the constitution's final draft. We should not listen to Geoff Hoon—he is a buffoon. Instead, we should listen to Eamonn Gallagher and Emile Noël, former directors-general of the EU, who have made the legal and political position clear beyond any doubt: if the people of Scotland vote for independence, we will automatically and without further negotiation become a member state of the European Union. Let us in this election campaign put an end to the scaremongering and nonsense and start telling the truth.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Where is Jack?

Has the Scottish Executive made any assessment of the impact on tourism in Scotland of Gordon Brown's  doubling of air passenger duty? In his few remaining weeks in office, will the First Minister urge the Chancellor not to take any further measures to damage the Scottish economy and Scottish tourism?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I will not comment on the pros and cons of the case, but I am concerned that Mr Monteith had only three minutes in which to speak, particularly as—quite rightly—the convener of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee opened and closed the debate and another member of the committee spoke for two minutes. In the interests of natural justice, a member in such a position should be given more than three minutes to explain their position to the Parliament.

The minister argues that Scotland is doing very well under the union and after 10 years of a Labour Government. If that is the case, why is the level of child poverty in Scotland 10 times that in Denmark and—this is based on the Scottish Executive's official statistics—two and a half times what it was 40 years ago under Harold Wilson? The minister should go and tell the children of Scotland, in particular the quarter who are living on or near the poverty line, that we are doing well. An Executive, like any Government, has to be judged by its actions in relation to policy—in this case, on business. Let us consider recent examples of where the Scottish Executive has utterly failed the business community in Scotland. One such example, which is close to your heart, Presiding Officer, is that, at the stroke of a pen, by making a ship a grey ship, the Executive could award a contract to Ferguson's shipyard and save the 99 jobs that are under threat there. Today we learned that the Executive has wasted £15 million—apparently, the BBC's figure was out by £2 million—on a tendering process for Caledonian MacBrayne services, whereby we have ended up with the status quo. That £15 million would have been better spent on creating jobs and tackling poverty or invested in education. I turn to some of the other aspects of Executive policy. The finances of Scottish Water have been engineered to ensure that businesses have to face the highest water charges in the whole of the UK. High water charges, which are a tax on business and jobs, have been a mainstay of the Executive's policy. The minister said that we have to stay part of the union with Britain and referred to the false black hole of £11 billion. The Executive does not mention that, according to its UK Government's figures, Scotland loses out to the tune of £550 million a year in what we pay towards the running of the UK Government, which is spent south of the border, not north of the border. If that money, which has already been paid for by the Scots, was spent in Scotland, an additional £550 million would be brought into the Scottish economy, with all the jobs that that would entail. The Executive then paraded its expensive private finance initiative programme—the biggest backdoor privatisation programme in Europe—in relation to schools and hospitals. By a simple switch from PFI funding to bond funding, which an SNP Government will introduce, for the projects in the pipeline, we will save £106 million a year. That  money could be invested in schools and hospitals, which would ensure that the taxpayer not only got a good deal but would own the asset that they had paid for at the end of the period. As Fergus Ewing pointed out, Malcolm Chisholm did not mention the reason for his resignation from the Scottish Executive—a very principled resignation that was based on his quite correct belief that neither the UK nor Scotland requires Trident or the son of Trident. If we remain part of the union with England, we will have to pay our share of the £100 billion that the son of Trident will cost over a 30 or 40-year period. If our share of that money, about £10 billion, was invested in transport, education, housing and the health service, it would create far more jobs and be of far more benefit to the people of Scotland. If the Government spends £100 billion buying a system from America, it will create a lot of jobs in America but not many in Scotland or the rest of the UK. Does the Executive not understand basic, year one economics? The Executive tries to tell us that it is financially competent. However, let us remember that this is the Executive that announced a new policy on business rates one week, telling us that it could give breaks to companies that were doing research and development work, but which had to withdraw the policy the next week because it had not checked its facts. This is the Executive that presided over the financial fiasco at Scottish Enterprise and the fiasco of the CalMac tendering process. It has no claim to financial or fiscal competence. The reality is not that which is painted by the minister; it is that a quarter of our children and a fifth of our pensioners are living in dire poverty and that 150,000 of our people are willing to work but cannot find a job. That is the union dividend. That is the result of 10 years of Labour misgovernment. That is why, on 3 May, the Scottish people will turf out that lot and put people in place who will put Scotland first.

Will the member give way?

I only want to ask a question.

Is Mike Rumbles speaking for Charles Kennedy's Liberal party or Menzies Campbell's Liberal party?

rose  —

Not at all—Mr Neil is simply going to ask two straightforward questions. First, how are the Conservatives going to fund the council tax rebate to pensioners that they have promised? What are they going to cut to fund it? Secondly, in the Conservatives' fund for roads—a key part of their regeneration package—they have set aside £15 million to take out bends and straighten roads. How many bends will they be able to straighten for £15 million?

Will the minister give way?

As always, Presiding Officer. Following on—[ Laughter. ] I will have to wait for the laughter to die down. Following on from Elaine Smith's point, I ask the minister to speed up the publication of the transport strategy for the health service in Lanarkshire. When the daft and dangerous decision was taken to downgrade the accident and emergency unit at Monklands hospital, we were promised a new transport strategy that would link health facilities. We have not yet seen that strategy. Will the minister tell us when it will be published?

Is it not a reflection of the failure of the Executive's policy that the level of child poverty in Scotland is nearly two and a half times the level in 1968 and ten times the level in Denmark? Why is the level of child poverty in Scotland ten times the level in Denmark?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have given you notice of my point of order. As you know, the Justice 1 Committee will publish its report on the McKie case and the Scottish fingerprint service this afternoon. I believe that the Scottish Executive and the press are getting advance copies of the report prior to the press conference that is to be held by the committee convener. However, advance copies have been refused both to the McKie family and to the Scottish Criminal Record Office officers who are the subject of the report. I accept that this would normally be a matter for the convener and the committee rather than for you, Presiding Officer. However, the matter raises fundamental issues about the human rights of the people involved and it has basic implications for the whole Parliament, not just for the Justice 1 Committee. I ask you to look at the situation, because it is unacceptable that the press and the Scottish Executive have prior warning of what is in the report but the people who are the subject of the report are being refused the same accommodation.

The minister will know that the UK Government has appointed Sir Digby Jones as the skills tsar. Does Sir Digby Jones have any remit in Scotland? If so, what is it and to whom does he report?

For the first and probably only time in the Parliament, I am happy to support entirely and without qualification a motion in the name of Karen Whitefield. Across the parties, there have been two major themes of the Parliament since it was set up. The first is the need for us to have economic and social inclusiveness in a way that we have not had previously. The second, which relates to transport  policy, is the need to improve public transport and access to it as part of an overall approach that is aimed at encouraging people to get off the roads and on to public transport. It is, therefore, a shame that such low priority has been given to upgrading our public transport facilities—in this case, railway stations—for access by disabled people. Karen Whitefield mentioned the disability equality duty, which was placed on all public bodies in Scotland in December 2006. Two key elements of the duty are the need to eliminate discrimination and the need to take steps to take account of disabled people's disabilities, even where that involves treating disabled people more favourably than other people. The annual budget for upgrading stations to take account of the needs of disabled people is about £3.91 million a year. I suggest that the total transport budget should provide the scope to increase the amount of resources that are dedicated to meeting the needs of disabled people. The increase that is required would not amount to a high percentage of the total spend. We are all conscious of the number of priorities that any budget has, but given the importance of economic and social inclusion, of getting people on to public transport and of living up to a statutory aspiration by putting the resources behind the law, expenditure on access to stations should be a higher priority. Six stations have already been earmarked for upgrading. Shotts is in one of most deprived parts not just of Lanarkshire but of Scotland. If deprivation is taken into account alongside the special needs of disabled people, the case for upgrading stations in places such as Shotts—and in Shotts, in particular—is overwhelming. In addition, we have a special duty to meet the needs of rural areas. Karen Whitefield has referred to herself as a representative of Airdrie, Shotts and the surrounding villages, but in a sense Shotts is a village, too. Although it is not a great distance from the main settlement, in many respects it is still fairly remote from the point of view of access. If we are to encourage people to get out of their cars and to use public transport, we must facilitate that by ensuring that disabled people have access to stations such as Shotts. It is a key priority. My final point is that the decision on which stations should be a priority for receiving the money that is needed for such upgrades should be a political decision rather than one that is handed to a quango. It is important that the Parliament and the Executive decide their priorities on the basis of much wider concerns than those that Transport Scotland can examine. An example of such a concern is deprivation. The provision of disabled access to stations is not just a transport issue; it is  about deprivation, equality and—obviously—the needs of disabled people. I am not criticising the minister, whom I know is well intentioned. However, like Karen Whitefield, I ask him to look at the whole picture and to make the upgrade of Shotts station to meet the needs of disabled people a priority.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that there is sufficient accident and emergency unit capacity in Lanarkshire. (S2O-11813)

I draw the minister's attention to the fact that, over the past three months, Hairmyres and Wishaw accident and emergency units have regularly, usually at weekends, had to refer people to another accident and emergency unit because they have not had sufficient capacity and have been unable to cope. In the light of that, is it not lunacy to close Monklands A and E unit when we urgently require to retain capacity at Monklands?

David Davidson said that, in the eight years of holding this debate, not much has changed. With all due respect, that could be said of his speeches. I reassure Frank McAveety that the incoming Administration following the election of 3 May will complete the M74. We are totally committed to that, and we will see it completed no matter what negotiations we have to enter into. I thoroughly enjoyed the latest, and very entertaining, instalment in Wendy Alexander's campaign for the Labour leadership once Jack McConnell is sacked following the election.

It is okay—I will let Wendy Alexander in soon. I was not winding her up deliberately. I was interested to note that, last week, according to the Labour Party, the alleged black hole in the budget was £11 billion. This week, Wendy says that it is £10 billion. There are 14 weeks to go until the election. At that rate of decrease, by the time we get to polling day there will be a structural surplus of £4 billion a year.

Who do I take first? I will take George Lyon first.

I will take an intervention from Wendy Alexander first. Come on, Wendy.

I was hoping for an intervention, rather than a speech. The first major change that we will make is that the new Executive's finance minister will be responsible for all revenue raising, as well as all expenditure. That is by far the biggest and most productive change that we can make. In answer to the second question, there is no black hole. Let us go through the so-called black hole. GERS starts with £11 billion, it ignores the oil money, it then includes a deliberate mistake—an accounting error, which has been admitted—of £300 million and it also allocates to Scotland a payment of £400 million for English prisons. We know that John Reid is in charge of English prisons—well, we think he is—but it is a bit unfair to allocate the spending for them to this Parliament. Further, GERS takes out our share of Gordon Brown's deficit in the United Kingdom and the mistakes in corporation tax revenue, which result in the document suggesting that we get only £2.4 billion, despite the fact the top companies in Scotland, put together, make profits of about £24 billion a year.

I will not give way to Mr Muldoon as he has only just come into the chamber. When we add all the figures up, we can see that, far from there being a structural deficit, Scotland will be in surplus.

We have always recognised the special needs of Edinburgh as a capital city. I am absolutely sure that the additional money that is required by the capital city of what will be not only a nation but a nation state will be recognised. When we win the referendum, Edinburgh will be one of the capitals of the nation states of Europe. As I was saying, far from there being the structural deficit that Wendy Alexander talks about, there would be a surplus. I direct members' attention to the share of money that is allocated to us as our share of defence expenditure. Our share of the cost of defence is 8.9 per cent, which includes our share of the cost of nuclear weaponry, the illegal war in Iraq and the illegal war in Afghanistan. However, only 5.5 per cent of that money is spent in Scotland. If our share was spent in Scotland, it would be creating many more jobs in Scotland and this country would be far better off. Of course, GERS does not take that into account.

For a deputy finance minister, Mr Lyon does not have much of a grasp of what I have just said. I said that our share of the money that is wasted on nuclear weapons will be spent in Scotland on schools, hospitals, education and housing. On current figures, that amounts to between £700 million and £800 million a year. That substantial additional investment in essential services in Scotland will mean that we will not resort to the expensive Tory policy of using private-finance initiatives, which is practiced by the Executive. We will save £110 million a year just by getting rid of PFI and by more wisely funding investment through far better methods. Unfortunately, I do not have time to finish my little lecture, but I am happy to do so after the vote.

I draw the First Minister's attention to reports from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and Save the Children this morning. After 300 years of union and 10 years of a Labour Government, more than half our children in many parts of Scotland are living in dire poverty. In the Craigneuk ward of the First Minister's constituency, 56 per cent of the children are living in dire poverty. Is that part of the union dividend of which he is so proud?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will commission a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, in light of recent events in England and reports that there may be up to 200 dogs being kept illegally in Scotland. (S2F-2646)

I join the First Minister in sending condolences to Ellie Lawrenson's family.  I draw the First Minister's attention to the recommendations of bodies such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which, like many others, regards the current legislation as inadequate in three respects. First, it concentrates on the breed rather than the deed—there is a need to tackle aggressive dogs that are not of the breeds defined in the legislation. Secondly, there is no provision in the legislation for what happens in the home. Thirdly, there is a need to look at making mandatory the registration and microchip identification of dogs. Will the First Minister look at those three proposals as a way of tightening up the legislation before another tragedy happens anywhere in Scotland?

We now know that the Liberal Democrat position is that they are, having been hoodwinked in the previous vote, prepared to be hoodwinked in this vote. From the tone of the minister's opening remarks, it is clear that he is still smarting from having lost the campaign to keep Rhona Brankin out of the Cabinet. When the Labour Party was elected in 1997, the message in its final campaign press conference was that we should vote Labour so that we could save the national health service by Friday. In the run up to the Scottish Parliament elections this year, the slogan must be, "Vote to save the Scottish health service on 3 May." Although Donald Gorrie said that the decision to close the accident and emergency units had been taken, a new Administration after 3 May could reverse that decision and keep both Ayr and Monklands accident and emergency units open. That is why Alex Salmond, Nicola Sturgeon, Shona Robison and the rest of the Scottish National Party have given an unequivocal commitment that if we form the Administration, possibly with other parties, after 3 May, we will keep both Ayr and Monklands accident and emergency units open. We will do that for the simple reason that we, unlike Labour, are not prepared to risk life and limb in the name of PFI. People ask me on their doorsteps about all the extra money that is supposed to have gone into the health service in the past 10 years. The boast, which is quite right, is that the amount of taxpayers' money that is going into the health service has doubled. The budget for the health service in Scotland is edging quickly towards £10 billion a year, so how is it that, on the one hand, all that extra money is going into the health service, but, on the other hand, the Executive is proposing to close six of the 15 accident and emergency units in central Scotland? The answer is that so much of that money is wasted on PFI and on profiteering. As "Frontline Scotland" pointed out four weeks ago in its programme "In Sickness and in Wealth", the decision in Lanarkshire has nothing to do with consultants' capacity or bed capacity, and it certainly has nothing to do with the wishes of the people of Lanarkshire. Their wishes have been articulated not just by me but by my good friend John Reid and his good friend Tom Clarke, both of whom will have to vote SNP on 3 May if they want the accident and emergency unit at Monklands to remain open. The decision had nothing to do with health policy and everything to do with finance and PFI. If the accident and emergency unit at Monklands had been funded through PFI, it would not be closing. The decisions that have been  made are all about the need to protect PFI—a profiteering policy that was introduced by the Tories and which is now sustained by the Labour party in Government. For 30 or 40 years, Labour lived off its reputation as the creator of the national health service, but Nye Bevan must be birling in his grave when he listens to Andy Kerr. Nye Bevan created the national health service, but, as far as accident and emergency units are concerned, Andy Kerr is butchering it.

Will the member clarify the Liberal Democrat policy? Are the Liberal Democrats opposed now to the closure of Monklands accident and emergency unit, or are they opposed to the closure of any accident and emergency unit in Lanarkshire?

Can I take it from the member's remarks that Liberal Democrat policy in Central Scotland is to close Monklands A and E?

Which one of the programmes that the minister has listed will be cut to fund Nicol Stephen's proposal to reduce income tax in Scotland by 2p in the pound?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Can the member tell us where the money will come from to fund Nicol Stephen's proposal to reduce income tax in Scotland by 2p in the pound?

Will the member give way?

Will the member say where the money will come from to fund Nicol Stephen's proposal to reduce income tax in Scotland by 2p in the pound?

rose—

I thank Mr Aitken for that lovely comment. What are the Tories' proposals? We have heard Mr Aitken's analysis of everyone else's proposals, but what are the Tories about these days?

Will Richard Baker explain, in terms of GDP per head, how it is that eight out of the 10 wealthiest nations in the world are about the same size as Scotland?

That view was expressed by the official adviser to the Finance Committee, which is now convened by Wendy Alexander. I note that, having made her speech, Wendy has now left the chamber. Does that mean that the Finance Committee's adviser's view of the Scottish Executive's statistics is that they are not up to international standards?

The one thing that we can learn from the Labour and Liberal Democrat speeches today is that all members seem to have read this morning's opinion polls, which show what the Scottish people think of the union dividend. What is the union dividend? Part of the union dividend is a rate of child poverty that is the highest in the whole of western Europe. In independent Denmark, independent Norway and independent Finland, the level of child poverty is one tenth of what it is in Scotland under the union.

I will in a minute. I am coming to Wendy Alexander's points, so she need not worry. Part of the union dividend is pensioner poverty, given that a quarter of our pensioners live on or near the breadline. They remember that, one year, Gordon Brown gave them a rise of 75p a week.

The member was supposed to make an intervention, not a second speech. The social settlements in those countries are predicated upon having the independence to take the right decisions for that country. Some independent countries want higher taxes than others. Other independent countries want a different tax mix. Our argument is that Scotland currently has the worst of all possible worlds with the union dividend.

On the contrary, Scotland is potentially the richest nation in the whole of western Europe. We produce 10 times the oil that we need and eight times the gas that we need. We have the potential to produce five times the  electricity that we need. There is no other European country with our level of natural resources. Had Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives not wasted those resources year after year, our people would be living in a wealthy country, instead of in poverty under the union and those parties. What is the Executive doing about fuel poverty? It makes much of the winter fuel allowance. Three years ago the allowance accounted for 35 per cent of the average household fuel bill; now, after a 57 per cent increase in energy prices, the figure is down to 22 per cent. What will the Executive do to restore the allowance to its previous level, so that our people do not have to live in fuel poverty? The Executive talks about waste, but the Tories, the Liberal Democrats and the Labour party are the lot who have presided over the private finance initiative. Let us consider the waste in PFI. The Tories signed a contract for the Skye bridge that wasted £27 million of public money. Inverness airport had to be bailed out with public money, at three or four times the original cost. The Executive is waiting until after the election to tell us how much it will take to bail out West Lothian College, which will also cost an enormous amount of money. Wendy Alexander asked where the SNP will get the money that it needs. We will start by ceasing to waste money on further PFI projects, which are bad news for the taxpayer and bad news for Scotland.

Absolutely. The closure of Monklands accident and emergency department is just one example of the social consequences of PFI. The Executive accuses other people of being unable to calculate their figures, but Mr Swinney gave two examples of Executive figures that are £1 billion out. In GERS £500 million has been allocated to us for the cost of English prisons and the English court system. I know that John Reid is in charge of those, but that is no reason for us to have to pay for them. The Executive has also miscalculated the cost of its legislation by £500 million. We will take no lessons in arithmetic from Mr Lyon and Mr McCabe, the ministers who presided over the Scottish Enterprise financial fiasco last year. I wanted to paint a picture of how in an independent Scotland the wealth of Scotland would be put to work for the people of Scotland. Unfortunately, I have only six minutes, so Mr  Mather, Mr Ewing and Mr Morgan will need to do that for me.

I accept that only about 4 per cent of our companies are incorporated, but the point that Mr Swinney made stands. The 4 per cent that are incorporated made total profits in excess of £24 billion, but the Executive claims that it received only £2.4 billion back in corporation tax from those profits. Even if we take into account double tax relief, that figure is fallacious.

Given what the member has said, why have the Tories criticised our proposal to reduce corporation tax to 20 per cent?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to make an announcement about the future of Careers Scotland. (S2O-11503)

What are the options, and can the minister guarantee that the Executive will break the habit of a lifetime and announce the outcome to the Parliament instead of the Sunday papers?

Will the member give way?

Maureen Macmillan makes the point that we are supposed to be having a debate. What does she think the chances are that, at the end of that debate, Tony Blair and his Government will agree to get rid of nuclear weapons?

I agree with what the minister has just said, but does he take the point that if organisations such as Communities Scotland adapted to the new situation and gave information without people having to approach the information  commissioner to force it out of them, that would have a beneficial knock-on effect on the money that we need for that commissioner? There is an onus on the Executive.

Mr Salmond has promised it.

How was the pie?

I take John Scott's point about the ombudsman giving evidence to various committees, but the policy lessons coming out of her work go into the ether unless she is reporting on her own remit to a particular committee on a regular basis. The lack of that may be one of the reasons why there are currently so many problems and delays in the ombudsman's office.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not want to be churlish, particularly at this time of year, but Margaret Jamieson asked the member who represents the SPCB a fair question and did not deserve to be told that it would be treated with contempt. We are all interested in the answer to her question.

Does the member agree that the number of cases referred to the information commissioner and the cost of running his office would be a lot lower if the agencies of the Scottish Executive, such as Communities Scotland, gave us the information that we requested instead of continuously and almost without exception refusing to do so, thus requiring us to go through a whole procedure to get the information to which we are entitled?

I want to make two general points that are relevant to the debate. First, I think that all members agree that if we were to start again things would be different and that we would adopt a slightly different approach to appointing commissioners, who are commonly referred to as tsars. However, we are where we are and we must consider where to go from here. The Finance Committee's report rightly sets out several questions that should be asked before the Parliament decides to appoint another commissioner. When I was preparing a bill that would have established a commissioner for older people, I considered the possibility of adding that commissioner's remit to the remit of an existing commissioner, but that proved to be extremely difficult in legislative terms. The legal advice that I received from the Parliament was that that could not be done without introducing a fairly substantive bill, which would probably require to be sponsored by the Executive. As well as considering the criteria that the Finance Committee has set out, we must consider the factors that can influence whether new remits can be added to existing remits. I come to my second general point. Because of the remit of its inquiry, the Finance Committee inevitably focused on the commissioners who have been appointed by the Parliament. However, compared with the Scottish Executive, those commissioners pale into insignificance in financial terms and in terms of the resources that they use. There is inconsistency right across the board, not only in the operating frameworks—the minister referred to those—of the recent appointments and the new bodies that the Executive has set up, but in relation to the basic principles that are involved. For example, appointments to the boards of regional transport partnerships, which the Executive has recently set up through Executive-sponsored legislation, fall outwith the public appointments code and the remit of the public appointments commissioner. It seems to me that that flies in the face of the Parliament's intention when it passed the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Act 2003. The latest appointment—of the police complaints commissioner—also falls outwith the remit of the public appointments code and the public appointments commissioner. I say to the Executive that nothing more than statutory instruments are required to bring such people into line and make them properly accountable under the act and under freedom of information legislation, for example. A number of issues relating to the five parliamentary commissioners must be addressed.  First, my experience of the public services ombudsman's office is that the time that it takes to reach a decision on whether an investigation should be conducted—never mind the time that it takes to conduct an investigation—is totally unacceptable. I have been waiting for 12 months for a decision from that ombudsman on whether there is a prima facie case to answer—that is before an investigation can take place. In almost every case, the turnaround time from referral to a final report is well over a year. That defeats the purpose of the act. I am not sure whether there is a lack of resources for dealing with the ombudsman's workload or whether there are inefficiencies in the ombudsman's office, but the corporate body must urgently and openly address that matter. It must talk to all members of the Parliament and not deal with the matter in secrecy, which it has typically done in the past seven years—Margaret Jamieson was right about that. How can we ask the corporate body to monitor the accountability of such bodies when it is not sufficiently accountable to the Parliament as a whole?

That is a separate issue. The corporate body operates like a secret society and there is a wider concern about that among members of all parties. That is not the main focus of the debate, but it is relevant. Secondly, there is no systematic way to hold the commissioners to account in the Parliament, not only on the financial side, for which the corporate body is responsible, but on the more general policy side. I again give the example of the Scottish public services ombudsman. The ombudsman is not being properly or systematically held accountable to the Parliament. A lead committee needs to be designated so that each commissioner reports to a specific committee. We know that the standards commissioner reports to the Standards and Public Appointments Committee, but the information commissioner does not report to a specific committee and neither does the ombudsman. The same is true of the other commissioners. We must ensure that there is greater accountability, not only to ensure that the commissioners do what the Parliament willed, but to address some of the policy issues that arise out of their work. I will give one example. It is clear to me—and having had a discussion with Professor Alice Brown, I know that it is also clear to her—that a major problem in Scotland is the lack of adequate complaints procedures within public bodies, including local authorities. That genuine policy  issue must be addressed. Many of the public agencies with inadequate complaints procedures are agencies of the Executive, yet there is no way in which the ombudsman can get a committee to address the issue and have the necessary follow-up work done on policy development. Thirdly, we should take a leaf out of the book of the United States Congress. When it sets up a body that it is not clear is required in the long term, it puts a brake on the length of time for which the body is set up. If we set up a new body—as I hope that we will after the election, Mr Brownlee—it would be a sensible innovation to set it up for five years and build into the bill a statutory requirement for a review of whether the body needs to continue at all, or in its present form. There would be a built-in procedure to ensure that, as Margaret Jamieson said, we get the valuable outputs in relation to the inputs and achieve not only value for money, but the original principled objectives in respect of either access to information or redress for maladministration or the failure to deliver a service. Finally, we need to consider inspections and audits across the public sector. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee was told three or four years ago, when we reviewed lifelong learning, that the Scottish Executive Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department and its agencies required every college in Scotland to be reviewed 28 times a year for different aspects of their work. Sometimes the same work was reviewed more than once. For example, the Scottish Enterprise local enterprise company for area A required a review for its contract and an almost identical contract with area B required someone else—usually a consultant—to undertake an inspection. I hope that Professor Crerar's report will address that, so that some common sense and streamlining can be brought into the system, along with more effectiveness and more accountability in respect of both the Executive and the Parliament. I hope that when the time comes members will support my bill to establish a commissioner for older people.

In many respects, the commissioner for children and young people in Scotland has done a good job. However, does the member agree that having both a commissioner and a chief executive in a small office with a budget of just over £1 million seems, to say the least, to be overegging the bureaucratic pudding?

Will Professor Crerar's review consider the number of inspections of local authorities that are required by the Scottish Executive? Highland Council recently counted the number of inspections and audits that are required of it in a year and the total was 659.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I tried to give you intimation of this point of order yesterday, but for some reason that did not reach you, so I will understand if you do not want to make a ruling immediately. On 8 November I lodged a written parliamentary question to ask the Scottish Executive when the position of chair of Scottish Enterprise would next be advertised. To date, I have received no reply to my question, but on Thursday 14 December the Executive issued a press release, with no notification to any parliamentarian, about the reappointment of Sir John Ward as chair of Scottish Enterprise. At the very least, the Executive has not treated the Parliament with respect. Indeed, the Executive has treated the Parliament with contempt by not answering my question before issuing a notice to the press.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it anticipates that the upgrade to the Raith interchange will take place. (S2O-11420)

Is there any way of bringing that date forward, given the tremendous problems at the Raith interchange? Has the minister undertaken an economic impact evaluation of the upgrade? Has he calculated how many additional jobs it would bring to Lanarkshire and the surrounding area?

Throughout the bill, we have tried to establish a balance between the interests of the creditor and the interests of the debtor. In doing so, both the minister and the committee have been conscious of the need to ensure that there is a degree of humanitarianism in the administration of bankruptcy and diligence. [ Interruption. ]

You will be glad to learn, Presiding Officer, that I see from my phone that the latest poll shows that there is a 10 per cent gap between the Scottish National Party and the Labour Party. We must achieve a balance between the interests of the creditor and the interests of the debtor. However, it is also necessary to ensure that people are left with enough to live on while they live up to their responsibilities. Section 172(3) states: "Where the sheriff is satisfied that, in the circumstances, the money attachment is unduly harsh to the debtor, the sheriff must, subject to subsection (4) below, make an order such as is mentioned in subsection (2) above." The purpose of my amendment 171 is to provide a degree of definition of the phrase "unduly harsh" and, in particular, to leave the debtor with enough for them and their family to subsist on, so that they are not left destitute or nearly destitute as a result of the decision of the sheriff. This is a humanitarian amendment that does not alter the balance between the interests of the creditor and the interests of the debtor, but acts as a guarantee to ensure that the affected person has enough left to live on. That is a sensible measure. The issue was not highlighted at stage 2, but I am moving the amendment as a result of what has happened to two of my constituents in Central Scotland, to provide an extra guarantee that in future there will be a degree of safeguard for the debtor. I move amendment 171.

I hear what the minister says but, quite frankly, I think that his comparison with divorce settlements is rather spurious. In a divorce settlement, aliment is related to the rights of the spouse. The definition of aliment is not as simplistic as that propounded by the minister. Amendment 171 would improve the bill by providing the guarantee that is required, and I do not accept that it would confuse the issue, so I intend to press it.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I understand what the minister says about all the measures that the chancellor has taken but, as the Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust has shown, inequality in Britain today is worse than it was on the day that Gordon Brown became chancellor.

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing tonight's debate and on her opening speech, the sincerity of which shone through. We should be having this debate during the day and voting on it because the subject is, with all due respect, too important to be left to a member's business debate at the tail end of the parliamentary day. It is one of the biggest challenges that Scotland faces, so I hope that the minister will be able to schedule a debate on poverty, particularly child poverty, sometime early in the new year. There are three main causes of child poverty in our society, the first of which is unemployment. I agree totally with Jackie Baillie that the best anti-poverty measure is full employment. However, as Frances Curran pointed out, it is not enough just to get people into jobs—we must also tackle the second major cause of child poverty and poverty among adults, which is low income and low pay. There is no point in a people being in jobs if they would be better off on benefits, or if they have to live in poverty. The third major cause of child poverty is poor housing. Despite all the efforts that have been made over many years, we have never really broken the back of Scotland's housing problem. For example, we are still only building about 27,000 new houses in Scotland every year compared to southern Ireland, where 85,000 new builds were started last year. One of the consequences of the current levels of poverty is poor educational attainment. According to the Scottish Funding Council, the same percentage of youngsters—about 14 per cent—from working class parents are attending university today as was the case 30 to 40 years ago. The number of people who are classed as  coming from working class parents is smaller than it used to be because many parents would now be defined as middle class, but that still emphasises the fact that we have not made any significant progress in giving people from such homes access to higher education. As we all know, another major consequence of child poverty is that people's health as adults is badly affected, as is their longevity. No matter what problems we are talking about—housing, unemployment, low pay, education or health—poverty runs through them all as a major theme that has to be tackled. I would like the chancellor to take three measures in his budget, one of which is the seasonal payments for which Barnardo's is calling. Another is implementation of the Child Poverty Action Group's recommendation that child benefits be paid to every child at the level that is currently paid to first children. That would go a long way towards helping to alleviate the worst of the problem. Although progress has been made on getting some children out of poverty, that is true only in relation in respect of the definition whereby children are said to be in poverty if they live in a household whose income is less than 60 per cent of the median household income. Many children have gone from living in households in which the income was under 60 per cent of the average to living in households in which it is just over 60 per cent of the average, but the percentage of children who live in households in which the income is less than 40 per cent of the average has increased. We face a major challenge and I hope that the chancellor and others will take radical measures to tackle a huge problem.

Does the member agree that what caused the U-turn was YouGov and the polls over the summer?

It is the same bill; there have been no amendments.

I join the chorus of approval and congratulate Dennis Canavan, who has conducted himself very ably in the course of the bill's progress. I am also delighted that he has confirmed that the reports in The Herald today have no truth in them. I thank both Dennis Canavan and Tom McCabe for their kind words about the Enterprise and Culture Committee. I will return to the committee's report and research on the subject shortly. I want to emphasise the fact that, in his otherwise excellent speech, Murdo Fraser created the first hostage to fortune of the election campaign when he said that "we have one of the most competitive economies in Europe". I am sure that Mr McCabe has written down that quote verbatim and that it will come back to haunt Murdo Fraser during the election campaign.

I think that Mr Fraser is trying to extricate himself from an embarrassing situation. Murdo Fraser also compared St Andrew's day to St Patrick's day. I hope that what we are doing will mean that St Andrew's day soon has the same impact as St Patrick's day, although I point out that, in Ireland, St Patrick's day is an additional holiday rather than a substitute holiday. That goes against Mr Fraser's position. I know that when I lived in the States, in the Boston area, St Patrick's day was a holiday and certainly a day of celebration for a lot of people in that part of America. Indeed, it is a day of celebration in the White House, whether the President is Republican or Democrat. I look forward to the day when First Minister Salmond goes to the White House to celebrate St Andrew's day. [ Interruption. ] I say to members that I am willing to take an intervention. In comparison with our other national heroes—William Wallace, Robert the Bruce and Robert Burns—St Andrew is unique: out of the four, he is the only one who was not born in Ayrshire. Despite that, we are still prepared to celebrate him—even in Ayrshire. On the argument about the economic impact of St Andrew's day, the committee undertook research jointly with the Executive as part of our reconsideration of the bill. That research came to the conclusion, if I may paraphrase what was said, that the economic impact of the holiday depends on what we make of it. If there is an ambitious  programme of celebration, both nationally and internationally, it will have major economic benefit for Scotland. However, if we do not celebrate it ambitiously enough, it will make a contribution that is either negative or zero. In essence, the economic argument boils down to what we make of the holiday. I welcome the Executive's programme for this year as a start and hope that, as each year passes, the programme will become much more ambitious. Indeed, I am sure that, by this time next year, the new Government that will be elected in May not only will have made St Andrew's day an additional holiday but will be planning to make it an independence day holiday.

Does the member agree that it is a bit ridiculous that this Parliament does not have the power to make simple decisions such as what should constitute an additional public holiday?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to ask about the conduct of the Executive parties in the Parliamentary Bureau with regard to my Commissioner for Older People (Scotland) Bill. I have adhered to both the letter and the spirit of the standing orders, as well as the founding principles of the Parliament. The way in which members' bills have been dealt with recently is frankly unacceptable. There has been a deliberate attempt by the Executive parties to butcher the bills and put them into the long grass. That fails to live up to the basic principles of the Parliament. Presiding Officer, I beg that you reopen the issue, because we expect you to defend the interests of back-bench members and individual members in every respect. I hope that you will take up the matter with the bureau and ask it to come to its senses and reconsider. The role of the Minister for Parliamentary Business is not just to represent the Labour party, but to ensure that we adhere to the founding principles of the Parliament.

Although the councils might not have identified the issues to the Executive, a number of school boards in all three Ayrshire authorities have identified the problem to the authorities.

I begin by outlining briefly the existing legal framework on the issue, which is vital to the safety of children travelling to and from school. The Education (Scotland) Act 1980 states that local authorities must have due regard for the safety of pupils who travel to school by any arrangement. The Schools (Safety and Supervision of Pupils) (Scotland) Regulations 1990 state that any arrangements that are put in place must be kept under review. Under the "School Transport Guidance Circular", Scottish ministers "expect" local authorities to do that and it is also a common law duty of care. The circular states that "parents have a right to expect that suitable arrangements for a safe school transport system will be made by education authorities, taking account of local circumstances." I allege that the spirit, if not the law, of the circular and the act is not being adhered to—in particular there is a huge gap in provision of supervisors on single-decker buses especially in many parts of Scotland. In a 2003 circular, Scottish ministers stated that "on many journeys, the supervision of pupils is unnecessary" without providing any evidence to back the statement up. Ironically, the circular goes on to say that supervision "would be desirable in some circumstances", but it does not state what those circumstances would be. That is at best an ambivalent position, which I think is also rather complacent. The same circular also states: "Supervision on transport can help to maintain good behaviour amongst pupils and this in turn can contribute to more positive behaviour within the classroom."  Well, if supervision is not necessary in most circumstances and it contributes to good behaviour inside and outwith the classroom as well as to the pupils' safety, why is it not universally applied? The circular also states that "Supervision contributes more generally to greater school transport safety." That makes me wonder why supervision is not mandatory. Why is it left up to the local education authorities to determine on its provision? Why do not the vast majority of those authorities provide regular universal supervision on school buses. The safe school travel pack that was provided by the Scottish School Board Association, and which has been endorsed by the Executive, provides guidance on good practice, but funnily enough it does not address the need for supervision. Legislation is, however, prescriptive when it comes to safety devices: for example, display of distinctive reflective school bus signs at the front and rear of each vehicle is compulsory. Since 2001, under reserved legislation, any coach or minibus that is transporting three or more children aged between three and 16 must be fitted with seatbelts. More recently, it has also become compulsory for cars to be fitted with booster seats for all children under the age of 12. Why do we have those measures for private transport but do not have parallel measures for buses and public transport?

Absolutely. That is another gap and another reason why the law needs to be substantially reviewed. The three Ayrshire local authorities' policy—it is also that of every council that was previously part of Strathclyde Region—is to provide supervision on all double-decker buses but not on single-decker buses, although research shows that primary school children generally travel on single-decker buses while secondary school children use double-decker buses. Surely it is more important that primary school children be supervised—although I am not denying the importance of supervision of secondary school children. The Scottish Consumer Council's report, "Travelling to School" found that "school bus services tend to use older and less comfortable vehicles",  which many pupils describe as unsafe. The same report states that "just under sixty percent of school bus pupils reported that they never wear a seat belt". Even worse, 40 per cent of school bus users reported that their bus did not have seat belts. The report also said that 75 per cent of school buses never have an adult supervisor other than the driver. In 2005, that report concluded that a more proactive approach from the Executive was needed and that the need for more escorts on school buses should be reviewed. The Executive's own report "Anti-social Behaviour on Buses" said that the school run is a major source of bother. A similar report by the Northern Ireland commissioner for children and young people in 2005 concluded that "There is a clear need for adult supervision ... on school buses" to reduce misbehaviour and to improve safety. Unfortunately, there are no up-to-date precise figures on injuries or accidents that involve school buses. However, "Road Accidents Scotland 2004", which was published in January 2006, reported 612 injuries in the 10 years up to 2004 involving people who were travelling by public transport buses. In recent evidence to the Education Committee, a petitioner said that in every constituency that the members of that committee represented, a serious injury or fatal accident involving a school bus had occurred in the past 10 years. Information about supervision arrangements and the spend on school bus safety is not held centrally—I hope that the Executive will consider the need to collect that information. I know that a review of sorts is going on in the Executive, but I say to the minister that prevention is better than cure. To be frank, the policy is a complete mess and it requires ministers' urgent attention. We owe it to every child in primary school and in secondary school to ensure that their travel to and from school is as safe as it can be in every respect. I beg the Scottish ministers to take the matter seriously and to produce an action plan early in the new year.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member is saying—

I will do as you say, and take as much time as you wish me to take. Jeremy Purvis just said that Ms Hyslop is not in the chamber, but she has never left the chamber.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Jeremy Purvis described Christine Grahame as a self-styled shadow minister; she is not self-styled but appointed by the leader of the party.

I am sure that you will be glad to know, Presiding Officer, that I am happy to take interventions to assist you in managing the time this morning. As other members have done, I express my support for the principle of the new rail link between Airdrie and Bathgate. As a host of speakers have mentioned—all of them, I think—the line will bring economic benefits, not only to North Lanarkshire and West Lothian, but to the wider central Scotland economy. It will also bring major environmental benefits, not least, we hope, by taking traffic off the M8. It will create social benefits, by widening the travel-to-work area for many people in West Lothian and parts of North Lanarkshire and, at the same time, it will expand social inclusion in those parts of Scotland. As every member who has spoken has done, I congratulate the committee, under the excellent convenership of Phil Gallie, on its thorough work. I also congratulate Mr Gallie on his explicit introduction to the debate. I have only one major note of dissent, which relates to paragraphs 165 and 166 in the committee's report. I do not dissent from the committee's report, but I want to draw the attention of the committee, and of the independent assessor whom the committee will appoint, to the issues that arise between individuals, particularly in the Airdrie area, and Network Rail. All members are keen to encourage a new attitude in public services. In days gone by, when the railways were a nationalised industry, the attitude was often, "Ye'll dae whit ye're telt and ye'll take it or leave it." One reason why we are all in favour of more consumer choice in our industries is to give consumers much more of a say than they had in the past.

I would be very relaxed about renationalisation, but that is not the issue at hand. The issue is the continuing attitude of Network Rail's senior management in Scotland towards individuals whose livelihoods, as Karen Whitefield rightly said, will be affected by the proposals. I draw attention to three examples in which the attitude that Network Rail has adopted and the contemptuous way in which it is dealing with those who will be affected adversely by the project is not in any way conducive to the proper conduct of Network Rail's business. The first example is Hillend loch and the angling club there, which Karen Whitefield mentioned in passing. In its dealings with the angling club, Network Rail has been frankly less than honest and certainly discourteous; at times—I will choose my words carefully—it has touched on being economical with the truth. I hope that the minister, in his discussions with the senior management at Network Rail, as well as the committee and the independent assessor, will make it absolutely clear to Network Rail that the people who are involved, all of whom are in principle in favour of the railway line, deserve to be treated properly in the negotiations. The angling club, which is widely supported, should be given its proper place. It should not necessarily be given everything that it asks for, but at least it should be dealt with fairly and justly. The second example relates to the people, particularly in Caldercruix, whose homes are the subject of compulsory purchase orders from Network Rail. I draw to the minister's attention the way in which Network Rail has dealt with the individuals concerned. We should remember that those people will lose their houses. They saved up for those homes and have worked hard to keep them, but they are willing to move and are not taking a nimby approach. However, the quid pro quo should be that they get a fair deal in return, which should mean not only fair financial compensation, but Network Rail dealing with them humanely. As well as drawing attention to the immediate issue, I ask the minister to examine the whole process. Under the scheme, when a compulsory purchase order is put in place, the valuation is undertaken by a company that is commissioned by Network Rail. However, in all cases in which a compulsory purchase order has been put in place, an independent valuation should be conducted of the property that is the subject of the order. An individual such as the district valuer should conduct the valuation, rather than a company that is appointed by the organisation that is carrying out the compulsory purchase.

With all due respect, Knight Frank, not the district valuer, is acting on behalf of Network Rail. We need to look into who exactly has which role, because the people involved have been told to deal with Knight Frank, not the district valuer. My third example concerns people who live in homes that are adjacent to where the line will be but which are not subject to compulsory purchase orders. The railway's impact on the value of their homes—not to mention the disruption that noise and other impacts of the railway will cause—will be severe, but Network Rail refuses to consider the possibility of compulsory purchase for those homes. People in that situation should have some right of appeal. There should be a process that is independent of Network Rail and allows them at least a fair hearing on whether their homes should also be the subject of compulsory purchase orders. It is not enough to accept that, if Network Rail says that it will not make a compulsory purchase order, those people will be left high and dry when the value of their homes falls substantially as a result of the decision. Something must be built into the process to make it much fairer for those people.

They will do so, but that does not invalidate the fundamental points that I am making. First, there is a major attitude problem in the senior management of Network Rail, which is reminiscent of the old days of the nationalised industry. That attitude needs to change. Secondly, matters of process outside the legislative process need to be addressed. In particular, we need to address the district valuer's role and the right of people who feel that they will be adversely affected by the railway line to get a fair hearing on the potential compulsory purchase of their homes. I do not believe that the independent assessor has  the power under the current legislation to deal with such cases. My drawing attention to those issues is not about invalidating the case for the rail line; it is about decency and treating people properly. We hear a lot about Big Brother and big Government. The matters that I raise are a good example of issues on which we can demonstrate that, when it comes to dealing with individuals, individual families and local organisations such as the angling club at Hillend loch, we are not like Westminster but care about those people as well as the big picture.

I have a simple question: is Bristow Muldoon's constituency one of the 14 that Labour will lose, according to a report in The Herald this morning?

I agree with every word that the minister has said, but I draw his attention to the contempt with which the senior management of Network Rail in Scotland have treated my constituents in Airdrie—particularly those who will be affected by compulsory purchase. Network Rail's chief executive refuses to discuss those cases with me, although I represent those people at their request in their dispute with Network Rail. Will the minister give Network Rail's senior management a loud and clear message that, in the process, it is important to treat the people who are affected properly and fairly?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what information it holds on the average time taken between the Scottish public services ombudsman deciding to investigate a case and the publication of the final report and, if it does not hold such information, what plans it has to introduce a procedure to monitor this issue. (S2O-11324)

I draw Mr Scott's attention to the concerns of many members about the time that it takes to get reports from the ombudsman. I am dealing with one case in which it has taken 11 months for a decision to be made on whether to investigate the issue at all. I am not sure whether the issue is to do with resources, efficiency or some other matter. However, I emphasise that, for those people who want the ombudsman to resolve an issue, the problem is of major concern. I ask that the member and the SPCB do everything they can to address the issue as a matter of urgency.

I know that the First Minister, like everyone else in the chamber, will wish those who are involved in the talks on the future of Northern Ireland well in their endeavours. However, it is clear that one of the major issues emerging in those talks is the proposal, which has all-party agreement, to reduce the level of corporation tax in Northern Ireland, from the United Kingdom level of 30 per cent to nearer the southern Irish level of 12.5 per cent. Will the First Minister seriously examine the implications for the Scottish economy if that proposal goes ahead and will he press for a similar power to be devolved to this Parliament, so that we can continue to attract inward investment and to keep the investment that is here in Scotland?

Amendment 121 would close a loophole in the law, whereby all advice given by officials to councillors on a planning committee is on record but additional evidence that is submitted orally at the planning meeting is not recorded. In a recent case in South Lanarkshire, additional oral evidence that had been provided at the planning meeting could not be used in an appeal to the minister against the planning committee's decision, because there was no record of it. At least two of the statutory consultees challenged the veracity of the oral advice that was given at the meeting, which included an alleged statement of their position. However, because there was no record of the advice, they could not submit their challenge to be considered by the minister as part of the formal review procedure. When I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, the Deputy Minister for Communities said that we must be careful not to overload the planning register with every detail of every planning application, however big or small. I have great sympathy with that position. However, in  substantive planning applications that the planning committee considers, additional oral evidence or information that is presented at committee meetings should be a matter of public record—just as meetings of the Scottish Parliament are on record—so that there can be no dispute about what was said, either at the late stages of the planning process or at an appeal. Amendment 121 sets out a narrow definition of the additional information that would be required in the planning register and in the public domain. The approach is essential.

Yes. Amendment 121 is drafted to allow local authorities to keep "an electronic or written record of any oral evidence or advice provided". How the record was made would be a matter for the local authority. It would probably be cheaper to record meetings electronically. My proposal would address the minister's concerns at stage 2 that the cost of keeping a record would be excessive, because it would cost next to nothing to put a tape recorder at the front of the room and record everything that was said at the meeting. If there was a dispute about or a need to check what was said, the record would be available to all participants. Currently, additional oral information or advice offered at a planning meeting is not subject to scrutiny or challenge, because it is not recorded. By recording the oral evidence, we would strengthen the arm of everyone involved in the planning process, because a dispute about what was said could be resolved without recourse to the courts. Amendment 121 is sensible—as members would expect of an amendment that I lodged—and would provide a cost-effective way of improving and enhancing the democracy and transparency of the planning process. I move amendment 121.

At stage 2, the minister told the Communities Committee that all issues raised by consultees and objectors should be included in the planning register, as she said again today. However, it is not possible to meet that requirement if there is no record of what the consultees and objectors said at the planning meeting. The requirement can be met only if oral information and evidence given at the meeting is recorded.  How can we have freedom of information if the information is not there to begin with? It goes without saying that an FOI request is redundant if there is no record of what was said at the meeting. Dave Petrie's comment about cost was nonsense. There is a verbatim record of every full council meeting in the country—sometimes that is unfortunate. Meetings are recorded electronically and sometimes in writing. Every meeting of the Parliament is recorded. The logic of the Tory and Labour position is that the committees in the Parliament should issue only their minutes and we should not have a verbatim record of what is said. Why is having a verbatim record right and good enough for the committees of this Parliament but not right and good enough for planning committees when they take crucial decisions? If the bill is to have credibility, it must extend the democratic rights of consultees and objectors. My simple, cost-effective, easy-to-understand amendment would do that. I beg members to reject the advice of the minister and the civil servants who wrote her speech.

Would the best way to celebrate the union not be just to end the union and to allow both England and Scotland their independence?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reconsider its decision not to hold an inquiry into the Shirley McKie fingerprint case. (S2O-11038)

During the Justice 1 Committee's inquiry, it became evident that, due to time and other constraints, that parliamentary inquiry could not call a number of key players, such as Harry Bell, who presided over the Scottish Criminal Record Office fiasco—

I did not know that someone else was answering questions on behalf of the minister. Further, the committee could not talk to Sir John Orr. In the light of the committee's inability to talk to all the witnesses and investigate the matter in the required depth, will the minister now reconsider the matter and have a public inquiry?

Does the Howat report include any provision for single status and equal pay in either local government or the health service beyond the next financial year?

Will the member give way?

I support John Swinney's amendment. In this debate, there is a general lesson for legislators. It is 36 years since the Equal Pay Act 1970 and, as Bruce  Crawford pointed out, it is 13 or 14 years since the act that led to local government reorganisation. Those two acts provide the legislative framework for single status and equal pay. There is an onus on legislators—at Westminster or Holyrood—not only to consider the implications of legislation before they pass it but, once it is passed, to ensure that it is implemented fairly and justly. To implement legislation fairly and justly, proper resources must be made available. However, in recent years local government has been squeezed on a number of issues—not because it is not receiving more money but because the number of statutory duties that are placed on local authorities has grown exponentially while their budgets have grown arithmetically. As John Swinney pointed out, we in Parliament have a role to play in banging heads together to find a solution to this problem, not only in one or two local authorities but the length and breadth of Scotland. I wish the Finance Committee well in the awards ceremony next week, but in its "Report on the Financial Implications of the Local Authority Single Status Agreement", the committee recommended "that councils examine ways in which reserves can be topped up" and that "there should be clear rules and guidance given to councils to prevent—a short term fix—the sale of assets simply being used to fund back-pay—leading to longer term problems." The committee also recommended that "the Executive enter into discussions with COSLA or with individual councils to identify whether funding can be made available and whether efficiencies and modernisation can be achieved to provide value for that money, taking into account the requirement to ensure that staff are paid on an equitable basis." John Swinney's amendment basically reflects the recommendations that were made by the Finance Committee, so I hope that we will have the full support of every member of the Finance Committee when we come to the vote at 5 o'clock. I want to make two further points. The first concerns the briefing that was provided by Unison Scotland, which says: "Falkirk Council has issued notices of dismissal and re-engagement to staff." Falkirk Council has done its utmost to ensure that a fair and just settlement is achieved, so to summarise the council's actions in that miserly wording is absolutely appalling and it severely damages the credibility of Unison's leadership in Scotland.  Secondly, we cannot ignore the fact that, as well as facing a substantial bill for single status and equal pay in the local government sector, we are also facing a substantial bill in relation to the health service. I hope that ministers will accept that fact, and that they will provide us with estimates of the costs and tell us how they will fund the implementation of the Executive's policy for the NHS.

The minister has talked exclusively about local government, but what are the Executive's plans for funding single status in the health service?

How?

rose—

There is probably a lot of cross-party consensus on the issue, both on the importance of dealing with the problem and on the need to tackle it in a multifarious way and through a range of services. Although we need particular policies that are geared to the NEET group, we cannot divorce the problems that those people face from the wider issues of poverty, unemployment and poor housing in Scotland. Tackling the NEET issue must be part and parcel of an ambitious programme to tackle poverty and unemployment in Scotland. One myth is that we have solved the unemployment problem but, according to figures from Scottish Enterprise, if we add up all the people who are fit, able and willing to work, including those who are on some form of benefit, we find that about 280,000 people in Scotland are still available to be recruited to the labour market. A fair proportion of them are in the 16 to 19-year-old age group. Not only do we owe them the opportunity to realise fully their potential for their sake—as the minister said—but we should realise that they are a vast untapped economic resource for Scotland. Business leaders sometimes say to me and others that far too high a percentage of our young people go on to higher education and that they cannot get young people for apprenticeships. I say to them that those young people are available for apprenticeships and for work. As the survey that was done for the strategy shows, they are willing to work and keen to get into the labour market. It is not an either/or situation. We should ensure that we get the requisite number of talented people to university and that we give the requisite number of talented people, including those among the NEET group, the opportunity of full-time education, employment or training. I agree totally with the minister that the issue does not arise when young people leave school. We could probably go to families in many areas and, at an early age, identify the children who are most likely to end up in the NEET group. They are most likely to be from families of people who are unemployed or on a relatively low income, to be living in a deprived area and in some of the worst housing conditions and to be going to a school that has some of the lowest attainment levels. We can usually identify those people early on. I emphasise the need, where possible, to identify individuals who need particular help at the earliest opportunity. In some cases, it might be possible to  do that in pre-school education or primary school, but it should certainly be possible by the time that people are in secondary school. I agree that those young people need one-to-one support. I once attended a presentation by the principal of Anniesland College, Linda McTavish, at which she put a triangle on the board and, beside it, an inverted triangle. The first triangle represented the numbers of young people who leave school to go into the labour market or on to university or college. The people at the tip of the triangle were those who go on to get a degree or a second degree; the next group down were those who go into degree or diploma level courses; and the ones at the bottom—the largest number—were those who leave school without enough qualifications. [ Interruption. ] The inverted triangle represented the amount of resources that are put in. No doubt that is the point that my good friend Mr McNeil is trying to make from a sedentary position. Linda McTavish's argument was that the people who need the least help get the most and the people who need the most help get the least. In other words, there is an inverted relationship between need and resource.

Obviously, arithmetic was not Allan Wilson's best subject when he left school. The reason for having policies such as ours is to tackle another issue that his Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council identified two or three months ago. Although we have had 10 years of a Labour Government and seven years of a devolved Government, only 14 per cent of people from poorer backgrounds in Scotland get into higher education—the same proportion that got into higher education 50 years ago. That is why it is important to have a range of policies that will allow that 14 per cent figure to get much nearer the 50 per cent figure for better-off areas. The other problem that we face is in school itself. We have heard about the back-of-an-envelope proposals for skills academies from the leader of the Scottish Labour Party, Mr McConnell. The way in which the proposals are being presented is as if to say, "If you're no bright enough to go to university, you must be pretty dull and so you should go down the vocational route." That is entirely the wrong way to present proposals. In Northern Ireland, the Costello report proposed that young people in second, third and fourth year at secondary school should receive one third academic training and one third technical training and be left to decide the other third on the basis of their own priorities and abilities. Adopting  such a formula seems like a much more sensible approach to the problem than setting up skills academies, through which we would be in danger of reinventing the two-tier education system that we thought we got rid of with the introduction of comprehensive education. There are initiatives for which I think the Executive has been unfairly criticised by the Tories, such as the education maintenance allowance, which the Tories are committed to abolishing. All the evidence is that initiatives such as education maintenance allowance that target poorer sections of the community encourage young people to stay on longer at school. There are major flaws and contradictions in the Executive's strategy. The third line on page 1 of the executive summary of "More Choices, More Chances: A Strategy to Reduce the Proportion of Young People not in Education, Employment or Training in Scotland" is: "Our objective is to eradicate the problem of NEET the length and breadth of Scotland." At the bottom of the page it states: "We propose seven NEET hotspot areas." The Executive is either going to target the problem in hotspot areas or throughout the whole country—there is an inherent contradiction there. None of the hotspot areas is a rural area; yet there are parts of rural Scotland where the NEET problem is proportionately greater than it is in parts of urban Scotland. The other big flaw in the strategy is that it almost totally ignores the services provided as a result of reserved powers, particularly by the Employment Service, and how they integrate. The danger is that we have a multitude of agencies and initiatives and that young people do not know where to go, whom to go to or how to get into the system that maximises the support that they require. Given what is happening with the careers service, Jobcentre Plus, the new deal and all the other initiatives, there is a need to streamline the organisation so that young people know that there is one place where they can go to get the help that they need. The point of contact in an urban area is often in the town centre but many of the young people who need to use it never go into the town centre. When I was a social worker in Dundee, I came across a lady who had lived in the Kirkton estate for 30 years and had never been in Dundee city centre. People like that are likely to be in the NEET category. We can learn from previous initiatives—some of which have now been binned—that located jobcentres and similar services in places such as Ferguslie Park so that young people had easy access to the services.  A range of issues needs to be addressed and there is scope for taking a much more imaginative and ambitious approach than the Executive has shown. However, we welcome the initiatives that the Executive has taken to date. I move amendment S2M-5098.3, to leave out from "and endorses" to end and insert: "regrets the poor performance of the current Scottish Executive which has led to far more of our young people, compared with their European peers, not in education, employment or training; calls for a fresh approach to engage schools, colleges, voluntary organisations and employers in Scotland to recognise the importance of early intervention for children, particularly those from socially disadvantaged backgrounds, to realise their potential in later life and so secure the opportunities that other young Scots enjoy, and recognises that, for Scotland to achieve a situation where every 16 to 19-year-old can have the opportunity to secure a place in education, employment, training or volunteering, it will require a concerted national effort and support from all sectors in Scotland."

The debate has been interesting and we have learned some things: we have learned that Bill Aitken does not know how to use the internet and that Wendy Alexander has not read the motion. The words "fiscal autonomy" do not appear in the motion—we talk about "fiscal powers". I will make it absolutely clear to Gordon Jackson, so that there is no dubiety whatever: I am a heart-and-soul nationalist; I am a cultural nationalist; I am a political nationalist; I am an economic nationalist; and I am a moral nationalist.

I will, in a minute. I want my country to be able to say that we are not participating in an illegal war in Iraq or anywhere else. I want my country to be able to say that we are not having Trident or son of Trident. I do not want to say to the people of England, as the First Minister did, "The reason we want to stey in the union wi you is so that we can dump our nuclear waste on English soil." I will let in Bristow Muldoon, but before I do, I congratulate him on his new appointment as an attack dog. Let us find out—is he is a Rottweiler or is he a poodle?

All I can say is that Bristow Muldoon is the only poodle whose hair disnae curl. The answer to the question is easy-peasy. Our position is very clear: when Scotland becomes independent, and during that process, we will retain the pound sterling. If, after independence, the Scottish people want Scotland to go into the euro, that will be a matter for the Scottish people. Why cannot the Labour Party trust the people? It is their decision. What is interesting about the question and, indeed, what is interesting about all the speeches that we have heard from the unionist parties this morning, is that they have all forgotten about the much bigger union of which we are a member. We are no longer just a member of the union with Britain; we are also supposed to be part of the European Union. How is it logical and sensible for Ireland to be a nation state member, and for Austria, Portugal, Luxembourg, Sweden and all the other successful small countries to be members of the EU but not for Scotland to be a member? There is no answer to that question. I say to the attack dogs—to the poodles, because the Rottweiler, Duncan McNeil, has left the chamber—that what matters is the European dimension. That is what makes independence not just desirable but absolutely essential. What we are dealing with this morning is the non-settled will of the Scottish people because it is clear from the poll that was published yesterday that they no longer regard devolution as their settled will.

It is precisely because of the transfer of power from London to Brussels that we should relocate our external representation from London to Brussels. We do not hear the Irish saying that they are going to give up their independence and let London represent them in Brussels. Wee Ireland—whose population was about half the size of Scotland's at one time—has done much more in the European Union than big Britain has ever done.

I will let Jeremy Purvis in. His main criticism of our proposed council of economic advisers is that it would be "boring". All I can say is that Jeremy will recognise boring when he sees it. [ Laughter. ]

That was a devastating intervention—absolutely devastating. The reality is that, over the past 40 years, power has shifted from London to Brussels. There is no reserved power in Westminster that could not be better exercised from Holyrood. I agree with the first point that Richard Baker made in his speech. The main issues are jobs, housing and the standard of living. That is why we need independence. The economic consequences of the union have been disastrous for too many of our people. Let us compare child poverty in Scotland, where a quarter of our children are living in poverty despite all the resources that we have, with Denmark—a country that has practically no resources—where the figure is less than 2 per cent. Let us consider also the level of pensioner poverty in countries such as Finland, Norway and Austria. It is minuscule. Compare that to the fact that a fifth of our pensioners live on or near the poverty line. We have had 10 years of a Labour Government—it calls itself a Labour Government—yet, according to all the recent reports, the distribution of income and wealth in this country is getting more unfair and the level of poverty is rising all the time.

I will let Wendy Alexander in. Let me tell members about Wendy Alexander, in case they did not see her on "Newsnight" the other night. At 11 o'clock, she came on saying that, if we have independence, there will be 10 years of disruption and chaos.

At 5 past 11, it was up to 20 years. By quarter past 11, it was up to 60 years.

All I can say is that I am glad that BBC2 does not have adverts. By the end of the adverts, it would have been up to 100 years. [ Laughter. ]

Is Andrew Arbuckle not proud of the role that Jim Wallace, a great Liberal, played in getting freedom of information legislation through the Parliament? Is the position that he argues not contrary to every principle and word in the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002?

We will not take any lessons from the party that has a £500 million black hole in the Glasgow housing budget. Des McNulty makes the point about the election cycle as if that is the reason for not publishing the report, but surely it is the reason for publishing it. In a democratic society, the voters should have access to all the information to which ministers have access before they have to vote.

Does the member not find it perverse that the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform will open the next debate for the Executive, in which he will attack Liberal party policy on fiscal autonomy, while the deputy minister is here defending Labour policy on lack of information?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the minister for taking an intervention and draw his attention to the loyal grins behind him from Mr McNulty. [ Interruption. ] In fact, they are now loyal hysterics. I am sure that the minister recognises the importance of parliamentary committees in the budget-setting process in the Parliament. As I am sure Mr McNulty would agree, surely it is right that if committees are to be taken seriously in the budget process, they should have access to the same information as ministers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its estimate is of the number of NHS employees in Monklands hospital in each of the next three years. (S2O-10832)

Will the minister guarantee that there will be no run-down in the number of people who are employed in the accident and emergency department at Monklands, particularly while that department is still having to cope every other weekend with the overspill from the other A and E departments in Lanarkshire? Given his last-minute—though welcome—decision to retain the intensive care and renal units at Monklands, will he explain how that impacts on the effective use of consultants when he is stupidly proposing to close the A and E unit?

I will start by doing something unusual and agreeing with Mike Rumbles on three points. First, like my colleague Christine Grahame, he was absolutely right to draw attention to the Tories who are in absentia. When it comes to election time, the Tories will be judged not by warm words but by  their track record, which, on pensions and pensioners, is nothing short of abysmal. Secondly, Mike Rumbles was right to point out the dubiety that exists about Labour's commitment to the policy of free personal care. Down south, despite the recommendation of the Sutherland commission, which covered the whole of the United Kingdom, Labour has refused to implement the policy. It cannot commit itself to free personal care for our elderly but, during the past three years, the Government has given what Gordon Brown described as a "blank cheque" to the illegal war in Iraq, which has cost £4.5 billion. The third point on which I agree with Mike Rumbles relates to local income tax. Elaine Murray's comments about the unfairness of local income tax were absurd. If we applied those daft arguments to local income tax, we would also have to apply them to national income tax. Of course, income tax is one of the most progressive forms of taxation that we have.

Since Mr Muldoon has waited behind, I will give way to him.

I think that Bristow Muldoon has—not for the first time—misinterpreted our leader. Pensioner poverty is the most important issue that our pensioners currently face. According to the Scottish Executive's figures, around 19 per cent of pensioners lived in pensioner poverty in Scotland in the year in which Labour came to power. In that year, around 170,000 pensioners were officially described as living on incomes that were below 60 per cent of median Great Britain income before housing costs. However, after nine years of a so-called Labour Government, the figure is 21 per cent. More pensioners are living in poverty today than when Labour came to power. That is the Labour Party's track record on pensioner poverty. I will return to how we should tackle such poverty towards the end of my speech. Fuel poverty, which has been grossly exacerbated by the monumental rise in energy prices, must be tackled as a priority. The Labour Government in London has frozen not only old people, but the winter fuel allowance. That allowance started at £200 and stayed at that amount, despite the fact that fuel prices have nearly doubled. A test of the Labour Government's commitment to older people and its desire to get rid of fuel poverty will be whether it increases the winter fuel allowance without waiting for next year's budget. In that context, it is amazing that  the Executive has no target for reducing cold weather deaths among our pensioners. Pensioner poverty is a crucial issue. In particular, the number of women in pensioner poverty must be considered—that issue has not yet been touched on. Fewer than 30 per cent of women receive a full basic state pension in their own right. On average, women in this country receive only 75 per cent of men's hourly earnings, only 50 per cent of men's incomes and only 33 per cent of men's pensions. When we talk about pensioner poverty, we must focus on women in particular. We have heard from the tired old parties in London that we cannot afford to do much more than is currently being done or to move at a faster pace. In that context, I point out two things. First, the 40 per cent tax relief on private pensions costs around £21 billion a year, and the vast bulk of that money goes to very rich individuals who use the money as a tax break rather than for saving for realistic pensions. Why should they be given that 40 per cent tax break? That money should help today's pensioners. Secondly, our system of national insurance contributions is extremely regressive. A person who earns £30,000 a year pays much more proportionately in national insurance than a person who earns £100,000 a year. There are two simple messages from the debate. First, we must deal with pensioner poverty because such poverty has increased rather than decreased in the past 10 years under Labour. Secondly, Scotland and Great Britain are rich nations and can well afford to end pensioner poverty once and for all.

Will the member give way?

Could the member also quote Michael Fry on his conversion to the case for independence?

I agree with everything that Annabel Goldie said about the council tax and the state pension, but is it not the case that the state pension would be £30 per week higher if the Tories had not broken the link between the increase in pensions and the increase in wages?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order is in three parts. First, at 3 o'clock this afternoon the Scottish Executive issued a press release announcing the resignation as of midnight tonight of the Lord Advocate. Is it in order that the press should be informed of the Lord Advocate's resignation before the Parliament is informed, given that the Lord Advocate is appointed by the Parliament? I remind you that when Henry McLeish resigned as First Minister, he came to the Parliament to announce his resignation—he did not go to the press. Secondly, before an immediate replacement is announced, the Parliament should have an opportunity to consider the position of the Lord Advocate and how it can be depoliticised, so that confidence in the Lord Advocate's independence may be restored. Thirdly, will the Parliament be treated properly and get a statement on the resignation tomorrow?

It gives me great pleasure, on behalf of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, to recommend that Parliament agree to the principles of the bill. I would also like to add my congratulations to Dennis Canavan, who has shown leadership and tenacity. I do not want to dwell on the history of the past year or so, although there may be lessons to be learned, both by committees and by the Executive, about how we handle bills. The positions that were taken last year could perhaps have been handled slightly differently. Once Parliament had decided to refer the bill back for further consideration by the Enterprise and Culture Committee, we decided to do two things. First, we decided to accept that the remit that we had been given would be fulfilled in the spirit as well as to the letter of what Parliament had agreed. Secondly, we thought that the best thing to do was to begin by garnering original research on St Andrew's day, and on the three different potential impacts of a bank holiday on St Andrew's day—the economic impact, the cultural impact and the social impact. As Jamie Stone said, St Andrew's day is celebrated in 30 countries throughout the world. St Andrew is the patron saint of a number of countries, not just of Scotland. The consultants who were appointed decided to select four countries in an effort to benchmark and compare the likely impact on Scotland of a bank holiday for  St Andrew's day, based on what happened with St Patrick's day in Ireland, Bastille day in France, independence day in the USA and the national day in Sweden. Although that exercise was commissioned by the Enterprise and Culture Committee, and supported by funding from the Conveners Group, we went out of our way to ensure that the Executive was properly represented at official level on the steering group of the body that oversaw that work, so that at every stage we could ensure that the Executive was fully aware of how the study was going, what the findings of the research were and what the final report would look like. Working in co-operation with the committee, the bill's sponsor and the Executive has got us to where we are today. The Executive now accepts the general principles of the bill, the committee unanimously accepted those principles, and it looks as if we are going to have unanimous support—or certainly substantial majority support—for the bill today. I would like to mention one other point that the committee has stressed. Passing the bill will not, of itself, be enough to ensure that St Andrew's day is properly celebrated, either at home or abroad. The information that we have available through the consultancy and research exercise that we commissioned gives us a host of new ideas, which I hope will be pursued by the Executive and by others to ensure that we have a truly comprehensive programme of celebration for St Andrew's day. Finally, I would like to make a recommendation to the Minister for Parliamentary Business. It would be wholly appropriate if we could time the stage 3 debate on the bill for 30 November this year. That would send out a loud and clear message about a Parliament that is unanimous in its recommendation to the people.

Although many of us share the objectives of the First Minister's policy, does he not agree that its implementation should not create a social or educational divide where none exists? It is important that we do not send out the message that pupils with ability should not consider a skilled occupation. I draw the First Minister's attention to the Costello report on the curriculum in Northern Ireland, which recommended that for older pupils in secondary school the curriculum should be divided into three parts: one third should be academic, one third should be vocational and pupils should be able to decide, on the basis of their interests and ability, whether the other third should be academic or vocational.

It has been an interesting debate. I particularly enjoyed Frank McAveety's speech and I totally agree with him that the quality of Labour's economic arguments in Scotland has been severely damaged by the fact that I am no longer doing its economic research. The speeches of Frank McAveety, Karen Gillon and others proved that point. It is a great pity that our dynamic part-time absentee Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is not participating in a key debate on enterprise. Perhaps he could come and tell us how ministers who have all the resources of the civil service behind them cannot get right a simple policy on business rates, when from day one, the civil  service advised them that they had announced a policy that could not be implemented. How can ministers therefore criticise us for allegedly not costing our proposals? How can anybody have any confidence in those ministers when they come forward with fairy-tale numbers for Fiona Hyslop's proposals on student debt or Jim Mather's proposals on business rates? They are the ministers who presided over the financial fiasco at Scottish Enterprise earlier this year. They did not even know what RAB was.

That is dead easy—£100 million. We will also have a choice about how to fund business rates, so it is a pity that Karen Gillon is not here to—

I apologise to the member for missing her. There are four ways we could fund the business rates cut. As John Swinney said, we have a balance of £1.4 billion sitting in the Treasury in London, not earning any interest. If we used that money for nothing else, it could fund our proposal for almost 10 years. Can people not do their sums? If £1.4 billion is divided £140 million, the result is 10.

I suspect that the £800 million will be targeted at every marginal constituency in Scotland, but given how the opinion polls are going, the money will need to be widely spread, particularly if Gordon Brown and John Reid fight it out for the leadership. They will be tearing each other's eyes out and the SNP's position in the polls will go through the roof. We will be in a position to implement our proposals. However, other sources of funding are also available. According to the Scottish Executive's own figures, the amount that we forgo in business rates from unoccupied business premises is actually more than the cost of our proposal. We could, if we decided, fund it through that.  Another comprehensive spending review is due next year. When we form the Administration, we will reorder priorities, starting with all the quangos in Scotland that are under the control of Labour's retirees. There is no problem about funding our proposal. When we win the independence referendum, we will be able to fund even more. This year, Scotland will earn a record income from oil revenues of more than £12 billion. That would be a jackpot for Scotland if we had control of the oil money. We would not waste it—we would invest it in Scotland's future. As long as Scotland remains tied to Westminster, we will not see a penny of that money, just as we have not seen a penny of it over the past 30 years. Karen Gillon can be assured that funding our programme, whether under devolution or independence, will not be a problem for us. Neither of the previous two speakers actually talked about small businesses. Among the many substantial challenges that face our small business community, one issue that has not been mentioned so far is energy prices. Is not it ironic that we who live in gas-rich, oil-rich and renewables-rich Scotland pay energy prices that are among the highest in Europe? We need to take control of the policy framework for energy prices in our country. For example, the way in which the policy of the London-centric Office of Gas and Electricity Markets is biased against small businesses in Scotland that contribute renewable energy is totally unacceptable. We need to help our small businesses to face the energy challenge. Small businesses also face a skills challenge. In too many sectors, our businesses face real barriers to growth because they cannot get the skilled people that they need so that they can expand and grow. The Scottish Executive has no policy on skills. At the Labour Party conference on Sunday, the First Minister came up with a back-of-the-envelope policy that was not only ill thought out and uncosted, but would have huge implications for the future of our comprehensive education system. Far from being shy about our proposals, we are proud of our proposals. Unlike the Tories or the Liberal Democrats, we have costed our proposals and we have said where the funding will come from. Unlike Labour, we can actually add up. The Labour Party cannot even add up. Anyone who cares about the Scottish economy must vote for our motion at 5 o'clock tonight. If our policy was implemented, Scotland would be a much richer place.

I remind the member of the commitment given by his leader, Nicol Stephen, to a 2p reduction in income tax, which is within the power of the Parliament. Where will that be funded from?

What is the Tory policy on business rates these days? How does the Tory party intend to reduce the burden of business rates? What will be the Tories' manifesto commitment?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is probably the chamber that has the luxury of my seven minutes. I will deal first with the Kerr report. It is consistent to be generally in favour of the principles of the Kerr report and—to quote Karen Whitefield—to say that this decision on Monklands flies in the face of the Kerr report. To hide behind the Kerr report, as the minister is trying to do, as justification for this dangerous and daft decision is nonsense. This is not about the implementation of the Kerr report; this is about the implications of PFI at Hairmyres and Wishaw. PFI is coming back to bite the Labour Party where it hurts.

I have always made it clear, in my submission and at every meeting that I have had with the health board and others—[ Interruption. ]

Unlike Karen Whitefield and others, I did not sell the pass on day one; I argued that Lanarkshire needs three accident and emergency units. Every Labour politician argued against that, with the honourable exception of Tom Clarke MP, who agrees publicly with me, Margaret Mitchell, Carolyn Leckie and others that somewhere with Lanarkshire's population and deprivation requires three A and E units. Those who immediately caved in and said that the number should be reduced to two sold the pass at that point, as it was then a case of divide and rule. In East Kilbride, the Labour folk came to the meetings saying, "We've got to have Hairmyres." Then, the next night, in Airdrie, Karen Whitefield would be there with John Reid saying, "We've got to keep Monklands open." In Wishaw, although we did not see the First Minister, he sent his troops to say, "We've got to keep Wishaw open." The reality is that A and E is a core service. If the unit at Monklands is closed, that will endanger life and limb. At the moment, in the health service in Lanarkshire on a typical Saturday night, there are so many people at the A and E units in Wishaw and Hairmyres that they have to be referred to Monklands. If the A and E unit at Monklands is not there, where will those people go? Will they go into Glasgow and make another journey to another A and E unit? Will they go to Stirling or Falkirk—or, eventually, to Larbert—even given the distance that that would involve? In a recent maternity case, a woman was sent from Wishaw to Dundee because Wishaw did not have sufficient capacity.

That is not the evidence. I am sure that even Karen Whitefield would accept that if someone in Airdrie had a heart attack, a stroke, an asthmatic attack or an attack of meningitis, by the time that they got to Hairmyres or Wishaw—especially at certain times of the day—at best, their position would be severely worse and, at worst, their life could be in danger. The transport infrastructure in Lanarkshire is such that, if the A and E unit at Monklands closed, the time that it would take for someone in Airdrie or Coatbridge to get to another accident and emergency unit would mean that, in some cases, lives would be in  danger. That is what we are dealing with. That is why the debate is far too important for members to be scoring petty points about the timing of debates. There are substantive issues that need to be addressed.

There are two issues. First, we received an assurance four years ago that there would be no threat to the A and E unit at Monklands. Any assurances from the Executive or NHS Lanarkshire are not worth the paper that they are written on. Secondly, the support that Margaret Smith says should be provided to paramedics should be provided irrespective of what happens to the A and E unit at Monklands. Those facilities should be in place anyway. When the debate started, we were told that the driving force behind the proposed closure was the shortage of consultants in Lanarkshire and the inability of NHS Lanarkshire to attract consultants. It is ironic that around £100,000 of health board money was spent on hiring outside public relations consultants to try to sell the case to the people of Lanarkshire. Had that £100,000 been spent on recruiting NHS consultants, we might not be in the current position. When it came to the final decision, contrary to what the minister said, the key factor at the board meeting was not the shortage of consultants nor the clinical reasons that have been given; it was all to do with finance. Because two of the hospitals are PFI hospitals, even if they do not have any patients, the health board still has to pay up the money for them to the private contractor. That is the real reason why Monklands A and E unit is closing. The litmus test of whether members are genuine or just playing politics will come when the matter is put to the vote tonight. If they vote for the Executive amendment to the SNP motion, nobody in Lanarkshire will believe them in May next year.

Will the member give way?

During his consideration of the issues, why did the minister ignore the views of the tens of thousands of people in Lanarkshire who are utterly opposed to the board's daft proposal? Many of those people attended public meetings and at every meeting, people universally opposed the daft proposal.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in bringing environmental justice to the people of Greengairs. (S2O-10396)

Although the community benefits from everything that the minister has outlined, there is still a major environmental problem in and around Greengairs. I remind the minister that the First Minister visited Greengairs just over three years ago and promised that the Executive would set up a dedicated environmental justice fund for Greengairs. Can the minister tell us when that fund will be established?

I do not intend to take too long, because the Enterprise and Culture Committee and its predecessor have already produced three reports on tourism in the past four years. The first was in our guise as the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and the other two were by the Enterprise and Culture Committee, on the reorganisation that had taken place and on the bill. I recommend all three reports as good recess reading for members. On behalf of the committee, I thank the minister for her response to the points that the committee raised on the bill. If I may say so, she dealt with all of them satisfactorily in her response this morning. Two fundamental structural changes are taking place. The first is the integration of what were the area tourist boards into the national organisation, VisitScotland, and the second is a reorganisation of VisitScotland's board. The committee supports the proposal to expand the board membership, because we see a need for more involvement not only of local authorities—which has proved difficult until now because of the restricted numbers—but of all the other sectors that need to be represented. On the appointment of the expanded  board, I draw the minister's attention to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report, particularly the information from California, which Gordon Jackson and I had the pleasure of visiting to examine the structure of the California Travel and Tourism Commission.

I do not believe all the stories about the member not doing his work in the Parliament. The California Travel and Tourism Commission has an interesting structure that involves the private sector in a way that we have not been able to do. In a sense, there the private sector is responsible for appointing its members of the commission from four different sectors—accommodation, visitor attractions, transport and entertainment. I draw the minister's attention to the Californian example as a way of introducing a new and innovative way of working in creating the structure of VisitScotland's board to ensure wide representation from the key players in the industry. That would be well within the proposed legislative framework that we are discussing. One point that has not been mentioned so far but which is raised in the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on the review of area tourist boards is the strategic focus that is provided by VisitScotland's ambition to achieve a 50 per cent increase in visitor numbers by 2014. My belief—and, I think, the committee's belief—is that that target has helped to focus strategically the work of the board and the wider industry. The feedback that I have had from the Scottish Tourism Forum and others is that that central strategic objective has helped to focus everyone's minds on the job in hand. We should compliment the current management of VisitScotland, in particular the chairman, Peter Lederer. The management inherited a difficult situation but has done a sterling job in promoting Scottish tourism. I hope that Peter Lederer will continue in his job, because he has set an example. It is not every day that I compliment public sector management, but I compliment VisitScotland's strongly. The organisation was in a precarious position when the current management took over, but it has stabilised the organisation and made it ready to progress and, I hope, achieve the 50 per cent target to which I referred. I want to make a point about integration. The area tourist board network had some fantastic advantages, particularly the engagement with the private sector at local level. In the new structure, we must ensure that we do not lose the contribution and involvement of the local private sector and we must maintain the ethos that the industry should lead and dictate which needs the  public sector agencies must meet. However, as the committee acknowledged, the downside of the previous system was the membership structure, which was undoubtedly a barrier to success in some areas. The key point is that the local partnerships that have now been established should be allowed to feed into the national network new ideas and thinking and to give feedback on what needs to be done to satisfy their requirements. Local input is extremely important, and the new integrated structure should be as much about building from the bottom up as about building from the top down. If the proper balance is maintained, we can get the benefits of both worlds. There is no doubt that tourism is our number 1 industry, that it is extremely important for employment in Scotland and that VisitScotland, the local authorities and the private sector have an absolutely vital role to play. The committee's view is that we must ensure that the new structure works. Indeed, we said in our previous report that we will monitor from time to time success at the local level as well as at the national level and how well integration has progressed. We recommend the bill to the Parliament and agree with its general principles. We hope that it will allow us to take the Scottish tourism industry forward so that it achieves what it can achieve and is the best small tourism industry in the world.

On a completely different subject, will the First Minister join me in welcoming the members of Lanarkshire health united? Does he agree with them and Tom Clarke, his colleague, that it would be folly to close any accident and emergency unit in Lanarkshire? Does he, like me, deplore the letter from Dr John Reid to Lanarkshire NHS Board calling for the closure of the accident and emergency unit at Hairmyres hospital? Does the First Minister not agree that Lanarkshire needs three accident and emergency units and that the health board should act accordingly?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the First Minister will want to correct a factual inaccuracy. He said that I did not submit evidence on the accident and emergency review in Lanarkshire. If he checks the record, he will see that I was a signatory to the written evidence presented by Lanarkshire health united—[ Interruption. ]

We will need to excuse the ignoramuses. I have also submitted oral evidence directly to Lanarkshire NHS Board. I will accept the First Minister's apology.

I bring to the First Minister's attention the report that was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise and that was published this week, which shows that the real level of unemployment in Scotland, after nine years of Labour Government, is 250,000 people. In the light of that Scottish Enterprise-inspired report, will the First Minister now tell us when we will see the employability strategy that has been long promised by the Executive and when he will publish proposals for dealing with the 35,000 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland who are not in employment, education or training?

Will the member give way?

Like the fingerprint storage facility?

Will the member give way?

I apologise for having left the chamber briefly to debate a completely different subject with Ken Macintosh on "Holyrood Live". Members will be glad to know that I won. I thank all those who were involved in the fairly onerous stage 1 consideration of the bill by the Enterprise and Culture Committee. We have been at that since January, which reflects the bill's complexity and broad range. That process probably encroached on a lot of the time and resources of organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland and Money Advice Scotland, but it has been worth while. The bill provides a good example of why our consideration of bills before producing stage 1 reports is far superior to the system at Westminster, which goes almost straight into amendments without the detailed consideration that we afford bills in committee. Every committee member was taken aback by the level of personal debt in Scotland and the problems that personal debt creates. As the preamble to our report says, the average consumer debt is now £13,380, which is a 64 per cent increase on the 2001 figure. We acknowledge that the bill is an important part of dealing with the consequences of that debt, but broader policy issues need to be addressed in relation to the growth of debt and how some people get themselves into financial difficulty as a result of the marketing pressures on them to take on more debt. The bill has several objectives, which include modernising the law and striking a better balance between the interests of debtors and those of creditors. It is also intended to facilitate entrepreneurship. It is fair to say that, having  heard the evidence, the committee thinks that the impact on entrepreneurship will probably be at the margins rather than being a driving force in enterprise policy. Nevertheless, some provisions—and some of our recommendations, if they are implemented—will help entrepreneurs who are in difficult circumstances. I will highlight four or five aspects of the bill that need to be emphasised, although the committee reported on them. Murdo Fraser briefly referred to my first point, which is that legislation is joined up and we cannot consider the bill in isolation. Two pieces of legislation are particularly important to the operation of the bill: one is the Company Law Reform Bill at Westminster and the other is the proposed legislation on protected trust deeds. One major consideration about the legislation on protected trust deeds will be its potential impact on credit unions—I am sure that Christine May will highlight that.

I agree totally with the minister. When the committee produced its report, we agreed a draft of our conclusions about part 1 of the bill, but we revisited that draft after we had considered part 4, because some of part 4 has a substantial impact on part 1. The bill needs to be considered as a package. When we deal with amendments at stage 2, we will need to be very aware of the issue of selling a debtor's home during bankruptcy procedures, which has been mentioned several times. We think that a one-size-fits-all approach is inappropriate and that there is considerable potential for people to be made homelessness if we get things wrong. The general view—almost the consensus—of those from whom we took evidence was that the bill's provisions on land attachment are draconian and need to be amended at stage 2. I think that that view has been accepted—I see the minister nodding his head. The next point that I want to drive home relates to the Finance Committee's comments on the bill, particularly on the costs that are associated with the Accountant in Bankruptcy, and whether the right way of enforcement would be through the creation of the Scottish civil enforcement commission, which we considered in detail. We asked for more details from the minister and for a copy of the evaluation of the various enforcement options. We then considered all the options that  the Executive had looked at, and I think that the unanimous view of committee members was that, on balance, creating the commission was probably the right route to go down. However, there are cost and resource issues. The additional responsibilities that will be placed on the Accountant in Bankruptcy require a reassessment of the financial requirements. I know that the Executive is engaged in that reassessment. There are a number of issues around land attachment that relate not only to homes. Murdo Fraser mentioned the wider issues and family homes in particular. The unanimous view of committee members was that, in normal circumstances, a person's family home should not be under threat, particularly if their debt is less than the equity in that home, which is often the case. There is no point in creating a social problem by making people homeless as a result of trying to solve a financial problem. Of course, there are circumstances in which it would be legitimate for a family home to be sold. For example, if the home was worth £20 million and the person's total debt was £10 million, nobody would dispute that it would be reasonable to sell it and use half the proceeds to settle the debt. Nevertheless, the current provisions are too draconian for the vast bulk of people. Sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms raised concerns about the practicalities of money attachment. The evidence that was given shows that there are practical problems that will have to be tackled at stage 2. All the issues that I have mentioned are important. The bill is detailed and complex, but committee members were unanimous in supporting its general principles.

The committee agreed its report unanimously, apart from some slight dissention from our Green member, Shiona Baird. The report was signed up to by all five party representatives on the committee. I hope that that is a good omen for the national consensus that we call for in our report. It is worth reminding ourselves why a high rate of growth is important. We heard this morning cries for more spending on education, health, transport and a range of other public services. If we were able to achieve a higher rate of economic growth, we would be able to achieve much higher rates of spending in our key public services as well as, overall, a much higher standard and quality of living for our people. Therefore, growth and higher rates of economic growth are important. When we set out to undertake our investigation and write our report, we agreed on three basic starting points. First, all of us are signed up to and agree with the general thrust of the strategy that is laid out in "A Smart, Successful Scotland". Secondly, for the purposes of the report, we agreed to park our differences about the powers—in particular, the economic powers—of the Parliament and to focus on issues on which the Parliament and the Executive have existing powers to act. Thirdly, although we recognise that there is much that is positive about the Scottish economy—not least our universities, the emerging clusters in life sciences, advanced engineering, the construction industry, and some exciting developments in aerospace and other sectors—we wanted to focus on areas in which we are still lagging behind, in terms of growth and competitiveness, to discover what additional action needs to be taken to increase our growth rate. It is worth noting the scale of the problem. During the past 25 years, the average growth rate in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries has been 2.9 per cent. In the United Kingdom, it has been 2.3 per cent, and in Scotland, it has been 1.7 per cent. Our long-term overall growth rate over the past 25 years has been significantly lower than those of our major OECD competitors. Even in those years when the gap between our growth rate and the UK rate has narrowed, that has been as a result of the  UK rate falling rather than the Scottish rate increasing. There is a gap in growth between Scotland and the rest of the UK and our OECD competitors, and we must try to plug it. A key recommendation in the committee's report concerns the need to double our levels of investment over the next 10 years. A great deal has been written about that since the publication of our report, some of which has been on our side of the argument while some has been against. However, it is important to consider the scale of the problem that we face in relation to investment. By investment, we mean the traditional jargonised definition of fixed capital formation. Although the committee did not make a big issue of this in its report, we would all agree about the lack of reliable statistics in the Scottish economy. For example, if we look at the Scottish Executive's website for the latest available figures on the level of investment in Scotland, we can see that there is a £1.4 billion discrepancy between what the Executive says and what the Office for National Statistics says. The former says that the level of investment is £12.2 billion and the latter says that it is £13.6 billion. That disagreement on such a basic figure highlights the inadequacy of the statistical information from which we have to operate. I will go by the latest statistics from the very reliable OECD, which show clearly that if Scotland is to be upsides with her competitors over the next 10 years, we will have to double—more or less—our level of investment. Last year's OECD figures—the latest available—show that our level of business investment as a share of gross domestic product is 9.4 per cent. That compares with an average of 13.4 per cent for the OECD as a whole, which means that our current percentage of investment is only 70 per cent of the OECD average. It is also much lower than that of some of our major competitors, who achieve a much higher figure than the OECD average. If we look at the forecast for growth in levels of investment for the next 10 years and take the latest figures from the OECD rather than the six-year-old figures from the Scottish Executive's website, we can see that the average percentage increase in investment is 3.1 per cent for the UK—Scotland is roughly the same—compared with an OECD average of 6 per cent. If we start at 70 per cent of the OECD average percentage of investment and grow at only half the average rate, by the end of a 10-year period our percentage level of investment will be down to almost half of the average for the OECD countries. To those who say that our statistics have misrepresented the problem, I say, "Go back and do your homework, and base it on the latest  figures, not on outdated figures from six years ago." The level of private business investment in Scotland needs to be doubled by the end of the 10-year period.

I am looking to the future rather than the past. Phil Gallie used to represent Ayr; I went to Ayr academy, whose motto was "Respice prospice". Phil can do the respice and I will do the prospice. As well as talking about the overall level of business investment, I want to highlight two particular areas—research and development. Research and development should be a very high priority for Scotland. Our spending on private sector research and development is the equivalent of 0.6 per cent of our GDP, which is one third of the OECD average. As the committee points out in its report, we need to invest about another £1 billion each year in private sector research and development to get up to the levels of investment in private sector research and development that are achieved by our competitors. However, it is not only in the private sector that there is a shortfall in investment. Public sector investment figures, too, tell a story of underperformance. For example, and again according to the OECD, public sector investment as a percentage of GDP in the period 1998-2004 was 1.47 per cent across the United Kingdom. The figure for Scotland was roughly the same. That compares with an average of 3.8 per cent for the OECD. In other words, in the public sector we were achieving only 46 per cent of the average for the OECD—although Phil Gallie will be glad to know that, in the preceding period, the figure was higher. There is underinvestment in the public sector. We will try to draw attention to the need in future to invest a higher percentage of public expenditure—whatever the total may be—than we have invested in the past. We will have to do that if we are to have the capital and the infrastructure that will allow us to compete. The Scottish Executive's infrastructure investment plan calls for an annual real-terms increase in infrastructure investment of over 5 per cent. On that point at least, we appear to be at one with the Executive. Despite the criticisms, the analysis that was presented by the Enterprise and Culture Committee was perfectly robust. The OECD  figures prove that by the end of the next 10 years we will have to double private investment so that we can reach the level of our competitors. That is a prerequisite to reversing the trend of the past 25 years, and it is a prerequisite to closing the growth gap—not just between ourselves and the rest of the UK but, more important, between ourselves and the OECD as a whole. On the basis of that accurate analysis, and on the basis of its exciting recommendations, on behalf of the Enterprise and Culture Committee I recommend the report to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations contained in the Enterprise and Culture Committee's 5th Report, 2006 (Session 2): Business Growth - the next 10 years (SP Paper 520).

I emphasise that the minister has not answered two basic questions. The first, fair question was from Karen Gillon and it has now been asked of the minister three times and three times he has  dodged it; either he does not want to answer it or he does not know the answer. If he increases the spend of Scottish Enterprise this year by £50 million, unless there is an overall increase in public expenditure of £50 million—there is not—that £50 million has to come from existing allocations. Yesterday, we read in The Herald , which is better informed than the Parliament, that the money was coming from the green jobs strategy, non-Scottish Enterprise spend on skills and training and the transport budget. Can the minister tell us, therefore—I will take an intervention if he has the answer—where are the £50 million-worth of cuts in existing allocations?

It does not matter whether it is cash or non-cash. If the total level of spend is £50 million, it must come from somewhere. The minister says that that spend is being reprofiled, but the question is: reprofiled from which original profile? Can he give us a photograph? Can he give us a profile? Does he know the answer to the question? Surely, before he allocated that £50 million and before he reprofiled it, he would have known where the money was coming from. If it is coming from elsewhere in his department, does that mean a reduction in money for colleges, universities, student awards or non-Scottish Enterprise skills and training spend? Is the money coming from the transport budget? If some or all of it is coming from that budget, which part of the budget is it coming from? It is absurd that the minister has come here this morning and been unable to answer such a fundamental and, if I may say so, simple reprofiling question. He has also failed to answer the second question, though he told us at last week's meeting of the Enterprise and Culture Committee that he would have the answer this week. To be fair, the week is not yet over, so he may have the answer later on today or tomorrow—no doubt we will read it in The Herald tomorrow. The second question is: after Scottish Enterprise's legal commitments have been met, how much of the new budget of £550 million is left?

I will do so in a minute. I know that Christine May likes to get in on the act. How much of the £550 million is left? Perhaps Christine May knows the answer—let us find out.

If there had not been this shambles in the first place, we would not need to be allocating the money. We should consider the money that has been wasted. For example, over the past six years, Scottish Enterprise has allocated £194,000 to the lobbying organisation CBI Scotland—of which John Ward and Jack Perry are former chairmen—while many a small company was told that there was no money left for them. The Presiding Officer is trying to reprofile my timescale, so I will be brief. Two issues are at stake: first, the shambles at Scottish Enterprise; and secondly, the shambolic way in which the minister has failed to deal with the crisis.

Will the minister give way?

Okay, I have two short, sharp questions. First, can the minister answer Karen  Gillon's question about where the £50 million will come from? Secondly, after Scottish Enterprise's legal commitments are met, how much of the £550 million will be left to spend?

Will the minister take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to the article in this morning's edition of The Herald about a £50 million rescue package for Scottish Enterprise. First, despite the promises of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, The Herald  has been informed before the Enterprise and Culture Committee or the Parliament. Secondly, the announcement breaches paragraph 16 of the protocol between the Executive and parliamentary committees. Thirdly, members of the Parliament are entitled to know which projects will be affected by the £50 million-worth of reprofiling and delay that is required to bail out Scottish Enterprise.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has now agreed a revised budget for Scottish Enterprise for this financial year. (S2F-2269)

I remind the First Minister that the last time I asked him about the issue, on 19 January, he told me that he expected Scottish Enterprise to finish the year within its allocated budget. Five days later, Scottish Enterprise advised him that it had an estimated overspend of £77 million, which has turned out to be £60 million. Can he confirm that, to assist Scottish Enterprise in filling that black hole, the Executive will have to reallocate resources from other budgets within the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department? Can he guarantee that essential services that are provided by our colleges and universities and by the Student Awards Agency for Scotland will not be adversely affected by that reallocation of resources for bailing out Scottish Enterprise?

Will the minister look at the funding and finances of NHS Lanarkshire and, in particular, how, in the space of two months, the board revised by £20 million its estimate of the capital cost of keeping accident  and emergency services at Monklands hospital open?

I agree with the First Minister that children should be told about the past—and the future. Does the First Minister agree that the best way of commemorating the 300 th anniversary of the union of the Parliaments would be to end the union of the Parliaments and to repatriate Scotland's wealth to the Scottish people?

After that speech, I am sure that George Lyon will never again forget Jamie McGrigor's name. This has been an interesting debate. Jim Wallace hit on an important point when he drew our attention to the range of subjects that have been covered, because of the range of responsibilities that the European Union now has. That is one reason why I am very much in favour of our being independently represented as a nation state in the European Union. Over the past 30 years, there has been a major transfer of political and economic power in decision making from London to Brussels, so it seems to be sensible to suggest that we should go direct to Brussels rather than via London.

I will give way in a minute. On more immediate issues, one of the points that I hope the Executive—and the First Minister in particular, if he has been listening—will take from the debate is that the time has probably come for us to have a full-blown Scottish Executive department for European and external affairs. What happens in Brussels touches on every department of the devolved Government. Whether we are talking about enterprise, lifelong learning, education, transport, finance, rural affairs, agriculture or fishing, the activities of every department of the Scottish Executive are heavily influenced by the decisions that are taken in the European Union. We should acknowledge that in our administrative set-up. I will focus on three major issues. The first concerns energy policy. I will not repeat the valid points that Jim Wallace made in his speech, but will instead deal with the more immediate issues of energy prices. When one speaks to businesspeople in Scotland and throughout the rest of the UK, one learns that one of the biggest problems that we face is the huge increase in energy prices that has taken place in the past 12 months. Some of the price increases—oil price increases in particular—are outwith the control of the European Union, but gas price increases have been another major driver of inflationary pressures and are a direct result of the monopoly position on gas distribution that German companies have on  the flow of gas through Europe. One of the urgent issues that the Scottish Executive and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in particular need to take up with their people in Brussels is the need to do something at Europe level about that monopoly, which is doing enormous damage not only to the Scottish economy but to the wider UK economy. The second major issue is the Lisbon agenda, which is all about economic development, competitiveness, jobs and the need for Europe to be able to compete with China and India as well as with north America in tomorrow's world. Of particular concern is the role of research and development in generating the wealth and jobs of tomorrow. That point was highlighted in the recent report on business growth that was produced by the Enterprise and Culture Committee, which emphasised among other points the underperformance, particularly in the private sector, of Scotland's spend on research and development. We can call on Europe to assist us in R and D as we see the decline in important structural funds to Scotland in the future as resources are shifted from underdeveloped regions in the old European Union to the newly acceded countries, mainly in the east and south. That will mean a major change in how we tap into the European resource. Until now, we have primarily tapped into the agricultural fund, and to lesser extents into the European regional development fund and the social fund, all of which—as Charlie Gordon and Alasdair Morrison said—have made major contributions to infrastructure, training and small and medium-sized enterprise development in Scotland. We are moving from vertical to horizontal funds. The type of assistance that will be available to Scotland will relate to functions such as research and development. Given our future £1 billion-a-year deficit—based on current trends—by the time we reach 2014 when the Lisbon agenda is supposed to kick in, the Scottish Executive should take the opportunity now to work with the European Union and to use its resources to maximise investment in research and development in Scotland, particularly in the private sector, as a major driver for jobs, industry and wealth in the future. Finally, Christine May highlighted state aid which, because of the rural nature of this country compared with the rest of the UK, represents a good example of rule changes that will require a particularly Scottish input. Any redesigning or re-engineering of the state-aid rules will have a major impact on the extent to which we can, for example, attract inward investment. At the moment, 40 per cent of the country is covered by state-aid rules; if  the original proposals had gone through, only 14 per cent of Scotland would have been covered. We are hoping for a compromise of about 22 per cent, but the matter requires priority attention from the Executive because it affects our ability not only to attract new industry but to expand indigenous industries. In conclusion, I believe that the Executive must in the future take a dynamic and energetic approach to energy, the Lisbon agenda, research and development and state aid.

Can the minister cite three examples of the Scottish Executive changing European policy at any stage of development?

And the other two examples?

I welcome one or two of the proposals in the minister's statement. In particular, I welcome the reorganisation of Careers Scotland outwith Scottish Enterprise. I advised Wendy Alexander that she was making a mistake when she took Careers Scotland into Scottish Enterprise. I draw the minister's attention to the reply that I received from the First Minister on 19 January, when I asked him about the emerging budget crisis at Scottish Enterprise. He said: "We should ensure that Scottish Enterprise knows its budget and that it implements its decisions within that budget. That is what we expect Scottish Enterprise to do. That is its responsibility, and it is properly audited for that purpose. I expect Scottish Enterprise to meet its budget targets."— [ Official Report , 19 January 2006; c 22555.]  None of those objectives has been achieved. The minister says that £30 million will be rejigged on the balance sheet from next year into this year. What are the implications of that for core services next year? We have not been told the answer. The only service that the minister has said will be saved is the business gateway. What about all the other services, including the ones that Murdo Fraser mentioned?

Is it not time that ministers dealt with the crisis and sorted it out once and for all? We are about to go into a new financial year. Is it not the case that, far from knowing the budget, ministers do not have a clue what the budget will be?

I am sorry to interrupt the minister so early in his speech, but can I ask—

Are we getting a statement?

He didnae tell us. Are we getting a statement?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Both ministers have referred in their speeches to keeping the Parliament informed about the financial crisis at Scottish Enterprise. Can we have clarification—and, I hope, confirmation—that we will hear a full ministerial statement on the financial crisis at Scottish Enterprise today or next week, before the Easter recess?

You are extremely generous, Presiding Officer, and your generosity is much appreciated. I intend to take every available minute. In the past couple of weeks, there has been a great deal of nostalgia about Harold Wilson, the former Labour Prime Minister who resigned about 30 years ago. In one of his best-remembered speeches, which was made in 1963 in Scarborough, he talked about the white heat of the technological revolution; this morning, 40 years later, we are talking about the white heat of the knowledge revolution that has taken over the globe, and our role in exploiting that revolution. The knowledge economy is not confined to the new industries, such as life sciences; it also applies to our traditional industries, such as shipbuilding and textiles. If we are to maintain a presence on the international textiles market, we will do so only by applying the latest technology—particularly information technology—and knowledge to the design and production of textiles. The same is true in shipbuilding. The way in which we go about shipbuilding has changed fundamentally in the past decade or so and the industry has had to accommodate itself to the knowledge economy. There are many other examples, and we should put on record the fact that our discussion does not refer exclusively to the six clusters that are the target for growth but applies to all sectors of the economy, whether in manufacturing or the service sector. There are many positive developments in Scotland today. When the Enterprise and Culture Committee went up to the University of Dundee, from which I graduated a few years ago, it saw the excellent work that is being done there in life sciences. Only last week, the university announced that it is leading the way in the identification of the gene that causes asthma and eczema, in the hope that we will find a cure for those diseases. If members go to almost any of our 13 universities in Scotland—such as the petroleum department at Heriot-Watt University, the biology department at the University of St  Andrews or the universities in Aberdeen or Glasgow—they will find a lot to be proud of and to make them confident in the universities' future. The college sector is similar. It was perhaps a bit neglected until recently, but it provides something like 40 per cent of the higher education in Scotland as well as further education. Members should go and see the work that is being done in biotechnology in Falkirk College, for example.

I spoke at the launch of Forth Valley College, so I accept the reprimand entirely. Forth Valley College has a lot to be proud of in its work in biotechnology, and I could quote many examples of the work that colleges are doing the length and breadth of Scotland. In a while, I will come to some of the downsides that we need to address in the college sector, but I register the fact that the SNP's mindset is not one of moaning, groaning and whining; we are proud of what is positive in Scotland, but we must also be realistic about the challenges that we face. I turn to those challenges now. Let us consider the Scottish economy's performance in relation to other OECD countries. There are four areas in which we are in the top quartile—right up in the top of the class. They are: the proportion of employers that are exporting; the employment rate; the proportion of those in employment who are undertaking training; and the percentage of businesses that are trading online. However, when we go down to the second quartile, we see that we lag behind on GDP per capita, relative productivity levels in industry, cost and coverage of broadband and graduates as a percentage of the population. We are in only the third quartile for business research and development, net immigration and the proportion of 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training. I am sure that we all agree that, if we are to realise our ambitions for the Scottish economy, we must maintain our position in the top quartile and get the indicators in the second and third quartiles up to the top quartile. That is what I want to talk about this morning. I stand by every word the Enterprise and Culture Committee printed in its report on business growth, which was published last week. That report was typically and predictably criticised by the doom merchants in The Herald and the Fraser of Allander institute—[ Interruption. ]—I remind members that there is an Executive majority on the committee and that the report was unanimous. In yesterday's edition of The Herald , Brian  Ashcroft—Mr Wendy Alexander—quoted an obscure researcher whose name is William Easterly—a name that no doubt drops from the lips of every member. He tried to say that there is no necessary correlation between levels of investment and growth. That is balderdash. Anyone who knows anything about business knows that, to grow a business, one needs to invest in it. It is impossible to grow a business without investing in it. The latest OECD figures on growth and investment are a mixed bag for the UK and Scotland. They show that the average growth in real gross private non-residential fixed capital formation—which is a way of saying investment less housing—throughout the OECD was 6 per cent. The UK level was half that—3.1 per cent—which compares with 13.9 per cent in Norway, 40.6 per cent in Iceland, 12.9 per cent in Belgium and 10 per cent in Australia. Those figures are from 2005. Unlike Scotland, the OECD has up-to-date figures; our latest figures are for 2000, which is Scotland's history, not its future. If we consider the latest figures for public investment as a percentage of GDP, which are from 2004, the first thing we notice about the British figure is that the Tories have a better record on public investment than the Labour Government. The figures for 1990 to 1997 show that public investment was 2.8 per cent of GDP in the UK, but under Labour, from 1998 to 2004, it has fallen to 1.47 per cent.

The reality is that, without Scotland's oil, the Government would not have been investing very much at all. The Government is still depending this year on £10 billion of revenue from Scotland's oil, yet ministers are boasting that the Chancellor of the Exchequer is giving us £87 million more over the next two years. That is hardly petty cash in relation to the oil revenue. I turn to the public investment figures for the UK compared with those for other countries. I will cite just two examples. The level of investment in the public sector in independent, oil-producing Norway, which is the same size as Scotland in population, was 3 per cent of GDP, which is twice the level in the UK. The figure was even higher in Ireland, at 3.5 per cent. In New Zealand, it was 3.66 per cent. Secondly, there are the figures for overall business investment as a percentage of GDP. They are even more depressing. I quote the very latest figures, for last year. In Iceland, business  investment was 19 per cent of GDP. In the UK, it was a miserable 9.4 per cent. In independent, oil-producing, same-size-as-Scotland Norway, it was 12.6 per cent—about a quarter above the UK level. Those who say that we do not have challenges to face are talking nonsense. I had many other points to make, but my final one is this. Under "A Smart, Successful Scotland", for Scottish Enterprise to succeed, it must be an organisation that performs. Despite my warnings to the First Minister two months ago, when it was denied that there was a financial crisis, many people will face the prospect of redundancy over the next week or two because of the financial mismanagement at Scottish Enterprise. I hope that the minister will make clear in his summing-up speech that we will get a detailed, reliable statement on the true finances of Scottish Enterprise, if not today then next week—certainly before the Easter recess.

I agree totally with everything that Elaine Murray has said. Does she agree that one of the other problems is that the RAE benefits people who have published their research, which often means handing intellectual property to our competitors, who exploit the commercialisation opportunities?

Does Frank McAveety agree with Gordon Brown that we should aspire to achieve the same spending level per pupil and the same size of classes as the private sector has, and that kids in his constituency would have a much greater competitive advantage in life if they had the same quality of education and the same spent on it as those in the private sector?

What impact will the financial crisis at Scottish Enterprise have on training? Is it true that the crisis means that no new training contracts for people who are aged 19 or over and no new training contracts for adult training will be signed?

Will the member take an intervention?

That is childish.

I congratulate Carolyn Leckie on securing this debate. I am going from here to a public meeting in Airdrie on the future of Monklands and the other hospitals and accident and emergency departments in Lanarkshire. I have already given notice to the Presiding Officer that I may have to leave early—it depends on when the debate finishes—in order to get to Airdrie. A great deal can be said about Lanarkshire NHS Board's consultation document, but in the time available I want to focus on the proposals for accident and emergency departments. For the record, I point out that three Labour MSPs who are supposed to represent Lanarkshire constituencies—Cathie Craigie from Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, Michael McMahon from Hamilton North and Bellshill, and Karen Whitefield from Airdrie and Shotts—are not even here to discuss this very important issue. Lanarkshire NHS Board is proposing that the three accident and emergency departments that currently offer services in the area should be reduced to two. The health board has gone further and said that the accident and emergency department at Wishaw will remain open. Wishaw happens to be in the First Minister's constituency. I am sure that there is no coincidence there. The board has therefore given us a choice over which accident and emergency department should close—Monklands, which deals with 36,000 cases every year, or Hairmyres. It is Hobson's choice. One of the options in the consultation document should have been to keep the three accident and emergency departments open. At no time has Lanarkshire NHS Board published any analysis or evidence to show why we need to take the option of having only two accident and emergency departments. I have requested that information under the freedom of information regime, but we are still waiting for an answer. One thing that Lanarkshire NHS Board says at the public meetings is that it is short of consultants. There is no doubt at all that we are short of consultants throughout the health service, but opting for Lanarkshire NHS Board's proposal would mean that the hospital that would lose its  accident and emergency department would still have an intensive care unit, which would need to be staffed by the very consultants the board says it is short of. There is absolutely no logic to its position. Elaine Smith is the only Labour member who represents the area who is present—

I apologise; Karen Gillon is here, as always. I ask the Labour members who are going to East Kilbride to say, "Keep Hairmyres accident and emergency department open and close the one at Monklands," and are then going on to Monklands to say, "Close the Hairmyres accident and emergency department," to think again. That is an example of divide and rule; it is no way to plan for the future of the health service in Lanarkshire or anywhere else. I could make 50 points about the stupidity of the board's proposals, but I will finish with one that is about the comments that the chief executive made in last week's Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser , which should be compulsory reading for everyone. He boasted that no costings had been done on the implications of closing the accident and emergency department at Monklands—or the one at Hairmyres—and that no research had been conducted on the impact that that would have on hospitals in places such as Larbert and Glasgow. Lanarkshire NHS Board's handling of the situation has been pathetic. I hope that the minister will send it packing and tell it to go back, do its homework and start again.

I congratulate Sylvia Jackson on securing tonight's debate and on the excellent way in which she led last month's delegation to Malawi, of which I was a member. I also put on record the delegation's gratitude to Roy Devon and Margaret Neal for their first-class support both in our preparations beforehand and while we were in Malawi. I apologise to the Deputy Presiding Officer for my having to leave for a constituency engagement after my speech, although I do not make a habit of leaving debates in which I am a participant. I am probably one of the fiercest critics of Executive policy, but I stand four-square behind the First Minister in his policy of trying to re-establish the special relationship between Scotland and Malawi. The resounding message that we received every day of the week of our visit was about the warm feeling that exists towards Scotland because of everything that our predecessors have done to help the people of Malawi and the surrounding countries in that part of Africa. Indeed, the first lady whom I met at a reception on the Friday evening when we arrived had a good old Scottish name—Molly. From then on, it was almost like being in Scotland. I say to the Executive that we have to look to the medium and long terms in this relationship. Consideration should be given to the establishment of a permanent representative in Lilongwe to facilitate that relationship and to help to co-ordinate and support the on-going and developing special relationship between Malawi and Scotland. Until I went to Malawi, at the encouragement of my good friend Michael Matheson, I had absolutely no idea how bad poverty and deprivation were there. In schools, the kids sit on bare floors: there are no desks in any of the schools that we visited; there are no pencils, no rubbers and no paper; there is only the teacher and, sometimes, a blackboard and something to write on it with. That is how poverty stricken the  education system is in Malawi, but the classes are full. Sometimes they contain 120 pupils—very enthusiastic young people who are desperate to learn and to be educated. One of the great tragedies is that the number of teachers who are dying of HIV/AIDS each year exceeds the number of teachers who are coming through the teacher-training colleges. Not only is Malawi unable to catch up, it is unable to stand still. On the economic front, if we can get the governance issues sorted out—there is a great deal to be optimistic about on that front—there is much that we can do to help the Malawian economy. I have already been in touch with one of the members of parliament there, whom Murdo Fraser and I met, about the establishment of a canning factory to develop and add value to the fruit and agriculture sector. There is a great deal to be said about Malawi. It is a fantastic country and the people are lovely. We should continue to develop our relationship with Malawi and try to help those good people to sort out their problems.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with the performance of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. (S2F-2178)

Does the Deputy First Minister realise that recent blunders by the Crown Office are bringing the legal system in Scotland into disrepute? For example, in a recent rape case, the victim was advised that the culprit would serve a minimum of 10 years; actually, he will serve less than five years. Last week, we had the ridiculous spectacle of the Crown Office putting a gagging order on a document that every journalist in Scotland already had, which made it a laughing stock. This week, in a case in which evidence had not been presented to the defender, we have the ridiculous prospect that the Crown Office might have to drop the whole case. Is it not time the Crown Office got its act together?

I agree with the First Minister's last statement. Is it true that £30 million of Scottish Enterprise's budget for next year is to be transferred to this year's budget? If so, what are the implications for next year's projects and programmes?

This debate is about justice and injustice, the administration of justice and the maladministration of justice as it affected Shirley McKie and all those who are associated with this case. I disagree fundamentally with two or three of the points that the Minister for Justice made. First, the idea that the Shirley McKie case could be investigated by a parliamentary committee is, quite frankly, laughable. No parliamentary committee, even with the best of intentions, would carry any public confidence in its inquiry or in its conclusions for the simple reason that we are all politicians and are not qualified to undertake such an inquiry. As Pauline McNeill said, a parliamentary inquiry would be no substitute for a proper, judicial public inquiry. Jim Wallace said, in his reference to the settlement, that we should not set up a public inquiry to review political decisions. The Fraser inquiry was precisely that: an inquiry into a series of political bungles made by him and his colleagues and predecessors. Secondly, the Minister for Justice has said repeatedly that we cannot reconcile both sides. This is not about some kind of marriage guidance counselling or reconciliation of two sides, but about finding out the facts of what went wrong in the Shirley McKie case. Any public inquiry would not be undertaken to reconcile two points of view, but to establish the facts and report on what we then judged to be the case. Finally, the minister said in summing up that the SCRO staff can now move on. However, their own union is calling for a public inquiry because it acknowledges that, until a proper public inquiry is held that carries the confidence of the public, the SCRO will not be able to move on. As a separate issue, it is worth considering the reforms that have taken place and how they have been effective. In doing that, I hope that we will consider the Sinclair case in Ayr 18 months ago, in which there was a misidentification of a fingerprint by the SCRO. I can understand why Jim Wallace is against a public inquiry, given that he had a major role to play in all this. He, too, has questions to answer. He received at his constituency office a letter dated 7 August 2001, from a whistleblower within the SCRO. I could quote the letter extensively, but  I will quote just the key sentence: "After commencing duty at the SCRO bureau, I was shocked and appalled at the level of malpractice." One of the issues that a public inquiry would consider is what happened when the then Minister for Justice received that letter, which was copied to the Lord Advocate. Did they act on the letter? Did they act on the allegations that were made in it? If so, what did they do and what was the result? What malpractice, if any, did they discover? If they did not act on the letter, why not?

I would have thought that anyone who called themselves the Minister for Justice, on receiving a letter that made accusations of criminality, would at the very least ensure that there was a proper inquiry into those allegations. It is quite clear that a public inquiry would have to look into the role of the minister and examine why it took five years and eight months from Jim Wallace, the then Minister for Justice, issuing an apology to Shirley McKie in the chamber for a settlement to be reached. Why did the Scottish Executive unnecessarily put Shirley McKie through six more years of hell? We need to know the answer to that question. We need to know the answer to many other questions, too. For example, why was there a misidentification of Shirley McKie's fingerprint? Why was there a second misidentification of someone else's fingerprint at the same murder scene? Is it true that some of the evidence has since been lost? If evidence has been lost, when and why was it lost? Is it true that, at the time, more fingerprint experts in the SCRO said that the fingerprint was not Shirley McKie's than said that it was? If that is the case, why did the criminal prosecution against Shirley McKie go ahead? Was the then Lord Advocate, or the procurator fiscal who took Shirley McKie to court, aware of the division of opinion in the SCRO? If they were aware of it, why did they go to court? If they were not aware of it, why not? Was the Lord Advocate—either as Solicitor General or as Lord Advocate—aware of that division of opinion? Was there a deliberate attempt to stitch anyone up in relation to the Marion Ross murder scene? Why did the Lord Advocate give a guarantee to the SCRO officers that, even if new evidence came forward, there would be no chance of a further prosecution? What about the allegations that were made by the whistleblower? For the record, I point out that the inspector's report did not consider the  McKie case; it was about processes and procedures. Why, why, why? We do not know the answers to those questions. I could go on and on with a list of questions to which we need answers. The time has come for justice. Shirley McKie has had a financial settlement and now she must get a settlement in justice.

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Colin Fox who, unlike the minister, has graciously given way. I draw Colin Fox's attention to the fact that there was not just one misidentification of a fingerprint at the murder scene in question. There were in fact two—only one of which was of a fingerprint as being Shirley McKie's. This case is not just a dispute between Shirley McKie and the SCRO. The SCRO has never explained the second misidentification, which did not relate to Shirley McKie's fingerprint.

Will the minister take an intervention?

rose—

rose—

I begin by going back to one of the original comprehensive regeneration programmes, the GEER—Glasgow east end regeneration—project, which was set up in the late 1970s by the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Bruce Millan, and which was reported on and evaluated in the 1980s. The evaluation report contained an important lesson that has not been fully learned: we can spend millions upon millions of pounds on the physical regeneration of areas such as the east end of Glasgow but, unless we create indigenous economic strength and high-calibre employment opportunities for the people who live there, the areas will have to be regenerated again in a few years. Without sustained employment and economic activity, they end up back at square one. In regenerating areas throughout Scotland, whether towns such as Kilmarnock or larger areas such as the Clyde estuary, the priority must be the creation of sustainable employment. When Gordon Brown was the shadow chancellor, he rightly spoke about his aspiration for full and fulfilling employment. It is probably true that we have one of the highest-ever levels of employment in Scotland but, ironically, we also have the highest-ever level of economic inactivity. That sounds like a contradiction, but it is because of the large number of people who are on incapacity benefit, primarily, and other long-term benefits, and because of the number of people who have been forced into early retirement rather than added to the unemployment figures. Until we tackle economic inactivity, we will never solve the regeneration puzzle or achieve our objectives. The prerequisite to success must be the creation of not just any kind of job but high-value, well-paid, decent employment opportunities. Why do we not have that level of employment  opportunity? Why is it that many of the jobs that have been created in the past few years are relatively low paid, often insecure and often with unsocial hours? Much of that goes back not just for the past seven or nine years but for the past 40 years. There has been a lack of sufficient investment in the public and private sectors in Scotland and probably throughout the UK. Even today, the level of private sector investment in Scotland as a share of our GDP is less than half that of our major competitors.

In a minute. The share of public spending that is allocated to investment is less than half that which is allocated to investment by our competitors. Whether we are talking about the profile of public or private sector spending, the key phrase is the lack of sufficient investment—in infrastructure, in the scientific base, in skills and in business and industry. We will not solve the problem until we double the level of investment in the private sector and the share of public spending on investment. That is the greatest challenge for us at present. I will let Irene Oldfather in because naebody else has.

I was hoping for a higher level of intervention than that. I am sure that Irene Oldfather shares my concern that it does not help Ayrshire's cause in trying to attract private sector investment when the chairman of Scottish Enterprise compares its economy to that of an eastern European country. Irene Oldfather was not there; I was. The other key issue is the need for a sustained strategy. In the 1980s, the Tories introduced the urban renewal programme, which had limited success in a number of areas of Scotland. However, that came to an end and has been succeeded by umpteen different programmes and umpteen different organisations. To use the example of the Irish—although I could use many other examples—we need a long-term national development programme that people stick to over a 20-year period and that is not riddled with bureaucracy and urban development companies that create jobs for the Labour boys. We need a long-term strategy, the centrepiece of which is investment in the community with, as Donald Gorrie said, priorities that are set at the community level. We can talk and talk about regeneration, but  we will never get it unless we are prepared to face up to the realities of life.

Is not it the case that the areas that have found it most difficult to attract investment are those that have had unbroken Labour rule for about 50 years?

In terms of joined-up government, does the minister agree that what the document contains about the  acquisition of strategic land flies in the face of what is happening with Scottish Enterprise, which is currently holding an auction of strategic land sites that some people say borders on a land fire sale?

I ask the Lord Advocate the same question that Nicola Sturgeon asked—which was not answered—on the new evidence on criminality within the SCRO that was submitted to the Court of Session as part of the negotiations with the McKie family. What is he going to do about that new evidence of criminality in the SCRO? Is it true that the Lord Advocate received a letter in August 2001 from an officer in the SCRO that claimed that after he commenced duty there, he was shocked and appalled by the level of malpractice? What did the Lord Advocate do in response to that letter? Did he carry out an inquiry to determine what alleged malpractice was taking place? If the misidentification of Shirley McKie's fingerprint was supposed to be an honest mistake, what about the misidentification of another fingerprint? Is that also an honest mistake?  The Lord Advocate is right to say that he has to act as the independent head of an independent prosecution service. However, his failure to order a public inquiry is creating the impression that decisions are being taken for political reasons rather than for reasons of justice.

Will the First Minister now order a comprehensive independent inquiry into the Shirley McKie case and all the issues surrounding it? Does he not agree that the case has thrown up some issues, not least those relating to justice, the now world-wide lack of confidence in the Scottish fingerprint service and the fact that the Executive has ended  up losing £2 million that could have been saved if the case had been settled at the right time?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the light of the statement by the Minister for Justice that she will make no further comment on the Shirley McKie case, I wish to ask whether you have had any intimation about the need for a ministerial statement on the issue, so that we can get to the bottom of the lies, deceit and criminality that are associated with that case.

I suggest that the First Minister sends Bristow Muldoon a copy of his speech about raising our game in the Parliament. Mr Muldoon should apologise to Mr Swinney for totally misrepresenting the SNP position. At the start of his speech, John Swinney outlined the two major proposals in the bill. The first one is to abolish the council tax—that is long-standing SNP policy and we agree in principle with that proposal. The second proposal is to introduce a national service tax—we do not agree with that proposal. That is the position that John Swinney outlined and it is the one that every SNP member who speaks in the debate will reiterate until Bristow Muldoon recognises reality rather than the myth that he would like to believe.  Let me explain our position. First, we agree totally that the council tax is one of the most unfair taxes ever imposed on the people of Scotland. The council tax bears no relation to the income, the capital assets or the wealth of the person who is being taxed. The council tax is full of anomalies, one of which is that rich students such as Prince William are exempt from it while many of our poor pensioners who earn just enough not to qualify for benefit are not. By any measure of the distribution of income or wealth, the council tax is an unfair tax and should be abolished. The question is what should replace it. I will outline the main principles that I believe should be applied to a replacement tax. The first principle is fairness, which means that those who earn the most in relative terms would pay a higher amount than those who earn less. However, I make a distinction between being fair and being punitive. The danger is that the Scottish service tax would be a punitive tax. Like Tommy Sheridan, I will not lose much sleep if a handful of extremely rich people leave Scotland. However, that is not where the proposed service tax is flawed; it is flawed in how it would affect the middle-income range, which consists of people whom we need to retain in Scotland and people whom we need to bring back to Scotland. We face proposals to close at least one accident and emergency unit in both Ayrshire and Lanarkshire. The reason that is given for the proposals is the dire shortage of hospital consultants in Scotland. Regardless of the pros and cons of the proposals for the A and E units, there is a dire shortage of hospital consultants in Scotland. Socialism is not about living in cloud-cuckoo-land, so we must face reality, and the reality is that if we introduce a punitive tax on income, the shortage of hospital consultants will get worse and we will end up being forced to close other parts of the national health service. Therefore, on the first principle, I say yes to fairness but no to being punitive, because the economic impact of that would be disastrous, not just for the health service but for other areas of our economy in which there are shortages of people. The committee's stage 1 report on the bill makes the point that the bill's economic impact has not been measured. I can tell members about the bill's potential economic impact. We have shortages of people in the information technology sector, which is a target growth sector in Scotland. Under the bill, we would lose IT people rather than attract fresh talent to Scotland. We also have shortages in the oil and gas and care sectors in Scotland, and we would lose people we need to retain from those sectors and fail to attract people into them. In my view, the punitive element of the service tax proposal is the most damaging one.  The third principle is that decisions on local taxation must be, by definition, local. The central argument for fiscal autonomy or independence for the Scottish Parliament is that those responsible for spending the money should be responsible for raising the money as well.

Not at the moment. We cannot apply that principle to this institution and not apply it to local government as well. As a socialist, I believe that the biggest problem in this country is the unfairness of the tax system, which arises primarily because the taxes on capital are less than they are in the United States of America, which is the biggest capitalist economy in the world. We should wait for Professor Burt's report so that we can consider all the pros and cons in the package, because public taxes on income may not hold the whole answer—perhaps assets such as land should also be taxed. All the principles to which I have referred bring me to the conclusion that, while the Scottish service tax proposal is, I believe, well intentioned, it is, unfortunately, ill thought out.

Automatic reappointment would be a total absurdity. Will all members be consulted before the corporate body gives evidence to the Procedures Committee on that issue? Will the rest of us have an opportunity to debate the principles before we are bounced into making reappointments?

Will the member give way?

It is a great pity that we do not yet have the document that is to be published this afternoon on Scotland's future energy supply and demand requirements as currently forecast, because the starting point for the debate on energy must be at what point Scotland will face a gap between its energy supply and its energy demand. We are debating how—if and when we reach that position—we should close the gap between demand and supply. Until we quantify the gap, we cannot answer questions about how and when to close it. I hope that, when we have the next energy debate, we are much more factually informed and have the forecasts for supply and demand. I acknowledge that people such as John Home Robertson honestly believe in the nuclear option, but I totally disagree with him. He was right to say that we cannot rely on imported coal and several members have said that we cannot rely on imported gas. However, if we take the nuclear option, we will end up relying on imported uranium. The fact is that the worldwide supply of uranium is estimated to last only 40 years. On previous estimates, Scotland will not face an energy gap until about 2025. Indeed, the extension to the life of Torness that has been announced means that Scotland probably will not face an energy gap until beyond 2025. From now  until 2025 is 20 years and 20 years is half of 40 years, so by the time Scotland faces an energy gap—

I would usually be delighted to take an intervention, but I have only three minutes. By the end of the timeframe that John Home Robertson is talking about for the development of new nuclear facilities, there will be only a 20-year worldwide supply of uranium left. That fact, combined with the threat of a terrorist attack on nuclear installations, the cost of nuclear power and the fact that we do not yet have a sensible answer to the waste problem, makes the nuclear option unviable on at least four or five counts. That brings me to my final point. In three months' time, the outcome of the UK energy review will be announced. The chief scientific adviser to Tony Blair has already let the cat out of the bag. In Downing Street, the decision has already been taken in principle to go for the nuclear option. The key to the difference between Downing Street's decision and Scotland's decision is that Scotland does not need or want nuclear power, so there is no reason why we should have it forced on us.

Will the minister indicate when the study into Scotland's energy needs, which was promised before the end of last year, will be published?

I say right away that I fully respect that it is the Presiding Officer's decision whom to call in the debate. However, I am willing to cut my time by two minutes to enable Dr Jean Turner to speak because I would like to hear from her later in the debate. I fully—

Absolutely. I am trying to facilitate the process. I found it incredible that Frank McAveety had the cheek and audacity to quote Nye Bevan. If Nye Bevan had been sitting in the public gallery listening to the speeches that have been made by the new Labour members in the debate, he would have been disgusted. It was Nye Bevan, a Labour minister, who introduced the principle of free prescription charges. If those new Labour people had been in the House of Commons in 1945 they would have said to Nye, "You cannae introduce a free health service, because it will help the rich." Is the logic of that that the rich should not get access to a free hospital bed, a general practitioner service, a free operation or child benefit because they are rich? Have Labour MSPs never heard of the principle of universality for certain key services so that we can create a society not just in Scotland but in the rest of the United Kingdom in which we have genuine equality?

No; sit doon, Jeremy. It is no surprise that, in the eight years of this so-called Labour Government, inequality in Scotland has got greater, not less, because of its pursuit of policies that create inequality rather than solve it.

It is not a great boast for a Labour member to say that after eight years of a Labour Government a quarter of our children are still living on or near the poverty line. If Mr McAveety thinks that that is progress, he is no socialist and, in fact, he has no right to the title "Labour" and to the traditions of the labour movement. We have heard a lot in the debate about costs and about the £45 million, but the Executive has not told us its costing for dealing with the anomalies. It has criticised everybody else for not having any figures for costs. The Executive has stated that it will get rid of the anomalies; what is the cost of doing that? I want the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to give us the number.

The bottom line is that Mr Macdonald does not have a clue about the costs, but the Executive is criticising everybody else because they do not have figures for the costs. The fact of life is that if the Executive gets rid of the anomalies, it will not have £45 million of revenue. If it gives people on incapacity benefit and disability living allowance entitlement to a free prescription, as it should, and covers all the chronic diseases for exemption, as it should, by definition the cost of the final step of abolition cannot be £45 million. The net cost will be substantially lower than that. I heard somebody refer to the 44 per cent increase in demand for prescriptions in Italy. Does it not occur to members that perhaps that increase in demand is genuine and that those people could not afford their prescriptions when they had to pay for them? Are members saying that all those people in Italy are at it? The fact of life is that we do not know, as Roseanna Cunningham said. What I find incredible is that it has taken the Executive three years to get round to tackling this problem. If the bill has done nothing else, it has at least forced the Executive to take some, albeit inadequate, action. I will stop now in the hope that we hear from Jean Turner.

Will the left-wing Tories explain why it is right in principle to provide free personal care to rich people but not to provide free prescriptions? What is the difference?

I welcome the minister's statement and in particular the additional resources that will be made available, but I say to the minister that there is a heavy emphasis on additional funding for institutions. We need to consider more direct funding of individuals to allow their talents to flower. That might involve, for example, complementing the work of the Dewar arts awards to help young people who, for financial reasons, need to go furth of Scotland for ballet training and so on.

Will the next meeting of the Cabinet discuss the cash crisis at Scottish Enterprise? Will the First Minister  confirm what the shortfall in Scottish Enterprise's budget for this year is? Will he also tell us what impact the immediate cut of 15 per cent in local enterprise company budgets will have on businesses in Scotland and individuals who rely on support from, or supply services to, Scottish Enterprise?

I understand why Phil Gallie enjoys his private bill committee meetings. To anyone who follows Ayr United and who regularly has to attend matches at Somerset Park, I am sure that such committee meetings offer light relief. I have never been a member of a private bill committee. As Lyndon B  Johnson said, "I do not seek and, if asked, I would not want to accept, nomination." I reiterate what I think everybody has been saying about the Procedures Committee's proposals: they are eminently sensible, pending the introduction of primary legislation to deal with private bills. As well as attempting to make more efficient the process that is used for considering private bills, we are trying to find ways to improve the quality of legislation. In some of the non-private bills that the Parliament has passed, it has been clear that we perhaps did not get the quality right. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 may well be a very good example. The introduction of assessors by committees on a voluntary basis will, I hope, lead to an improvement in the quality of legislation, particularly when we are dealing with very technical matters. Phil Gallie was quite right to suggest that we should keep an eye on cost. However, I do not think that the issue is primarily one of cost; rather, it is one of value for money. If, as a result of using assessors, we improve the quality of the legislation, particularly in relation to very technical matters, value for money will be improved, provided that the cost is not sky-high. One of the main benefits of the system, if it is used, is that it will free up members so that they can do many of their other duties. It cannot be efficient to tie up so many members for such a long period on very technical matters that would be better delegated to a technical professor.

That is why, essentially, the assessors will be advisers, not decision makers. The MSPs will still be there. The advantage of the assessor's report is that the MSPs will be able quickly to zero in and focus on the controversial issues that, rightly, should be decided on by elected politicians. If the politicians receive the aid of a highly qualified assessor's technical advisory report, the quality of their decisions should be improved. Using assessors is to be a voluntary measure. It will not be compulsory for private bill committees to use the procedure if they do not think that it is necessary or desirable to do so. If we consider the motion in Donald Gorrie's name carefully, we see that it contains two parts. The first, on which we have concentrated in the debate, relates to the introduction of assessors. However, the motion also mentions the consequential changes to standing orders that are outlined in annex A to the committee's report. Through the detail of some of those changes, we  are incidentally improving the definition of a private bill and the criteria for the selection of members to sit on a private bill committee, for example. All in all, the Procedures Committee's proposals are very sensible and should be welcomed by members throughout the chamber. I hope that when we come to vote—perhaps before 5 o'clock—we will endorse them unanimously.

That speech from Bill Aitken was perhaps the most amusing speech on skills that I have heard in the chamber or anywhere else. The minister began by asking for input and ideas, so I draw to his attention the discussion paper that I produced in October last year. My paper is a serious contribution that makes a number of recommendations for the employability strategy, and I hope that they are given serious consideration. I believe that we face six major skills challenges, so let me dwell on two or three of them in this closing speech. The first key issue that the employability and NEET strategies will need to address is access to skills and education. The McGoldrick report that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council published two or three months ago emphasised that, despite all the initiatives that various Governments have introduced with good intentions, the proportion of people entering higher  education who come from deprived areas and lower income groups is more or less the same as it was 20 or 30 years ago. Therefore, we have not cracked the major problem of access to education and training for that group of people. The situation was well summed up in a report by the Labour peer, Dame Helena Kennedy. Basically, the way in which parts of our education and skills system work means that "If at first you don't succeed ... you don't succeed". The situation was also summed up by Linda McTavish, who was the principal of Anniesland College. In her evidence to our lifelong learning inquiry three years ago, she pointed out that young people in our country can be characterised as a triangle. The bottom layer of the triangle comprises the vast bulk of people who are unlikely to succeed, do not succeed at present and will not succeed unless they are given a substantial leg up. In the middle layer are those who are being given a leg up and can succeed with small amounts of help. The top layer of the triangle consists of those who, thanks to their personal resources and background, will succeed no matter what. However, the triangle is almost inverted in relation to the resources that are allocated to each of those three groups. In terms of resources per head, the vast bulk of resources goes to those at the tip of the triangle, who are the small number who will succeed anyway. The second-largest allocation of resources goes to the middle group, who will succeed with only a small leg up but who nonetheless receive a fair amount of the resources. However, relatively speaking, very few resources go to the large numbers of people who need the most help. One of the biggest challenges that we as politicians face is the need to ensure that, over the piece, we skew investment and resources—it is easier to do this if investment is growing—much more in favour of those who need a more substantial leg up to succeed. We can do that in a number of ways, but let us consider the categories of people—I will mention just two or three—who need help the most. We have heard about the 16 to 19-year-olds who are commonly referred to as NEETs—young people who are not in education, employment or training. Clearly, they must be a priority group, for all the reasons that have been highlighted during the debate. The second priority group is part-time students. Duncan McNeil referred to the practical problems and financial barriers that face many people who want to return to training as a prerequisite to returning at some point to the labour market. People face major barriers to returning to training  and education, which means in turn that they face a major barrier to returning to the labour market. I hope that the employability strategy will address the particular needs of that group of people. The third group is middle-aged people who have perhaps been made redundant or for some reason have been out of the labour force for some time and require training or retraining to gain opportunities in the labour market. I hope that the employability strategy will address those three priority groups as well as some of the groups that Sandra White mentioned.

Absolutely, although I point out that, of the OECD's top 13 performance indicators, the one area in which we have been consistently in the upper quartile in the past 10 years has been the number of people who are in employment and also receive training. We are doing well in that field, but a great deal more must be done. Access is the number 1 challenge. The second challenge is what I call the knowledge life-cycle revolution. Previously, when someone went to university or was given training, the knowledge and training that they received did them for a lifetime of work. That is no longer the case. For example, people who trained to be shipbuilders trained in an industry that is still with us, but whose peak lasted for 150 years. The peak in the electronics industry in Scotland, which also started up in Duncan McNeil's constituency, has lasted for 50 years. The next generation of new industries will probably have a life-cycle of only 20 or 25 years. It has been estimated that during a typical lifetime of work in the 21 st century, people may need to be trained and retrained up to 10 times. That means that a tremendous challenge is in front of us, in both the private sector and the public sector. When the strategy is published, it must take that into account. The third issue that I will emphasise relates to the productivity and skills challenge. All the research done by the Department of Trade and Industry, the EU, the World Bank and the OECD points out that the major problem in Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom is the level of intermediate skills. We must skew investment towards the expansion of intermediate skills and use the latent workforce of NEETs and others to  whom we have referred to match the supply to the demand. I will mention the final three challenges without saying anything about them: the population changes that are taking place; the benefits trap, to which Sandra White referred and which I hope will be dealt with in the white paper that is due later this month or next month; and the resources issue. As Lord Sandy Leitch pointed out in his interim report at the pre-budget stage in November, if we are to tackle the problem we must recognise that a very substantial investment will have to be made so that we really develop the skills that are required for a modern Scotland.

Does Bill Aitken disagree with Struan Stevenson, who advocates a Tory-SNP alliance?

I agree with Phil Gallie about the concept of modern apprenticeships, but does he agree that there is now a need to develop them and make them more flexible so that older people in particular can benefit from them much more than was the case in the past?

Once the debate has taken place, will the minister be in a position to tell us when the employability strategy and the not in education, employment or training strategy will be published?

I thank the Presiding Officer for that warning; I shall, of course, heed it. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on the introduction of new fingerprint procedures, as reported in The Herald on 4 January 2006. (S2O-8616)

Why has there been such a delay in introducing the new fingerprinting service and identification system? Is it because of the shambles in the fingerprinting bureau of the Scottish Criminal Record Office? Will the minister, with the introduction of the new procedures, overhaul that bureau and end the shambles that has existed there for five or six years?

I agree with Alex Fergusson that this has been a good debate. It has been fairly wide ranging, as it has dealt with issues about climate change that are of international importance, as well as a number of more parochial issues that nevertheless need to be addressed. I would like to underline two or three issues. First, the dereliction of land has not been mentioned, but for many people—particularly in urban communities—that is extremely important. The Executive could take firm and dynamic action to deal with the problem of derelict land, especially in our bigger cities and particularly in the Glasgow and Lanarkshire areas. More derelict land comes on to the market in Glasgow every year than is refurbished and regenerated and it has so far been a lost opportunity. If we tackle the problem effectively, not only will it benefit the environment in which people live, it will also free up more land for housing and mean that we do not need to encroach on the green belt. It also brings people together into local communities within our urban areas.

I will make one more point before I take the intervention.  I hope that the Burt committee, which is looking into the future of local government finance, will consider seriously the option of introducing a land value tax, which I believe would make a major contribution both to land reclamation and to economic growth. I will now take Mark Ballard's intervention.

Absolutely. Mark Ballard will be glad to know that it has also contributed enormously to economic growth in that area, as it has brought jobs and development. That is what we all want. The second issue that I will raise is a parochial, but nevertheless important one, which I believe is a litmus test of how serious the Executive is across all departments about the environment. The issue is the future of Greengairs and the surrounding area in Lanarkshire. Of all the environmental blights in Scotland, Greengairs—it is not entirely the fault of the Executive—is a good example of a place where the environment has been neglected. Within a radius of 3 miles of that small village there are nine landfill and opencast mining sites. That is a disgrace. It is not a case only of ensuring that there are no more such developments in and around Greengairs; positive remedial action is required from the Executive to deal with the after-effects of the poor environmental decisions that have been taken. Since I am about to run out of time, I will make my final point. I agree with Des McNulty. We should have an adult debate about the future of nuclear power, but one major fact that has been ignored by the proponents of nuclear power up until now is the threat from terrorism. If a terrorist blows up a coal mine or some other installation they might kill a few people, but if they blow up a nuclear power station they could kill a nation.

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Executive expects proposals for the reorganisation of local enterprise companies to be announced. (S2F-2022)

Does the First Minister agree that it is essential for Scottish Enterprise to clarify what it seeks to achieve on city region development before it embarks on reorganisation? Does he also agree that simply to split Scotland up into east and west regions would fly in the face of our attempts to try to get Glasgow and Edinburgh to work together? Finally, does he agree that there must be a fundamental review of whether we should organise on the basis of geography rather than on the basis of the industry clusters that Scottish Enterprise is targeting?

Margaret Jamieson has been campaigning against it as well.

I will concentrate on the criminal justice plan but, before I do, I will talk about rendition flights. Everyone in all parties condemns torture and any suggestion that this country would be used for rendition flights. Indeed, a Westminster cross-party group on rendition flights is chaired by a Tory, which emphasises the cross-party approach to the matter. However, the practical issue arises of what we can and should do. Kenny MacAskill made a sensible, practical suggestion, based on the historic precedent that was set by the New Zealand Government. We should say to planes that come to Scotland that if they want permission to land at our airports, they must confirm or deny that they are on a rendition flight with someone on board who is en route to a country where they could be tortured. That is a perfectly sensible and practical way forward. I hope that it will be taken up by the Executive and the Government and pursued accordingly. I turn my attention to criminal justice issues. It is not often that I speak in criminal justice debates; I tend to confine myself to matters economic. However, there is widespread concern in the community about our criminal justice system. Despite all the legislation that has been passed in this place and in the House of Commons,  confidence in the criminal justice system is decreasing out there on the street. Indeed, confidence in a number of the institutions on which we rely to deliver the criminal justice system is decreasing. I will mention a number of those institutions and I will do so proportionately and in context. First, I will talk about the police. As someone who is married to a former police officer, I have the greatest respect for, and totally support, the police force—I have to. However, when my son was the victim of a serious assault in Ayr last boxing day, I was taken aback by how poor the police response was to that incident. I deliberately did not highlight the fact that his father was an MSP or use my position in any way, but eventually the poor level of service, the lack of interest, the lack of response and the broken promises about being contacted were such that I was forced to write to the chief constable to complain. Of course, the minute I wrote to the chief constable, I had five different senior officers from Ayrshire on the phone to me, but it was far too late by then, because the damage had been done. I was struck not just by the poor service that we received from the police on that occasion but by the low level of police morale, not just in that part of Ayrshire. I believe that that is affecting the effectiveness of the police service. The decrease in police morale is primarily due to two factors. The first of those is the daft sentencing that is sometimes handed down by the courts. John Swinney mentioned a good example of that earlier. It must be demoralising for our police officers to chase the criminals, catch them and get them convicted only for them to be given light sentences for relatively serious crimes. We have a major problem with the judiciary, which has to be sorted out, without undermining its political independence. Secondly, I was struck by the follow-up, in particular by the time taken to get criminal injuries compensation, which is beyond belief. My son received an offer, but I advised him to turn it down. I had heard through the grapevine that the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority deliberately undervalues the amount in the first offer. I told my son to appeal and to appeal again. Within two or three days, the initial offer was doubled. I wonder how many genuine cases there are of people who have been desperate for the money and have accepted the initial offer, although they could have done with the extra money that would have been on offer had they gone through the appeal system. I have dealt with one or two such cases as an MSP, despite the fact that the authority for such matters is reserved.

There is a real problem there. There is also a problem with the Scottish Prison Service and the attitude of its chief executive. Every time a member asks the minister a question about the Scottish Prison Service, the minister never replies, other than—

I am sorry—I am in my last minute, unfortunately. The minister never replies, other than to say that she will refer the matter to the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service. I find that totally unacceptable, as I know do other members. The minister is directly responsible to the Parliament for the Prison Service and she should answer to members of the Parliament for the Prison Service and its many failings.

Will the minister give way?

I have a question for the minister about the criteria for deciding on investment in roads. Making decisions on the basis of existing traffic is a narrow way of judging priorities. As my colleague pointed out, in north Wales, the economic impact of the dualling of the A55, as well as the safety and social impact, has transformed a depressed area.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on initiating the debate and on his eloquence in speaking to the motion. I speak in this debate as someone who has two interests in the A76. The first is a constituency interest: the A76 runs from Kilmarnock to Dumfries, and therefore covers both Central Scotland and the South of Scotland. My other interest is as someone who lives in Ayr, who previously worked in Cumnock and who has always been extremely concerned about the state of the A76. Alex Fergusson highlighted many of the safety issues that have been raised. It is worth taking a journey from Kilmarnock to Dumfries on the A76—I encourage the minister to do so. It is not too bad leaving Kilmarnock, but it is almost impossible to get safely through Mauchline without having to stop on numerous occasions to let heavy goods vehicles pass. Let me emphasise the point about heavy goods vehicles, because we are not talking just about transit vans. The two main products that are carried on the route are coal and timber. Coal lorries and timber lorries are exceptionally unsafe and travel at substantial speeds, despite the state of the road. There is no bypass on the road south of Cumnock. Drivers bypass Auchinleck and Cumnock to return, as on the previous section of the road, to going through towns and villages, some of which have very narrow streets. Drivers go through the main streets in Kirkconnel, in Sanquhar, in Thornhill and elsewhere. There are concerns about the state of the road. Alex Fergusson mentioned the remedial measures that were supposed to have been taken between New Cumnock and Sanquhar. The minute you leave New Cumnock, you would not think that you were on an A-class road but on a farm dirt track, because the road is so poor. It is narrow, winding and very unsafe. It is almost beyond belief that it is classed as a main road. I argue the case for improving the A76 on safety and economic grounds. Look at the connection between Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway and further south: there is no first-class road connection between Ayrshire and the south of Scotland. That has an effect on the economy. It is about 20 years since the then four local authorities in Ayrshire decided jointly that the A76 should be the main route south from Ayrshire into Dumfries and Galloway and on to the border, but in many places the road is still in a state of complete disrepair and is very unsafe. Alex Fergusson's point about the impact of the  M77 was well made; it has increased the volume—and often the speed—at which traffic travels in a hurry to get from Glasgow to south of the border. I hope that the minister will consider the issues seriously. The one thing on which I disagree with Alex Fergusson is that I do not see why we should not set an ambition to have a dual carriageway from Kilmarnock to Dumfries. If we are serious about opening up the economies of Ayrshire and of Dumfries and Galloway, that should be our ambition. In an answer earlier this year, the minister said that an upgrade would cost about £500 million. That is less than one tenth of the money that the Chancellor of the Exchequer raised from Scotland's oil on Monday. I do not see why some of that investment should not come back into roads in the west of Scotland.

I accept that it is important that the Executive takes time to get the right solution, but the consultation has been finished for two months. Until such time as the Executive makes a decision, can the Executive at least request that the assessors and valuation boards in Renfrewshire and Lanarkshire adopt a position similar to that of other assessors? Can the enforcement of liability be suspended until a final decision on the matter has been reached?

This debate is about dealing with the consequences of a loophole in the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, which has created a difficult consequence for a small number of residents of very sheltered housing accommodation, particularly in Renfrewshire and Lanarkshire. It was not the intention of the Executive or the Parliament in passing the 2001 act that the current situation should arise, which is why I am calling for the Executive and the Parliament to act now to rectify the situation. The problem is this. Prior to the 2001 act, very sheltered accommodation complexes, such as those run by the Abbeyfield Society charity in Coatbridge and Airdrie, were treated for the purposes of local taxation as one individual unit with one council tax liability. Alternatively, in some cases they were treated as businesses, but, if so, they received the charitable rebate on business rates. Since the 2001 act was passed, however, the assessors for two valuation boards—those in Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire—have interpreted the act to mean that each resident of very sheltered housing accommodation is liable to pay council tax, so old people who are living in such complexes and who were paying a share of council tax are now liable for council tax in its entirety—they are being made a unit for council tax purposes. Further investigation into how people living in a sheltered housing complex become a council-tax-payable unit reveals the reason to be that they can lock the door. Under the anomalous legislation, if  they can lock the door, they are liable to pay the tax; if they cannot lock the door, they are not liable. The 2001 act requires care homes to register with the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. Care homes that register with the commission are treated for council tax purposes as one unit. However, very sheltered housing complexes are not care homes as defined in the act and so do not register with the commission—ergo, the assessors in Renfrewshire and Lanarkshire have deemed each person in them liable to pay full council tax.

I know that the concierge in the complex in Coatbridge has the key to each unit. I suspect that that is the case in the other units as well. The complexes are a concierge-type service, but not a care-type service. That, apparently, is an important distinction. The consequences for the elderly people in those complexes who are on full benefit are somewhat muted, because the net impact on their income and charges is pretty well nothing. The problem arises for those who are not in receipt of full council tax rebate, who must pay the council tax either partially or entirely themselves. Many of those people have worked hard all their days. They have saved and have put enough by in a superannuation scheme or occupational pension. Now they are being made liable for full council tax payment, although they occupy only a room and share the facilities in a sheltered housing complex. The sudden change in the application of the council tax liability has not only created dire financial consequences for many old and very frail people, but caused enormous distress and anxiety to them. In some cases, that distress has adversely affected their health.

Absolutely. It is fair to say that, had the Executive not commissioned a consultation and review of the matter, assessors throughout Scotland would already be imposing the same liability on the residents of very sheltered housing  complexes in their areas as are being imposed in Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire. The Executive carried out a consultation between July and October. I believe that it is genuinely trying to find a solution to the problem—I hope that the minister up will update us on that consultation and enlighten us on the Executive's proposed way forward. The important point is that the situation has arisen as a result of our mistake as a Parliament in the drafting of the 2001 act. We should not penalise elderly people because of poor legislative drafting either by the Executive or by the Parliament. We should be big enough to admit that we made a mistake. We should now rectify that mistake by amending the law to close the loophole and to make sure that the liability to pay council tax is no longer imposed. My final plea is this: there is a second injustice that needs to be rectified. It is unfair that only the residents of Renfrewshire and Lanarkshire have had to pay the full council tax for this period. I hope that, when the Executive comes forward with proposals, those will include a commitment to provide a full refund of the additional council tax payment that the people in Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire have had to make. That is a fair, just and humane way in which to tackle the problem.

To ask the Scottish Executive what policy or procedural changes it has made in order to improve the quality of fingerprinting evidence. (S2O-8224)

I thank the minister for the answer. A statement was made this week by SCRO that where there are two opinions, one must be wrong. If that is the case, how does she reconcile the disagreement between Grampian Police and SCRO? Is it not the case that, until the dispute between Grampian Police and SCRO is resolved, all fingerprinting evidence from those two organisations should be double-checked to ensure that it is correct?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not raise or ask about an individual case; I asked about a policy matter. It is little wonder that the chamber is empty at question time, because questions do not get answered.

This is a joke.

In his submission to the Treasury, will the minister point out that the proposals could cost Scottish banks up to £80 million a year? Will he suggest to the Treasury and the Bank of England that, instead of trying to scrap Scottish notes, they should try to ensure that Scottish notes are made as acceptable as English notes, in England and throughout the world, at the proper exchange rate?

Given that, according to answers that have been given to written questions, much of the information is not held centrally, how will the minister measure success in increasing the amount of business that is given to small and medium-sized enterprises in Scotland through the public sector?

Does Phil Gallie accept that countries such as France do not have the resources that Scotland has in oil, gas and all the alternatives? We do not need nuclear.

I shall, of course, keep strictly to five minutes. The debate is about whether the lights will go out all over Scotland. I do not think that the Scottish Conservatives' lights have ever been switched on, because some of the nonsense that we have heard from them about wind farms, for example, was beyond belief. Being in favour of a wind farm strategy does not mean that one is in favour of every single wind farm proposal. It is like taxis in Edinburgh—we are in favour of taxis in Edinburgh, we just do not want too many taxis in Edinburgh or the abuse of any taxis in Edinburgh. Wind farms are in exactly the same category.

I do not have time to take an intervention from Mary Scanlon. One of the great tragedies of the debate is that we do not have the study that the minister has promised by the end of the year. That will be a factual analysis of the supply and demand for energy in Scotland for the period ahead. It would be helpful to have that information so that the next time that we have an energy debate, we will be able to make a much better assessment of the energy gap that might arise in 15, 20 or 25 years. Like the rest of the world, we have two major driving forces in energy policy. One is the insatiable demand for energy worldwide. In China and India alone, the annual demand for oil is rising by 16 per cent a year because of the massive industrialisation of those two countries. The exponential increase in the demand for energy is side by side with the increasing evidence that if we do not do something about global warming, we will face very serious problems in the years ahead. The question for this and every other country is how to strike a balance between satisfying the  needs of industry and individuals for increased energy while at the same time protecting our planet from global warming. Scotland is in a unique position. We are an energy-rich country: we are rich in oil; we have been rich in gas although it is a declining asset; we are rich in coal; and we are even rich in uranium deposits, which is not something to welcome particularly. The nuclear argument must be argued on four key issues. I do not accept, as John Home Robertson tried to kid us on, that there is an acceptable solution to the problem of nuclear waste. There is the issue of cost. The cost and economics of nuclear energy in the past have shown that it is not economically viable as a major energy source. There is the problem of the potential for accidents. We have seen the results of the surveys in and around Dounreay, Rosyth and other areas where there has been potential for and actual fall-out of nuclear and radioactive material. The final danger of which we must take cognisance in all energy policy is the threat of terrorism. If a terrorist attacks a coal-fired power station, they will do enormous damage and put people's lives at risk. However, if they successfully attack a nuclear power station, they could wipe out not just one community, but a whole country. Those facts cannot be ignored. That is why nuclear, at the moment and for the foreseeable future, is not a viable or realistic option for Scotland or any civilised nation. That is why we have to look at all the other alternatives, including conservation. We are not doing nearly enough to conserve our energy at the present time. It is unfortunate that I have run out of time—I made a commitment to keep my speech under five minutes, but there is so much more to say. I hope that the next time that we have a debate on energy we will have the facts and figures before us so that we can dispense with some of the nonsense that we have heard this morning.

Will the member clarify whether he agrees with his new leader that energy policy should not be devolved further or whether he agrees with his new deputy leader that it should all be devolved?

Does the First Minister realise than one factor that contributes to overcrowding in prisons in the west of Scotland is the lack of spaces in open prisons? Some prisoners who should be in open prisons are still locked up in other prisons. What is he doing to increase the number of places in open prisons in the west of Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order is relevant to decision time. During my speech on the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill, I asked for a ruling from the Presiding Officer before we vote on the competency of the Scottish Executive's amendment, which misquotes and misrepresents the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report. The amendment states: "the Enterprise and Culture Committee's Stage 1 report concludes that the Bill does not fulfil this purpose". That is not the case at all. We said that the bill does not "of itself achieve this purpose." There is a big difference. Words matter, especially when some folk are at it. I request a ruling from you as to whether an amendment that is so factually inaccurate can be accepted as competent.

On a technical note, I advise Karen Gillon that she will not become a member of the committee until 5 o'clock.

I, too, pay tribute to Dennis Canavan's work. As convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I make it clear that I am utterly opposed to that part of the Executive amendment that calls for the bill to be referred back to the committee. I ask the Presiding Officer to give us a ruling, before the vote at 5 o'clock, on the competence of the Executive's amendment, as it is factually inaccurate in that it does not quote the committee's report accurately. I am opposed to the proposal to refer the bill back to the committee for three reasons. First, the committee has already done the work—we have reported on the general principles of the bill, with the unanimous recommendation that the general principles be accepted. Secondly, if we repeat the exercise, there will be no way in which the Executive will get its proposed bankruptcy bill through on its timescale. The third and real reason is that our heads do not button up the back. The real reason that the Executive wants to refer the bill back to the committee is so that it can whip the Executive members on the committee to do down the bill so that it is not embarrassed by having to vote it down in the Parliament. The real reason why Lanarkshire Labour tactics are being employed is to try to butcher the bill. I am the convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, but the Executive neither informed me of its proposal to refer the bill back to the committee nor consulted me as to the viability of doing so. However, I am not surprised at that, given the incompetence that the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform and the Executive have shown in their handling of the bill. The Executive submitted its evidence one working day before the report was produced. The committee members agreed unanimously that I should write on their behalf to the Minister for Parliamentary Business to complain about the contemptuous way in which the Executive dealt with the committee in relation to the bill. Let me make it absolutely clear that sending the bill back to the committee to repeat work that it  has already done is not only absurd, but will have consequences for other key aspects of the Executive's legislative programme.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. The committee considered the bill in detail. We heard oral evidence and we read the results of the consultation that Dennis Canavan undertook before the bill came to the committee and the written evidence that we received from numerous bodies. The support for the bill was overwhelming. Of course we need more time to consider the bill in detail, but that is the purpose of stage 2 and why we would set aside plenty of time for that. I give the Executive an undertaking to set aside plenty of time—as we planned—to deal with stage 2 to ensure that we end up with a good or an even better bill. To throw out the bill today would begin the destruction of the committee system. The minute that we bring the whips into the committees or use the whips in the Parliament to overrule a committee's unanimous recommendation, that spells the end of the committee system. We are told that the committee system is the second house in Scotland, but we cannot be the second house and an independent scrutineer of legislation while taking our orders from Lanarkshire Labour at the same time.

Iain Smith is talking rubbish.

To ask the First Minister what objectives he has set for his forthcoming visit to Canada. (S2F-1854)

I suggest that the First Minister visits Alberta to see how that province has used its oil wealth to tackle problems of poverty and deprivation. Unlike in Scotland, where a quarter of children live on or near the poverty line, Alberta has practically no child poverty. Will he learn the lesson that it is not greedy to use one's oil wealth to relieve poverty and deprivation among one's own people?

I, too, congratulate Charlie Gordon on his maiden speech. I am sure that the First Minister, with gritted teeth, would have been watching it closely on a monitor. I first met Charlie when he was campaigning for independence for Scotland as a member of the breakaway Scottish Labour Party. I hope that he has not changed his mind, even though he has changed his party. I disagree with him on one issue, which is his claim that Glasgow is booming under Labour. Glasgow has a real unemployment rate of about 28 per cent. With that level of unemployment, to claim that the city is booming makes Charlie look a Charlie—a real Charlie. Let us start with the facts about the Scottish economy.

I will take it later. After eight years of a Labour Government and six years of a Lib-Lab pact in Holyrood, let us look at the facts. Fact one is about unemployment. The real level of unemployment in Scotland is about 250,000 people. About 90,000 unemployed claim benefit, but another 50,000 or 60,000 officially unemployed do not claim benefit. Thirty-five thousand 16 to 19-year-olds are not in employment, education or training, which is the highest percentage in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, according to the Executive. In addition, there are many thousands on incapacity benefit who can and want to work and tens of thousands in part-time employment who want to be in full-time employment. Let us be clear: the idea that Gordon Brown has solved unemployment in Scotland is total nonsense. We continue to have very high, very concentrated levels of unemployment in Scotland, most noticeably in the constituencies of Des McNulty, Duncan McNeil and Charlie Gordon, as well as in many other Labour representatives' constituencies.

I am sure that they will reverse that decision in 2007. They will recognise that 300 years of the Union has been a disaster for Scotland and for Glasgow. Let us look at facts and the investment record. Our competitors invest about 20 per cent of their GDP in their economies; in Scotland, we invest less than 10 per cent. The figures on manufacturing exports that we got yesterday are some of the worst ever produced. Two weeks ago, we got the new figure on research and development expenditure. It is not going up; it is going down, although it is already one of the lowest in the OECD.

It would improve them enormously, because of exchange and interest rates. For example, our industry would not face an interest rate that is twice the real rate in countries in the euro zone or North America. A lower interest rate would be a massive boost to industry and manufacturing jobs in Scotland. Let us deal with oil, not by looking at the past, but by looking into the future.

I will not give way again. The reality is that we now have a second chance with oil. All the lies that were told about oil 30 years ago, as Gavin McCrone pointed out, are now being retold today. However, the reality is that we are in for a long, sustained period of high oil prices. As Lord Oxburgh, the chairman of Shell UK, has pointed out, we are in a situation in which, no matter what scenario we paint, oil will remain at $60, $70 or perhaps $80 a barrel. We are also in a situation in which Gordon Brown is depending on oil revenue this year to bail him out of his economic black hole. I find it amazing that the unionists argue that we could not be independent because Scotland would have a small deficit. Gordon Brown is running up record deficits. Does that mean that the UK cannot function as an independent country?

George Lyon has heard clarity; he just does not want to listen. If we had control over not only oil but all our financial and economic policy, we would be able to do something that I would have thought every Liberal and Labour member would want to do—we would be able to use the natural resources of Scotland, and the resultant revenue and downstream jobs, to solve the problems of unemployment, deprivation and poverty. Instead, we have nothing but a litany of complacency from the two coalition parties about the state of Scotland today. Our message is very simple: put Scotland's wealth to work for the people of Scotland. The only way in which we will be able to do that is by freeing ourselves from the controls of London through an independent Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way now?

Does the member agree that, if Scotland was independent, we would not have been part of the illegal and immoral war in Iraq? An independent Scotland would have saved £1 billion, which could have been made available for peacekeeping and getting rid of hunger in the world, instead of for butchering people in Iraq.

Will the minister tell us how many of the 24 or so plenary sessions of the Committee of the Regions that have taken place since the First Minister was appointed he has attended? Am I right in saying that he has attended only one?

Will the minister take another intervention?

I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on the final part of his speech, which was excellent. He is welcome to cross the floor at any time. There is a broad consensus among members that many aspects of the Cultural Commission's report are worth while and that many of its recommendations are both relevant and important. However, I think that Roseanna Cunningham put her finger on the button when she said that the problem with the report is that it does not lay out a vision of where we want Scottish culture to go in the years ahead. The absence of an underlying view of what the Parliament and the Executive should seek to achieve in the future makes it difficult to translate many of the recommendations into an overall cultural policy that allows us to decide priorities, where the money should go, where we need legislation and all the rest of it. The biggest job for first the minister, and then the Enterprise and Culture Committee and the Parliament, will be to develop the big picture which, with all due respect, I think the commission utterly failed to do. Some of the recommendations are not important, relevant or worth supporting. I will pick out what I thought was one of the daftest recommendations ever: that another minister, a deputy minister for tourism, culture and sport, should be appointed.

That is highly encouraging because, when I look through the list of departments that have a deputy minister, I find that nearly every one of them is failing utterly to reach its targets. I can only hope that, as the sole power in the land in her department, Ms Ferguson will achieve her targets. The commission laid a great deal of emphasis on structures and how we should deliver but, to my mind, that should come at the tail-end of the debate rather than at its start. As Roseanna Cunningham said, we need to decide what we want to deliver before we can decide how best to deliver it. I draw members' attention to the excellent evidence that my friend and colleague Mr Matheson submitted on behalf of the Scottish National Party, which was the only party to submit evidence to the commission. Rather than recommending the creation of another two quangos, with all the bureaucracy and costs that would be attached to that, he suggested an idea that is similar to that put forward by Donald Gorrie, which would involve the setting up of a Scottish academy with advisory status. The academy  would advise the minister, while the Education Department would do the administration. We do not need a bunch of bureaucrats in the department, a bunch of bureaucrats in the SAC and a bunch of bureaucrats in a funding agency. We want to have just the one set of bureaucrats so we can save a lot of money on the other two sets. The beauty of the idea of the Scottish academy—and I hope that the minister will take it seriously, despite the fact that it came from the SNP—is that it can be composed of people from the grass roots and from every section of arts and culture in Scotland. It would not be a body appointed by ministers on the recommendation of the civil service; it would consist of people who were elected by their peers in various sectors of the arts, who would come together regularly to help to develop an on-going strategy and advise the minister on where the priorities should lie, where the money should be spent and where the investment is required. That way, we would involve people and encourage the artists to participate in the decision-making process rather than having the decisions handed down to them in some dirigiste fashion, reminiscent of what happened in the days of the Kremlin. He will find this utterly surprising—and this is certainly a rare occasion—but I agree with much of what Brian Monteith said. Many of the points that he made about the role of the state and the public sector were correct. The state should not decide what is good and what is bad, culturally speaking. We want to divorce as much of the decision making as possible from Government and Parliament and have the decisions made in a much more democratic and participative way that involves those who deliver our culture. The primary role of the public sector is not to deliver cultural services—although in some areas, such as libraries, that will probably always have to be the case—but, particularly with regard to the creative arts, to enable, to provide support to and to assist in the development of the creative people who are the deliverers of art and culture. Another good recommendation—which is, like most of the good recommendations, buried in the report—is the idea of having a national awards scheme whereby we give many more scholarships. We heard from Chris Ballance about the financial difficulties that writers have. I do not believe that it is our job to provide our writers with a guaranteed income for ever and a day, no matter how good they are. However, we can give them much more pump priming than we do just now. Perhaps there could be a scholarship of up to three years. Some of those scholarships should be international scholarships to help to build the sort of international links that Roseanna Cunningham talked about and to develop our connections with  other cultures worldwide. We need to provide the funding at the grass-roots level that will enable us to sow the seeds of creativity; we should not think of ourselves as the people who have to create or run an organisation or come up with guidelines for cultural organisations. If we are going to encourage the cultural flowering of Scotland, we have to sow those seeds at a local level and at a national level. It is right that we should ask our local authorities to do much more than some of them are doing. However, we cannot do that or give effective cultural rights to people if we do not ensure that the resources are there for them to exercise those rights. Indeed, it is not legislation that is required but resources. The philosophy that is required is an enabling one that will allow us to sow the seeds that will encourage the flowering of our nation. If we do that, we will become a culturally advanced nation, which will benefit everyone.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Her Majesty's Government on the impact of high oil prices on the Scottish economy. (S2O-7583)

I thank the minister for that detailed reply. Will the minister pursue with the Government in London the impact of high oil prices on the rural economy in Scotland and on poorer motorists and the need to have a countervailing reduction in either fuel duty or VAT? Is it not about time that the minister showed his Labour colleagues the same leadership on this issue as he has shown on business rates?

In recent times we have heard a great deal of the blood-curdling phrase, "Scotland is the best wee country in the world". To a large extent, this debate is about how we judge whether Scotland is the best wee country in the world. I find it difficult to believe that we are the best wee country in the world when we have the highest rate of violence in the developed world. I find it difficult to believe that we are the best wee country in the world when the Executive brags that 25 per cent of our children live in poverty and that one-third of our pensioners live on or near the breadline, when 300,000 people in Scotland are, for one reason or another, economically inactive and when we have one of the lowest gross domestic product growth rates in the UK and in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. It beats me how anyone can look at those statistics and conclude that we are the best wee country in the world. It seems to me that it is not Janette Anderson and Ian Graham who are the idiots; it is those who see those statistics and describe Scotland as the best wee country in the world. I accept the Greens' argument that GDP is not the only measure of success. As Linda Fabiani pointed out, the annual UN human development index, which takes many factors into account, is a very good measure of economic performance and social well-being. If the Greens and others consider the countries that are at the top of the UN human development index, they will see that the same countries are at the top of the league for GDP growth and GDP per head. Conversely, the countries at the bottom end of the UN human development index tend to have lowest growth and GDP per head.  That tells me that there is a strong correlation between GDP growth, with all its flaws, and general human well-being. It is no accident that the countries that are at the top of the GDP league and the human development index have several common features. The first common feature is high investment in their economies; on average they invest 20 per cent of their GDP in their economy in education, health, manufacturing and other services. Secondly, most of them strive for full employment. Thirdly, they have far fairer societies. Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Austria have 2 per cent child poverty, not 25 per cent. There is a definite correlation with GDP. I agree with the Greens' criticism of using GDP as the only measure, but it is an indicator or proxy for social as well as economic well-being. I have no time to develop my argument, but I will say this: had we access to the oil in the same way as Alberta and other places do, we would be top of the league instead of bottom. We could then say that we were one of the best—one of the best—wee countries in the world.

Will the member give way?

rose—

In the light of what the First Minister said, given the wide-ranging views throughout Parliament on the need  for additional powers and in the spirit of the Parliament's founding principles, does he agree that rather than conducting an internal review in the Executive, it is time to consider establishing a special committee of the Parliament, perhaps convened by the Presiding Officer, to examine additional powers and to take evidence from civic Scotland and others on the additional powers that Parliament now requires? Does he acknowledge that although there is disagreement about independence, agreement may well be wide on the next step forward?

The First Minister said that success in Scotland should "be judged by indicators on a global scale". I agree. In the light of that comment, I draw the First Minister's attention to last week's report by a Scottish Executive working party, which highlighted the fact that Scotland has the highest proportion of 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training among all the members of the Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development. Given that that is clearly a failure "on a global scale", will the First Minister take urgent action to get many more young people into employment, education or training?

Has the minister read the report from the University of Glasgow that points out that the real level of economic activity and unemployment in Glasgow is 28 per cent? After eight years of Labour Government, that figure is seven times the claimant count.

I, too, congratulate Derek Brownlee on his maiden speech. Given the quality of his speech, he, too, must be in the running to succeed as leader of the Tories in Scotland. I pay tribute to Derek Brownlee's predecessor, David Mundell, who was a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee during my tenure as convener. He made an exceptional contribution to the committee's work, despite his Tory philosophy, and I am sure that he will do extremely well at Westminster. I must be honest and say that the Finance Committee asked the wrong question in its report. The percentage of total expenditure that is spent on economic development does not matter a great deal; what matters is that the right level of money is spent on economic development and that the money is spent effectively and in the right areas. The percentage of total spend is almost incidental if we are doing what is necessary. The first thing that we must do is to decide what we are trying to achieve. The Enterprise and Culture Committee is grappling with the issue in its inquiry into business growth. Are we trying to close the gap between the Scottish and United Kingdom average growth rates? That would certainly be an achievement, as the gap has been closed in only two years during the past 30 years. Alternatively, are we looking further afield to our international competitors? The economies of countries that are at the same stage of development and are roughly the same size as Scotland are growing at a rate that is twice the long-term growth rate of the Scottish economy. That is the ambition that we should set ourselves. If we compare the UK average during the past 30 years with that of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, it is clear that the UK economy has not been particularly fast growing. Therefore, it would be entirely wrong to benchmark our ambitions against an economy that is not doing particularly well. We should be aiming to double the long-term growth rate of the Scottish economy. I am a nationalist, so members will expect me to say that we cannot achieve that ambition if we manage only the microtools and do not have control over the macrotools, in particular interest rates. If members compare the real level of interest rates—

Not at the moment, but I will give way to Wendy Alexander later. Interest rates in the UK are set by the Bank of England to meet the needs of England—indeed, the small part of England that is the City of  London—and are not matched to the needs of the Scottish economy. As The Scotsman 's own shadow monetary policy committee—which includes Donald MacRae—said, if we were setting interest rates on the basis of the needs of the Scottish economy, they would be about half the rate of those that are set by the Bank of England.

I know what the member is dying to ask me: am I talking about being inside or outside the euro? It does not matter. Countries that are inside the euro have had an interest rate that is half that of the Bank of England, despite their low economic growth, and those that are outside the euro have had much lower interest rates as well. When it comes to being in or out of the euro, the position is neutral; either way, our interest rates in real terms have been far too high.

I will do something that Wendy Alexander would not do and take an intervention.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. There is absolutely no question. If Wendy Alexander reads our party policy, she will see that we would have an independent central bank in Scotland, which would be given ground rules in the same way that the Bank of England gets its framework from Gordon Brown, a Scottish Chancellor of the Exchequer. Mr Mather or Mr Morgan, whoever gets the job—

It might be me, but I do not think so. Whoever gets the job would set the ground rules for an independent central bank in Scotland. There is nothing wrong with that, because they would take their decisions based on the needs of the Scottish economy, not on the needs of the south-east of England. Since we are on the subject, and we are talking about money that is devoted to economic  development, I remind Ms Alexander of the point that she made a year ago about the volatility of the oil price. It so happens that on Friday night I was sitting next to Lord Oxburgh, who is the chairman of Shell. I asked him, "Is Wendy right about the oil price?" He said, "No, she's completely wrong. The oil price will be $40 to $60 a barrel for 20 years." It is high time that we got our share of that money to spend on economic development and growth in Scotland.

That is the best speech that George Lyon has ever made.

I seek more detail from the minister about the proposals. First, how will they relate to a community such as Greengairs? After the implementation of the reforms, will it be impossible for one community to have nine opencast and landfill sites within a small, confined area? At the moment, the sites at Greengairs are destroying the local environment there. Secondly, the minister said that one of his intentions was to speed up the process. Will he tell the chamber what the average time from the submission of a planning application to approval is at the moment and what it will be after the implementation of his proposals? Thirdly, will the Enterprise and Culture Committee recommendation that national guidelines should be introduced for wind farms be incorporated into the new national planning framework?

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Executive will respond to the recommendations in the Cultural Commission's report, which was published this morning. (S2F-1748) Will the Deputy First Minister join me in welcoming members of the Culture, Welsh Language and Sport Committee of the National Assembly for Wales, who are in the gallery?

I do not expect the Deputy First Minister to be able to respond to the 124 recommendations of the Cultural Commission only two hours after the report was published, but will he confirm that the Executive will abide by the principle that politicians should not be involved in the day-to-day running of culture and the arts in Scotland? Will he give a commitment in principle to implement the recommendations on rights and responsibilities in relation to culture and the arts for citizens?

I want to ask the First Minister about the impact of the instability in euroland, which was highly predictable, on employment and growth. In particular, I want to ask about the state-aid action plan that the European Commission announced yesterday. Will the First Minister ensure that the new rules on state aid help rather than damage jobs in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its latest estimate is of the number of 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, training or employment. (S2O-7034)

I point out that that represents 13 per cent of all 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland and that that is higher than the figure in 1999, when the Executive came to power. When will the minister do something about the problem and get those  young people into education, training or employment?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate and the ambassador and the Norwegian people on celebrating 100 years of independence. I look forward to Scotland joining that family of independent nations in not too many years' time. I should also apologise for the main Government party's display of ignorance in not putting anyone up in the debate to acknowledge the great achievements of the Norwegian nation and people. Scotland and Norway have much in common. We each have a population of about 5 million people; we are on the geographic periphery of Europe; we share many of the same industrial structures; and we are both oil nations. However, the comparison tends to stop there because, although we discovered oil at the same time as the Norwegians did, we have become relatively poorer in the past 30 years while Norway has become very rich indeed. Rob Gibson mentioned the petroleum fund, which is now worth £90 billion and will secure the future of the Norwegian economy and people not just for 20, 30 or 40 years but probably for hundreds of years to come. It has been so successful that the Norwegians are using not only the interest on the capital but the interest on the interest on the capital to invest in their economy. As for any lessons that Scotland needs to learn, we have only to consider Norway's success. We have been told that we should not have control of  the oil because its price varies daily and weekly—tell that to the Norwegian people and their £90 billion fund. Jim Mather alluded to the worldwide network of embassies. We have been told that embassies are a bad thing, but I do not think that many people in Norway would agree with that. Norway has no external debt, whereas the UK is massively in debt. Finally, Norway's contributions to the developing world already exceed the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product. Despite the ignorance of Labour members, the message from the chamber should be loud and clear. We send our greetings to the Norwegian people and express our pride in their achievements. We must learn lessons from them and, just like they did, go for our independence and freedom.

The member stresses the importance of secondary education, but all the research shows that the vital element is early-years education in primary schools. The fact that we spend only about 80 per cent of the OECD average in the early years is one of the reasons why we are failing.

I will widen the context of the debate by considering not just the narrow issue of student debt but the broader policy objectives that we are trying to set. A major objective of the Executive's lifelong learning and education policy is, quite rightly, to increase the proportion of people from working-class backgrounds who go to university. Despite the fact that the percentage of 16 to 19-year-olds who enter higher education has increased from 1 per cent in 1950 to about 50 per cent in 2005, the proportion of students who come from working-class areas has remained static, by and large. Some years it goes up a bit and other years it goes down a bit, but the 55-year graph shows that the percentage of students from manual-working family backgrounds is more or less the same as it was 55 years ago. I am the first to admit that the problem is not just financial; there are other reasons why people from poorer backgrounds do not go to university. One of the major demotivating factors is that people know that they will not get the financial support that they require. The minister was quite right to say that fear of debt is as important as debt itself. Rightly or wrongly, the fear of debt among people from poorer backgrounds is a major contributor to why they do not go to university.

I have already said that I do not believe that financial support is the only factor and that there are other, more complex factors. Nevertheless, it is important. I have two points to make on participation rates. First, there is a lot of criticism of our having such a high participation rate in Scotland. However, some countries have participation rates as high as 70 per cent and there is a clear link between the level of economic growth in a country and the  percentage of its people who participate in higher education. Secondly, this year we have seen a 3 per cent drop in the participation rate from 51 per cent to about 48 per cent. One of the reasons for that is funding, but another is job prospects for graduates. According to one survey, only 36 per cent of all graduates end up in a job that is relevant to their degree and many of them end up being paid nothing like £15,000 a year until they have been in the workforce for 10 or even 15 years, which makes a significant contribution to post-university poverty. I say to the Executive, do not take a narrow party-political approach to our proposal, but examine carefully whether grants would be a far better investment than loans for society as a whole. Perhaps then we could achieve the other objectives of our wider education policy.

I draw the First Minister's attention to the commitment in the Queen's speech to introduce a bill on behalf of Rhodri Morgan and the National Assembly for Wales to establish an old people's commissioner for Wales. In light of that, will the First Minister now commit the Scottish Executive to supporting my proposed member's bill to establish an old people's commissioner for Scotland?

I remind all members of the importance of the tourism sector to the Scottish economy. It contributes between £4 billion and £5 billion a year to Scotland's gross domestic product, employs about 197,000 people in Scotland and is one of the highest-growth industries that we have. For the past three or four years, it has outstripped many of the other so-called high-growth sectors. Rightly, VisitScotland and the Scottish Executive have set a strategic target of increasing the size of the industry by 50 per cent by the year 2015. The subject of our report is the reform and reorganisation of the area tourist boards and the contribution that that reorganisation can make to achieving the strategic objective of a 50 per cent increase in the size of the tourism sector. I think that there is universal agreement in principle in all the major parties that the old area tourist board network was outdated and was not fit for purpose in the 21 st century, not least because a membership-based system, relying on very small businesses for much of its funding, was not the way in which to market Scotland to the modern world. There is also general agreement in principle that it is right to have an integrated national organisation that promotes Scotland as a whole, as well as every corner of Scotland, both inside Scotland and, more important, to the wider world. I do not think that there is any disagreement about those points.

Absolutely. Although we recognise the need for homogeneity in the organisation, that integrated organisation offers a diversified product to the wider world, including cheese factories,  Caithness and Sutherland and all that is good north of Inverness, as well as south of it.

I will refuse. The principle is not in dispute. The inquiry by the Enterprise and Culture Committee addressed the nuts and bolts of the reorganisation and reform of area tourist boards. I will mention some of the issues that arose, more from the point of view of looking to the future and learning any lessons that need to be learned than from that of going over the coals of the past again. The past is the past, and although we recognise that many aspects of the reorganisation could have been done better, we owe it to the industry and everybody in it to concentrate on where we go from here, rather than going over the history of the past two years. There were four or five key issues that were addressed by the committee that will require to be continually monitored until the completion of the reorganisation process. First, we dealt with the process. At times, the level of communication between VisitScotland and members of the private sector—particularly those on the boards of the area tourist boards—was not perhaps all that it should have been. That led to a great deal of frustration, as was articulated by Robin Shedden, the chairman of the area tourist board network. There is a lesson in there for the future about how VisitScotland communicates with those in the industry, as well as with the industry's clientele. Secondly, at times, many members of staff felt that they were not given adequate information at key stages of the process. It is always difficult to get it absolutely right when people's jobs are involved, but the committee felt that, at times, communications with staff could have been substantially better than they were. As a result, I know that in some areas we lost one or two good staff who would have been a major asset to the new organisation. Again, there is a lesson to be learned. Thirdly, we looked at communication with wider Scotland. Sometimes people felt that they were in the dark about how far and fast the reorganisation was going. The next major issue concerned cost. The original estimate of the cost of the reorganisation was about £2 million over two years or so, but the cost is now £6.5 million. Although that is a significant amount of money, in relation to the size of the sector it is a drop in the ocean. However, it is an indication of the need for much more detailed planning in such exercises. Another major point, particularly for the future, is the need to ensure that all the stakeholders  involved in the reorganisation and in the delivery of services—including the private sector operators in particular, as well as the enterprise network and the local authorities—are properly consulted by VisitScotland at every stage as we move towards completion of the process. To be fair to VisitScotland, it has set up special machinery to ensure that that happens. In the light of Eric Milligan's report on people's first impressions of Scotland, I hope that the debate concentrates on where we go from here and, having learned the lessons of the reorganisation, on how we make sure that we achieve the strategic objective of increasing the size of the sector by 50 per cent in the next 10 years. If, at the end of the day and despite all the difficulties, the reorganisation contributes to that, it will have been well worth doing. On behalf of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations contained in the Enterprise and Culture Committee's 3rd Report 2005 (Session 2): Restructuring Scotland's Tourism Industry: Report on the Review of Area Tourist Boards (SP Paper 305).

To ask the Scottish Executive how much it and its agencies are committed to spending to promote London's bid for the 2012 Olympics. (S2O-6662)

Is the minister aware of the conclusion of the House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee that the cost to Scotland, through lost lottery money, of holding the 2012 Olympics in London will be in the order of £70 million? Given that £65 million of applications for sports lottery funding have been turned down in the past three years, that represents a huge dent in expenditure on sport in Scotland in the period to come.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's policy is in relation to the detention of children under 16 in prison. (S2F-1617)

I draw the First Minister's attention to the revelation last week that children under 16 are regularly held in Kilmarnock prison. Can he tell us how many children are being held, or have been held in the past year, in Scottish prisons? When will the Executive live up to the promise made by Jim Wallace when he was Minister for Justice that there would be an end to that practice long before now?

I will, of course, take advantage of the Presiding Officer's kind offer, but first I apologise to the Deputy First Minister for missing the first part of his speech. I  also declare my interest as a director of the Scotland Funds and as a former non-executive director of a life and pensions company. The Scottish National Party is the only party in today's debate that can honestly say that our word is our Bond—he is phoning up half a million of our people as we speak. Before dealing specifically with the financial services industry and the Executive's strategy for it, I will make a couple of general points about some issues that have been raised in the debate. First, I find it absolutely incredible that Scott Barrie and other Labour members think it acceptable that the growth rate of the Scottish economy continues to be about 60 per cent of that of the rest of the UK, particularly when the rest of the UK relies so heavily on the assets of the Scottish economy. Scotland's oil and gas not only helps the UK's balance of payments position, but makes a huge contribution—some £10 billion in extra oil revenues this year—to the UK Treasury. That will go a long way towards helping the Chancellor of the Exchequer to deal with his so-called black hole. Secondly, I find it incredible that the Irish experience is being written off as if we have nothing to learn from it. Ireland is a small country that has few indigenous resources other than peat, but its GDP per head now exceeds that of Scotland and that of the United Kingdom as a whole. If the Irish economy continues to grow at 5 per cent per annum, by the end of this decade Ireland's GDP per head will be 20 to 30 per cent higher than the GDP per head in this country. To write off that remarkable achievement as if there is nothing to be learned from it is absolutely crazy and absurd. Another point to make about Ireland's success in financial services and other major sectors of the economy—I say it as one who categorises himself as being to the left of centre rather than to the right, although it is a fact of life—is that much of that success can be put down to Ireland's having introduced a tax regime that provides low corporation tax and double taxation arrangements with other countries. It is not only the SNP that says that; the people who lead the financial services sector in Ireland say that the combination of low corporation tax and double tax arrangements has been the main driver of the success of Ireland not just in obtaining inward investment, but in laying emphasis on indigenous growth of companies that are now based in the Irish economy.

Jamie Stone should never believe what he reads in the  Daily Record . I certainly do not. His point is irrelevant to the debate—to be frank, it is a lot of nonsense. My next point concerns how well the financial services sector in Scotland serves the rest of the Scottish economy. We are all signed up to the idea that our priority must be to increase not only the growth rate but the competitiveness of industry and commerce in Scotland. It is a fact of life that one of the major costs that our industry has, but which our competitors do not have, is our relatively high real interest rates. Over the past 30 years or so, the level of interest rates in real terms has run at about twice the real level in the United States and in Europe. I will not make the point—although it is an obvious point to make—that if we were an independent country we would not be in that position.

The shadow monetary policy committee that was set up by The Scotsman consistently sets interest rates at between 1 and 2 per cent below the rates that are set by the Bank of England. Although the Bank of England was set up by Paterson, a Scotsman, it is the bank for England. It has certainly not been the bank for Scotland or the Scottish economy during the past 30 or 40 years. If the minister will listen, I will make the point that, even with a devolved Parliament, we can start to address some of the problems, especially the cost of borrowing for investment by industry in Scotland. Many of the German Länder do not place emphasis on helping to fund small start-ups that do not add value; they fund high growth start-ups, but not low growth ones. They also give high priority to providing funding through equity and loan capital at non-commercial rates to both start-up and existing businesses, which allows them to grow and to invest. I say to the Executive that it would be worth its while, as a way of developing the financial services sector in Scotland, to study other regional European Union Government schemes, local banks and local credit associations that help to fund local businesses and which offer non-commercial terms and conditions. I refer not just to interest rates, but to matters such as security, capital repayment holidays, interest holidays and so on. We could learn from comparable regions across the channel. How do we grow the financial services sector in Scotland? We have a strong financial services sector, but how can we build on that sound platform? We should consider the strategy that in  Indonesia is called localisation. We must recognise that we live in a global economy and that we must be free and open. We must also recognise that the competition no longer consists just of other banks or pension funds down the road in Edinburgh, in the United Kingdom or even in Europe, but may be a bank in Wisconsin, Singapore or elsewhere—we are talking global. However, the fact that we are living in a global economy does not mean that we must put up our hands and say that there is nothing we can do to promote our industry. At the core of the localisation strategy that is followed by Pacific countries lie, on the one hand, recognition that we live in a global economy and, on the other, management of local resources to fulfil the demands of the global economy. In our case, the local resources would be financial services and the skills that go with those services. We agree with many of the recommendations in the strategy and with points that have been made, but we want to be able to add to that, to expand things and to set our heights even higher. Moreover, we should not just pay lip service to infrastructure. In that respect, I must acknowledge that today marks the official opening of the M77 between Kilmarnock and Fenwick. The SNP also supports the decision on the M74 extension. We find it incredible that the Greens are always telling us about how to boost industry when the worst thing that could happen to the financial services sector would be implementation of the Green party's air transport policy, which would mean that the cost of connecting to the rest of the world would be multiplied by a factor of about five.

I thought that that intervention would help to fill some time, Presiding Officer. I say to Mark Ballard that the key infrastructure issue for the financial services sector and other industries is direct air links, particularly those across the Atlantic, rather than congestion in one or two cities. We support the Executive's moves to boost the financial services sector and to support its development in Scotland. However, we want to go  further: obviously, we believe that if we were independent, we would be able to go much further than we can under devolution. We also want the Executive to consider new and innovative ways of helping our financial services to assist the rest of our economic base, particularly in respect of the problem of having to face a real interest rate that is twice that of our competitors. Inroads that were made into that problem would add significantly to the impact of the strategy for the financial services industry in Scotland and its wider strategy of there being a smart, successful Scotland.

I echo the sentiments that the minister expressed. This is a day on which the Gaelic language is going forward, not back—to coin a phrase. I congratulate the minister on the role that he has played in working with members of the committee and others, such as me, to take the bill forward. As a result of that co-operation, we have ended up with what will be a much better act than would have been achieved through the draft bill with which we started out. I thank Robert Brown, the convener of the Education Committee, for allowing me to participate so actively in the committee's proceedings, even though I am not a member. I also mention Mike Russell, who introduced his Gaelic language bill, which was on similar lines to the bill that we are considering, during the first session of Parliament. The bill represents not the end of the story but the end of the beginning of the story of the regeneration of Gaelic. During the bill's passage we have recognised a number of areas in relation to the promotion of the language that are not covered by the bill and remain to be addressed. For example, I think that we all agree that there  needs to be a clear strategy for the future of Gaelic broadcasting, which will use new, digital technology to spread knowledge and uptake of the Gaelic language. We still face a major challenge. It is estimated that there is a net loss of about 1,500 Gaelic speakers every year. We also have a dire shortage of Gaelic-speaking teachers. The passing of the bill will not address or solve those problems, but it will send a clear message about the serious intent of the Parliament to address all the problems that Gaelic faces, including the language's status and the need for public agencies to promote the language as part and parcel of their remit. It is important that the bill acknowledges the role of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and I hope that the next report on the progress of the Gaelic language against the charter will be more complimentary than the last one was. Robert Brown said that we learned a great deal from the Welsh experience, but the Welsh language started from a much higher base than does Gaelic in Scotland, which faces much more widespread and severe challenges than were faced by Welsh. Like our colleagues in other parties, we will take pride in the passing of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill. We are glad that we have been able to contribute to the bill's progress and we look forward to progress being made in broadcasting, in education, in the work of Bòrd na Gàidhlig and in the promotion of the language throughout Scotland. I hope that after we pass the bill at decision time at 5 o'clock, there will be coverage, not just in the northern parts of Scotland but throughout the land, of the fact that the Scottish Parliament has rectified decades, if not centuries, of neglect of a key part of Scotland's past and heritage.

I support the amendments in the name of John Farquhar Munro. We think that it is sensible that the members and, in particular, the chair of a board that is appointed with the express  purpose of promoting Gaelic should be Gaelic-speaking people. For the reasons that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton outlined, it would be a perfectly sensible proposition to have Gaelic speakers running the show as far as the promotion of the Gaelic language is concerned. The Scottish National Party is happy to support—in English, unfortunately—amendments 2 and 3.

I have nearly been knocked off my chair. I thank the minister for the ultimate sacrifice and his generosity in accepting amendment 45. Perhaps I should give the chamber a brief history behind the amendment. The FSA holds a unique position in the United Kingdom constitution as the only non-ministerial Government department. Ironically, the legal advice that the Executive gave us at stage 2 ran contrary to the advice that the committee received from the Parliament's legal people, who said that the FSA was not technically a cross-border agency. I am glad that the minister has now recognised that the Parliament's legal advice was bang on and that the Executive's advice was, to say the least, slightly wrong. It is right to build the provision into the bill. I accept that, in any case, the FSA has given in writing its commitment to co-operate. However, the acceptance of amendment 45 means that if there are any problems with any future Administration, including the FSA, the bòrd or the Scottish Executive, we will not need to revisit primary legislation. I thank the minister for accepting amendment 45. He will be glad to know that we will vote for all his other amendments.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The legal advice from the Executive on the Food Standards Agency was entirely wrong, so how can we have any faith in its legal advice on this matter?

I press amendment 5.

I do not anticipate a great deal of controversy in this afternoon's debate, but my amendments in this group address one of the areas in which there will perhaps be a difference between my party and the Scottish Executive. My amendments are designed to strengthen the bill. A clear message has to go out from the Parliament about the importance of the Gaelic language, not just in terms of what we are trying to do for the language itself but in regenerating the language as a key part of regenerating the culture, traditions and heritage of all of Scotland. One of the great myths is that Gaelic is relevant only to people in the Highlands and Islands but, as many  people in the chamber will know, there are actually more speakers of Gaelic in Glasgow than there are still in the Highlands and Islands. The purpose of amendment 5 is to incorporate the aspiration of the Executive to build into the bill the terminology of equal respect for Gaelic, but to strengthen that further by giving Gaelic equal validity, as recommended in evidence to the Education Committee by Bòrd na Gàidhlig. The purpose of doing that is so that, when Gaelic is used, it will have the same meaning in law, the same validity and the same level of importance as the English language. We do not suggest—no one suggests—that Gaelic should be used as a second language in every instance. The amendments in my name do not propose such an approach; they propose that in situations in which Gaelic is used, the language should have equal validity with English. If the amendments are agreed to, they will send a clear signal about how important Parliament considers Gaelic to be and ensure that the validity with which Gaelic is treated is built into the bill, as is the concept of respect. At this late stage, I ask the minister to reconsider the matter and to agree to reasonable amendments. Such unity in the Parliament would be the first sign that we can approach the bill on a consensual basis. Let us ensure that we treat Gaelic and English on the basis of equal validity, as well as with equal respect. I move amendment 5.

Will the minister examine the impact of such measures on educational input? Like Inverness College, too many colleges are having to take decisions that are driven by historic debt problems rather than by their areas' educational needs.

I thank members who have complimented the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and its successor committee, the Enterprise and Culture Committee. I always enjoy being complimented and take the opportunity to compliment and thank those who have been members of those committees and the staff who have worked on them. I remind members why the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee recommended the merger of the two funding councils. Its recommendation was essentially based on three pieces of evidence that were received during its inquiry. One piece of evidence related to the development of the university of the Highlands and Islands, which is unique in being made up of 13  further education colleges. The distinction between further and higher education and between colleges and universities was becoming very blurred there, as it was at the Crichton campus in Dumfries, which I think is the only place in the United Kingdom where a person can get a degree from any one of four universities. Finally, when we considered the figures and the flow of students between higher and further education and the fact that 40 per cent of HE students were in FE institutions, for example, it was apparent that the distinction between colleges and universities and between HE and FE was becoming much more blurred than it had been. That is not to say that there are not distinct roles for universities and colleges. However, in order to gain flexibility in those innovative ideas and projects, we felt that it made sense—given that we already had a combined executive—to have a combined funding council. It will also be easier for a joint funding council to work with other bodies in the field, especially Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. However, now that we are about to pass the bill, let us look not to the past but to the future. The new funding council has five key challenges in front of it. The first of those is the access challenge. Despite the fact that around 50 per cent of young people in Scotland now go to university, the figure for young people from working-class families is stubbornly still around 14 to 15 per cent. There is a huge untapped pool of talent that we need to try much harder to get into the university and further education sectors. The access challenge is of major importance. The second challenge is the skills challenge. We recognise that, in certain sectors such as construction and the health service, one of the barriers to growth is the skills gaps that we face. Across the board, some of the softer skills are in shorter supply than some of the more hardware-type skills. The skills challenge exists and we must tackle it if we are to increase the rate of business growth in Scotland. The third, and most important, challenge is the lifelong learning challenge. The knowledge life cycle is changing all the time. When I went to university, whatever a person learned at university often stood them in good stead for the next 20 or 30 years. However, what a medical graduate learns this year could be out of date next year or the year after. Therefore, the need for continuing professional development and real lifelong learning is the third challenge. The fourth challenge is in research. We are excellent in public sector research and get a massive share of the public sector research budget, but we face a major challenge to increase private sector research and development.  Last but not least, there is the challenge of achieving excellence and quality. We have some of the finest universities and colleges not just in the UK but in the world. Our universities are third in the world—and not just per head—in terms of the excellence of their output in academic journals and the like. Our job now is not only to keep up that level of excellence but to spread it throughout all the institutions in Scotland, so that we do not end up third but go for number 1. That is the challenge of the new council and we must support it in meeting that challenge. Finally, I hope that the minister will take in the recommendation of the Enterprise and Culture Committee that, in considering the composition of the council, he should consider the possibility of bringing in one or two members from the international intellectual and training community as well as appointing members from within Scotland.

I support amendment 12, as the decision to build a skills committee into statute is right. I will make a number of points about how the skills committee should operate. As the minister said, we had an interesting and worthwhile debate on the skills agenda in Scotland last Thursday, and there was broad consensus in the Parliament on the priority that needs to be attached to the development of a skills strategy. However, the new funding council's spend on skills will represent only a part of the total public expenditure on skills in Scotland. For example, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise spend to the value of about 50 per cent of the further education budget on skills development. Moreover, we now have the Sector Skills Development Agency, Sector Skills Alliance Scotland and industry sector skills councils as well as much involvement of the private sector, which is not to mention a range of other bodies, such as the Construction Industry Training Board, NHS Education for Scotland and local authority schools. I therefore urge the minister to consider, in conjunction with the new funding council, the issue of skills and to use the skills committee as a way of co-ordinating the work on skills throughout the Executive's areas of responsibility. I also suggest that he consider the role of Futureskills Scotland. It is an excellent organisation, but perhaps it should no longer be confined to being a part of Scottish Enterprise; perhaps it should be a cross-organisational body, possibly located in the Executive, so that the information that it gathers can inform the new funding council's decisions as  well as those of the other skills agencies in Scotland. The Scottish National Party welcomes the provisions on a skills committee as the right initiative to take to ensure that skills, along with research, remain at the forefront of the development of higher and further education.

Is it not the case that, if a medical student pays a higher fee as a result of the introduction of variable fees, that will be reflected in a higher repayment of the graduate endowment?

I rise to support amendments 14 to 16, in the name of Fiona Hyslop. We start from the principled position that we are opposed to the introduction of variable fees. I do not think that we will win that battle today, so we need to consider the conditions under which variable fees could and should be introduced under the terms that the Executive has set. One of the problems with the bill as it stands is that it gives any future minister the power to introduce variable fees for any institution, for any course and for any student. That is far too wide a power for a minister to have. We have an assurance from the current Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Jim Wallace, that his intention is to deal only with the specific issue of medical students. I take his word that there will be no other application of the power for as long as he is the minister, which, no doubt, is a decision for Mr McConnell. However, Jim Wallace will not be the minister for ever. As Chris Ballance pointed out, there will be an election in 2007, and if we are elected, we will get rid of the power. If we are not elected and Murdo Fraser becomes the minister, he will be able to apply the power to any student, any course and any institution.

Mr Adam was asking for information; he was not giving a commitment on behalf of anyone. I think that he will confirm that point. I turn to the position of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. In 1999, he did not want any tuition fees. His colleagues south of the border are arguing for no tuition fees whatsoever, yet the minister's position has changed. In 1999, he was against them; in 2000, he was for them; in 2003, he was against variable fees; in 2005, he is in favour of them. That reminds me of the old music hall song:  "She wouldn't say yes, She wouldn't say no, She wouldn't say stop, And she wouldn't say go." That has been the minister's position on tuition fees during the past four or five years. The fundamental point is that, unless Fiona Hyslop's amendments are accepted, we will hand any future minister a carte-blanche power to introduce variable fees at any institution for any student of any subject. We find that totally unacceptable and we shall vote accordingly this afternoon.

There was no fundamental difference of principle on academic freedom. The only question was whether the requirement to preserve academic freedom should be written into the bill or contained in subsequent statutory instruments. I listened objectively to the arguments at stage 2 and, as convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, was persuaded to exercise my casting vote by voting for Michael Matheson's amendment because that was the right thing to do. In my view, the requirement to preserve academic freedom should always be written into primary legislation rather than secondary legislation. If the requirement is written into secondary legislation, future Administrations will find it a lot easier to change it, whereas if it is written into primary legislation, the continuity of academic freedom will be guaranteed. As other members have pointed out, there are two important aspects to the new section that amendment 10 will insert. The academic freedom of the post-1992 universities will be protected in statute in the same way that the academic freedom of the pre-1992 universities is protected. The protection that the new section will afford extends to other fundable bodies, including the colleges. I congratulate the minister on keeping faith with the committee's wishes. I was worried that the Executive might try to overturn Michael Matheson's stage 2 amendment without substituting it with a more suitable amendment, but it has not done that. I am glad that we now have consensus on writing into the bill the excellent wording that is contained in amendment 10.

Given the decision that was taken to reorient the scientific base of the Hannah towards obesity and diabetes research, did the department put the institute in contact with the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning or the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, which is responsible for wider scientific research in Scotland?

I congratulate Phil Gallie on securing the debate. I have never voted for him, but he has always been a great champion for Ayr and Ayrshire. I hope that the minister will acknowledge not only the strength of feeling about the Hannah Research Institute in Ayrshire and the wider west of Scotland, but that  members of all parties are speaking with a united voice. It is incredible that we must have the debate. The Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department is flying in the face of the policy of every other department in the Scottish Executive. The Hannah institute is doing work on obesity and diabetes at a time when the Minister for Health and Community Care tells us that tackling those problems is a top priority, and the Minister for Education and Young People says that we must deal with those problems among young people or face major problems in the future. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and his agencies have said that research in those areas is a top priority. How is it that among all the Executive Departments and the Cabinet, every member of which has been told to back up the smart, successful Scotland agenda, one rogue department has put a fine institution under dire threat? If we were talking about an area of science that is in decline, we might begin to understand SEERAD's arguments, but we are talking about an area of science that is growing apace at a geometric rate, not just in Scotland and the United Kingdom but internationally in Europe and across continents. Everyone recognises the importance of that area of activity. I hope that the minister will not give us woolly answers. We face a great problem, because the uncertainty that SEERAD's position has generated is creating a self-fulfilling prophecy. Dr Zammit, a leading scientist of international renown in diabetes, has left the Hannah to go to the University of Warwick. We are already suffering the brain drain that has resulted from the uncertainty that SEERAD has created. We need neither pious hopes nor the promise of the promise of a pledge: we need a decision. We need the Executive to take the decision to keep the Hannah and not just to keep it but to develop it, expand it and continue to build it up as a centre of excellence. If SEERAD is not prepared to do that, it should hand over responsibility for the research facility to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. He would then fund it as the Executive is funding all other major research institutes in Scotland, through a co-ordinated science policy and backed up by the newly merged funding council and the scientific advisory committee. The debate is not a groan and a whine and a special interest plea for Ayrshire. It is a debate about Scotland, the future of our kids and the need for research. It is about the need for Scotland to remain a scientific hub in Europe. We must send out the message loud and clear that not only  should the Hannah survive, it should be allowed—and funded—to prosper.

Does the member accept that there is a strong case for the funding for the Hannah to be transferred to the new merged funding council that will be responsible for all other research funding through the Scottish Executive?

I accept that general point, but skills shortages go side by side with 150,000 people who are officially unemployed in Scotland. There is a clear breakdown in getting more of those 150,000 unemployed people trained and retrained to take up current vacancies.

Not in Scotland.

Thank you very much indeed, Presiding Officer. Perhaps it is my birthday as well. I will begin on a positive note. I am sure that we all agree that there is much to be proud of in skills and education in Scotland. The performance of our universities is one example, as our academic achievement is third best in the world—not per head, simply third best—as measured by the OECD. There is also a great deal to be proud of in the good work that is going on in our colleges and among private sector training providers. I am sure that we all share in that pride, but we must also recognise that there are still problems to be solved and issues to be addressed, which is not to run Scotland down. I will list 10 challenges on the skills agenda in Scotland. The first, which is one of the most urgent, concerns the 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training. I will not make a party-political issue of the matter, because I accept that, as Robert Brown said, such issues are complex, but the situation is getting worse not better. The official statistics show that between 2001 and 2003, the number of NEETs increased from 33,000 to 35,000. In Cathie Craigie's area—North Lanarkshire, which includes Cumbernauld and Kilsyth—the increase was 50 per cent, so there is nothing for us to be complacent about. If a good proportion of those 35,000 16 to 19-year-olds were in training or an apprenticeship, that would go a long way towards solving many of the problems of shortages to which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred, when employers report an inadequate supply of young people to train in the construction industry or in plumbing, for example. Addressing that must be top of our priorities. I hope that when the Executive produces its employability framework in the summer, it will zero in on that problem. The second issue is more strategic and Robert Brown referred to it in an intervention. All the evidence shows that intervention in the early years—pre-school and in primary school—provides a far bigger bang for the buck than waiting until later years to invest in our kids. We have quite a good record on spend per student in the higher education sector—we spend on average about 120 per cent of the OECD average. However, our spend per pupil in the early years is only about 75 per cent of the OECD average. A strategic issue that we all must address is the need to up investment substantially in the early years, although not at the expense of the tertiary sector, because that would be cutting off our nose to spite our face. We must give priority in additional spending to the pre-school and primary school years. That will be a fundamental  prerequisite for long-term success in our skills agenda. Thirdly, we must address access. In Scotland in 1950—long before I was born—1 per cent of school leavers went to university. That figure has now increased to about 52 per cent. The number is slightly down this year, at about 48 or 49 per cent, but the average is 50 per cent. That represents a massive increase in those who go to university. Despite that increase, the reality is that the percentage of children from poorer backgrounds who reach university is stubbornly still about 14 per cent, which is much the same as it was in the 1950s and 1960s. We have never fundamentally addressed how we improve access to higher education for that group. I do not believe that anything in their genes—I am not talking about their denims—is inherently inferior to the genes of middle-class or aristocratic children. Something is fundamentally wrong when we allow the great pool of talent among our working-class kids to continue to go to waste. I do not accept that an easy and simple solution exists and I do not think that all that is needed is money, grants or loans, although they are a major part of the solution. Other issues are involved. However, one exciting thing that the Parliament can do is to address access to higher education.

I am talking about higher education. The member is right: 40 per cent of the people who go to university go via the FE route. That is why it is important to move to having one funding council, for example, because the institutional division between further and higher education is being blurred. Another challenge relates to part-time students. If we want to encourage more people to come back into the labour market, we must get people in their 30s and 40s to go back into training and into re-education. However, as Adam Ingram pointed out, those who go back in via the part-time route probably still get the worst deal and have the least entitlement, although there have been improvements. Addressing that issue is important. I think that we all agree that the modern apprenticeships programme is good, but the non-completion rate in most local enterprise company areas is still approaching an enormous potential  waste. We must address that issue as well as the related issue of skills shortages in particular sectors. I highlight the construction sector. Over the next few years, we will need to recruit around 27,000 people into the construction sector in Scotland. Around half of those people will have to be recruited as a result of people retiring; the other half will have to be recruited as a result of additional investment. However, with the modern apprenticeships and Construction Industry Training Board work, only between 2,000 and 2,500 people are being trained each year, which means that it will take around 10 years to fill the current shortages, never mind the shortages that there will be in 10 years' time. A step change is needed, particularly in the construction sector, and that represents a massive opportunity for jobs and training. Finally, we must address the related issue of demographics, which Jim Mather talked about, and the problems of literacy and numeracy. There is still the ridiculous situation in Scotland whereby some universities are running remedial English classes for students who go to university from school to learn languages. That is unacceptable in a modern industrial country. All those challenges must be faced up to. The issue is not about running down Scotland—we should recognise the big pluses that I mentioned at the start of my speech. We should face up to the challenges so that we can be top of the class in every one of the areas that I have mentioned.

Will the member take an intervention?

First, I congratulate Cathie Craigie on her 50 th birthday today. I hope that, in the next 50 years, she will be more accurate when describing SNP policy than she has been in her first 50 years. I draw her attention to the record number, confirmed last week in a parliamentary answer to me, of 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training. That is a Labour record.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to publish the latest report of Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons on HMP Kilmarnock. (S2O-6182)

Is the minister satisfied that it takes six months from the completion of the investigation to the publication of the report? Given the recommendations in last month's fatal accident inquiry report by Colin McKay into the suicide of James Barclay, will the minister request that the chief inspector undertake an immediate further investigation into the procedure for suicide watches in Kilmarnock prison? In the Scottish  Prison Service, the prison has a track record in suicides.

I welcome what the First Minister has just said about representation in Beijing. I encourage him to expand that representation into other countries, particularly India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Australia, and to follow the advice of his predecessor, Henry McLeish, who suggested that we should have a whole network of Scottish representatives in all the embassies throughout the world. Finally, I have a specific question. When does the First Minister hope to appoint a successor to Susan Stewart in the embassy in Washington?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Currently, 0.7 per cent of our GDP is spent on research and development. In his budget, the Chancellor of the Exchequer set a UK target of 2.5 per cent of GDP. What will the minister do to close the gap between 0.7 per cent in Scotland and the target of 2.5 per cent for the whole of the UK?

I draw the member's attention to a report that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee produced two years ago when the idea was floated that the Hannah Research Institute and other such bodies in the agricultural sector should be brought within the remit of the funding councils instead of being funded directly by SEERAD. If that had happened, the threat to the Hannah would not be as great as it is today.

Is the member's £300,000 estimate before or after tax? If we have 100 well-qualified people earning substantial salaries, they will contribute enormously to the local and national economies. Surely the development is, at least potentially, a far better deal than the white elephant that the Tories invested in at Clydebank.

Does the member agree that a reduction in corporation tax from 30 per cent to 20 per cent would provide a major boost to the sector?

The debate is likely to be one in which there will be a large degree of consensus around what we need to do in Scotland to invest in the life sciences. For a long time, my view has been that the key to economic development in Scotland is to make Scotland the science capital of Europe. Last week, in his budget statement, we saw the Chancellor of the Exchequer steal some of my ideas when he launched three science cities south of the border. Clearly, life sciences play a major role in the Executive's wider strategy to create a smart, successful Scotland and, specifically, to try to make Scotland the science capital of Europe. I want to put on the record an issue that arose in relation to the role of the new intermediary technology institutes. The ITIs are part of the long-term solution to the problems of the Scottish economy. I believe that they have a vital role to play in making Scotland smart and successful. Quite rightly, the Executive has earmarked £450 million over 10 years for investment in the ITIs. A point to which I keep returning—indeed, I have made it every time the ITIs are discussed in the chamber—concerns the onus on every politician and responsible commentator in Scotland not to jump on the passing short-term bandwagon and hammer an ITI at the first hurdle, when the first mistake is made and the first investment or risk goes belly-up, just because the ITI took a risk and failed. If an ITI has not had any failures, it is likely that it has not taken risks in the first place. It is regrettable that someone of George Kerevan's intelligence was so critical in The Scotsman of the IMI announcement. Mr Kerevan wrongly stated that all the intellectual property would transfer to the company. However, it is a fact of life that if we want to create the high-end, added-value investment and jobs of the future, we have to be in the business of doing deals with companies such as IMI. The onus is on all of us to champion decisions where risk is taken in the light of experience.

Of course I agree with Stewart Stevenson. Who could disagree with him?

Absolutely—particularly at the lower end of the scale. As the minister said, someone who is trying to secure an investment of £15 million or £20 million in Scotland can find that such investments are generally much easier to obtain than a £2 million investment, particularly when it comes to start-ups or higher-risk sectors. Access to finance at reasonable rates and with reasonable terms and conditions is a precondition and prerequisite to achieving our objective of making Scotland smart and successful. As the minister mentioned, we have a long track record of invention in Scotland, not just in the life sciences but in many other areas of activity. Three recent inventions in the life sciences are magnetic resonance imaging, Dolly the sheep and the p53 cancer suppressor gene. All those discoveries were made by Scottish universities in Scotland. We suffer, however, from a general problem in life sciences, as in other areas: when we invent something in Scotland, often somebody elsewhere makes it. Much of the downstream activity gets done furth of Scotland, and we need to address that. About 17 per cent of all the patents that are registered in the UK in an average year are from Scotland, yet only about 5 per cent are actually developed in Scotland—a difference of 12 per cent. We are creating wealth for other nations and are making discoveries that other people exploit. We need to find more imaginative and innovative ways of ensuring that a higher percentage of the research that is undertaken in Scotland ends up in development and downstream activity here. That is as true of life sciences as it is of many other sectors. I had the pleasure of speaking at the University of Glasgow just before Christmas, at the launch of a project on the pooling of research facilities in Scotland, specifically in physics and chemistry. Last week, I chaired a presentation by organisations now known as SUPA and ScotCHEM. SUPA is the Scottish universities physics alliance; ScotCHEM is the formal  organisation for pooling together all the chemistry departments, and their resources, of the main Scottish universities. Their work must be developed fully, and I hope that the minister will continue to support their initiatives. Even considering the strength that we have when we pool our resources and the number of scientists we have available, we still come below Oxford, Cambridge and University College London. Our objective as Scottish universities incorporated, as it were, should be to be larger than any one of those single institutions. I believe that we must pursue that goal in life sciences as well as in other disciplines. Dundee provides a classic example of what we need to do throughout Scotland. When I attended the University of Dundee in the early 1970s, it only produced brilliant economists. There was no research into cancer and there were no biomedics—there were none of those leading-edge sciences and technologies. In the past 10 to 15 years, Dundee has put itself on the map, not just of Scotland or Europe but of the world, as a major centre of excellence in cancer research and, more important for the long term, gene technology and discovery. If we can repeat the Dundee example in many other parts of Scotland, we can create the high value-added, exciting, leading-edge economy that we all desire. Unfortunately, I cannot tell members exactly how to do that in seven minutes. However, I welcome the creation of the new £40 million fund and I hope that it will be used to leverage additional private sector funding into research and development in Scotland. I tell the minister that he will have the support of members on this side of the chamber for that project. I move amendment S2M-2644.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "and also recognises the need to root that spirit and its resultant wealth in Scotland by gaining the economic powers that will allow Scotland to produce an increasingly more competitive proposition, thereby retaining and attracting more investment and talented people and providing an environment that encourages the growth of indigenous and multi-national businesses in Scotland."

I draw the First Minister's attention to a gap in provision for victims in the immediate aftermath of a serious  crime. There is great variation in the service provided to victims of crime, particularly by some police forces. For example, victims of crime are not provided with information on counselling and other support services that are available to them. Furthermore, they are not kept sufficiently abreast of progress on investigations or told when someone is being brought to justice for their crime. Will the First Minister examine that gap and determine whether we can find a better way of providing those services, especially in the immediate aftermath of a crime, when victims are at their most vulnerable?

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I welcome the Procedures Committee's report, but I want to make a number of points, the first of which is a general point for that committee. The recommendations on the role of and the practice of reporting to Parliament by the commissioner for public appointments are sensible, but there is still an accountability deficit in respect of some parliamentary commissioners whom Parliament has legislated for and appointed. In particular, I hope that the Procedures Committee will now address how the Scottish Public Sector Ombudsman and the information commissioner will report to Parliament. How they do so is not at all clear, as it was previously not at all clear how the commissioner for public appointments would do so. Secondly, I hope that the commissioner and the committee will consider at an early stage—including at the design stage of the code of practice for public appointments—the recommendations in the 10 th inquiry report of the United Kingdom Committee on Standards in Public Life, which was produced in January. That report made a series of recommendations on further improvements to the system of public appointments north and south of the border. Many  of the recommendations that are made in that report are worthy of consideration. The only note of discontent that I would express is on the last point that was made by the deputy minister about the code of practice and whether there is still prejudice in the system. The code of practice—as designed and implemented by Dame Rennie Fritchie—made substantial improvements. I hope that when our public appointments commissioner draws up her code for consultation, she will use the opportunity to strengthen the code vis-à-vis both parliamentary scrutiny and, more important, the need to take patronage out of the system. Despite the code and various reforms in recent years, the reality is that about two thirds of all appointees who express a political affiliation are from one party. Although that party gets 35 to 40 per cent of the vote in Scotland, I do not believe that it has two thirds of the best brains that apply for public appointments in Scotland. Through the code, the commissioner and the Standards Committee we must try to build confidence in the public appointments system by taking patronage out of it and ensuring that prejudice in favour of one political party is no longer maintained. Until that happens, many of us will retain a degree of scepticism and even cynicism about the system of public appointments. My third point relates to what Karen Gillon said about how the commissioner should report to Parliament. There are, essentially, four areas in which the commissioner is directly responsible to Parliament, and it makes perfect sense for that to happen through the conduit of the Standards Committee. In the context of the system of public appointments in Scotland, we are talking about standards in public life and ensuring that appointments to quangos and other bodies are above and beyond reproach regarding patronage or any other kind of favouritism. Parliament should debate the commissioner's annual report along with the report from the new standards and public appointments committee on the key issues that Parliament has still to address. The Procedures Committee has demonstrated typical common sense, which was articulated by Karen Gillon in her opening speech. We are glad to support the Procedures Committee's recommendations, but with the caveat that the remaining patronage in the system must be cleared out once and for all.

Did the First Minister see last night's BBC documentary on Kilmarnock prison? The programme vindicated all the points that I have made in the past six years about the anarchic shambles that is Kilmarnock prison. Does he agree that a particular concern is that there have been seven suicides in the prison, at least two of which could have been prevented if the prison had been properly managed? Stewart Yates, a former assistant director of the prison, said: "The primary focus of running the prison was the financial outcomes". Does the First Minister agree that it is now time to  take profit out of prisons and to make prisons a genuine service to punish and rehabilitate prisoners rather than a service that is about profits?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to reach a final decision on the planning application from Eden Waste Recycling Ltd for a landfill site at Greengairs in Lanarkshire. (S2O-5478)

I draw the minister's attention to the unique position of Greengairs. There are already nine landfill and opencast sites in the surrounding area. The addition of another landfill site would totally fly in the face of the Scottish Executive's environmental and planning policies and would do further enormous damage to the environment and economy of that part of Lanarkshire.

The entertainment value is always exceptional when the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning speaks. The debate has been very interesting. Jamie McGrigor told us how Inverness has been booming since Fergus Ewing became its MSP. Duncan McNeil brought Marx into a debate on the Scottish economy; unfortunately, he got the wrong one. He was referring to Karl, but he sounded like Groucho. Mention has even been made—by Stewart Stevenson—of the Isle of Man space programme. All I can say is that if the Isle of Man manages to send a man to the moon, he will meet the Green group of MSPs while he is up there. In his opening speech—which was perhaps not one of his finest—the Deputy First Minister told us a lot about his trip to China last week. It must have been the slow boat that took him there. To begin, I will deal with the nonsense of saying that Scotland's economic performance compares favourably with that of similar small countries. George Lyon told us that we are outperforming other small countries. That is nonsense. The most comprehensive index of countries' economic performance is produced by the United Nations development programme. It shows that Norway—which is celebrating 100 years of independence this year—is at the top of the list of the 20 countries with the best economic performance not just in Europe, but in the whole world. It has been claimed that the Norwegians' oil fund of £90 billion has been mismanaged. I wish that we had a mismanaged £90 billion in our bank account. Sweden is second on that list and is followed by Australia, Canada and the Netherlands. If we go  down the list, the UK is in 12 th place and we get to more than 20 countries before we get to Scotland. The idea that we are performing well as a small country is a total myth.

Scotland is in a completely different situation because we have indigenous resources the like of which Ireland never had. We have 90 per cent of the UK's oil reserves, 50 per cent of the gas reserves and 300 years of coal reserves. Although we have a small population, we have some of the finest universities in the world. The reason why a third of our people are living on the poverty line, in spite of the fact that we have all that potential wealth, is that unionist Labour, unionist Liberals and unionist Tories have mismanaged Scotland's resources.

I will give way in a minute because I always enjoy the entertainment value. Members should not just believe me. They should not take it from the SNP that Scotland's resources have been mismanaged; they should take it from the Scottish Executive's own agency, Scottish Enterprise, which commissioned a report from a consultancy called Local Futures. Although it received the report in August, for some reason it did not put it on the website until December, when we were all going off on our Christmas holidays. When the Executive was asked why the report did not appear for two months, an anonymous spokesman said: "Our knowledge management team produces stuff like this all the time and people often don't hear about it until someone, well, stumbles across it." We are talking about what is supposed to be a smart, successful Executive. According to The Herald , the report says that Scotland continues to lag behind the rest of the UK in both earnings and employment rates. The report warns: "This low-value service bias combined with a large public services sector is not likely to produce a globally competitive knowledge economy in Scotland." It also says that Glasgow, which has 10 Labour MSPs, "has a powerful base of knowledge-driven industries and public services, but it is also characterised by a high level of skills poverty and social polarisation". The Executive should not tell us that everything in the garden is rosy. To find out that that is not the  case, we need only look at the article in yesterday's edition of The Herald that had the headline, "Lives lost: Scots children who go straight from school to nowhere". The Executive does not even know whether 35,000 youngsters in Scotland are in employment, training or education, so it should not tell us about success. A few months ago, a Royal Bank of Scotland report pointed out problems with the company base in Scotland. We are far too reliant on a small number of sectors and a small number of companies. I am sure that members of the Executive will have read that report.

First, Neil MacCormick did not say that. Secondly, all the legal opinion—including unionist legal opinion, such as that of the late Lord Mackenzie-Stuart, a Tory who was chairman of the European Court of Justice—agreed that 90 per cent of the oil was defined as being in Scottish waters. It is not a matter of politics, but a matter of legal fact that it is Scotland's oil and will remain so. In the 1970s, I argued for an oil-sharing policy between England and Scotland. I still argue for an oil-sharing policy, but one with a slight difference: London has had its share and it is time that we in Scotland had ours. George Lyon referred to a Scottish Parliament information centre paper on the Scottish economy's performance, but I will refer to the latest SPICe paper on the level of spend on research and development in Scotland. Scotland is the region in the United Kingdom with the fourth-lowest business expenditure on research and development. When the Deputy First Minister was asked what he would do about that at the Enterprise and Culture Committee, he said, "I don't know. I huvnae a clue. I've nae idea. We've nae answers." That was the message from a smart, successful Scotland.

I am in my last minute, and after that message, I suspect that Jim Wallace might be in his last minute, too. The message is straightforward. To borrow from William—not Jim—Wallace, there is only one way for Scotland to prosper, and that is through freedom.

Unemployment is not at an all-time low.

I should clarify for the member's benefit that the oil fund will fund capital investment, not the current provision of services. It will fund long-term investment for future generations, which is why we call it a future generations fund.

Does the member accept that Scotland, like the rest of the UK, is now part of a market of 500 million people and that the day after independence and for ever after independence, we will still be part of a home market of 500 million people?

I am old enough to remember the 1974 Labour manifesto, which promised that an oil fund would be set up in 1974.

Does Maureen Macmillan agree with Wendy Alexander, who stated in The Scotsman  yesterday: "the Executive need to tackle the issue of the proportion of spending going into ... farming, fishing and forestry ... in rural areas which do not bring economic growth."

Does the member agree that some of the policies that the Greens advocate—such as the ending of cheap flights to Europe and into Scotland—would create mass unemployment, destroy the Scottish tourism industry and lead to a massive reduction in wealth in Scotland? In terms of economic policy, can anyone trust a party that demands a quorum to get into a lift?

Earlier, Murdo Fraser cited the GERS figures, saying that they were reliable, and he is now calling for public sector savings. However, was he at the debate just before Christmas when Wendy Alexander, a Labour MSP, pointed out that  the people who draw up the GERS figures had got the Government efficiency figures wrong by £700 million? How can he rely on anything that those people produce?

Although we all applaud the examples that the minister has given, is it not the case that two weeks ago, in front of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, he agreed with me that to achieve the objectives of the smart, successful Scotland strategy we need to boost research and development spend in Scotland by a factor of two? When I asked the minister what he would do to achieve that, he said: "I do not pretend to have any of the answers."

Will the minister give way?

Does the member support her other colleague, Ted Brocklebank, who suggested entirely the opposite to what Lord James proposed in the committee?

I could not disagree more fundamentally with the member. Does that mean, for example, that the Gaelic-medium education that is taking place in Kilmarnock should be abolished and that, under the Tories, its funding would be withdrawn?

That is what the member is saying.

Many people ask me whether I can speak Gaelic. I must admit that I struggle with English from time to time, without adding Gaelic to that. However, like many people in Scotland I am conscious of the importance of Gaelic in our heritage and culture. Today is an historic day for the Scottish Parliament, because this is a bill that many of us would not have expected to see if there had not been a Scottish Parliament. Had there been a Scottish Parliament many more years ago, Gaelic might have made far greater progress and we might not have reached the current position, in which the language is under real threat. Gaelic is a minority language—only about 1.8 per cent of the population speak it—but it is not confined to the Highlands and Islands. Forty-eight per cent of Gaelic speakers are in the Highlands and Islands, but 52 per cent are in other parts of Scotland. We should not regard Gaelic as an issue  that is confined to the north of a Mason-Dixon line above Inverness; it affects many parts of Scotland. In places such as Kilmarnock and Glasgow, as well as in other parts of Scotland, there is a growth in the demand for Gaelic education among every age of the population, which is to be welcomed. I welcome the minister giving the Education Committee's recommendations a fair wind, with respect to the status issue as well as co-operation on reserved matters, of which I will say more later. I will make two points on key aspects of status. First, as the minister said in evidence to the Education Committee, Gaelic already is, de facto, an official language in the sense that many official publications are now issued by public agencies and Government in the Gaelic language and they have exactly the same status as any document issued in English. However, we would like the official status of Gaelic to be built in to the bill.

Absolutely. That brings me to my next point, which is that even building recognition of Gaelic as an official language into the bill is not nearly enough. We need to go further. I think that Bòrd na Gàidhlig's evidence provided the solution with reference to giving the language equal validity of status. I think that there is consensus on that in the Gaelic community and in wider Scotland. We want to give the Gaelic language equal status with English and make it a live language. However, we do not want to force every agency to publish in Gaelic every document that they publish in English. Nobody is arguing for that. We think that a solution around equal validity is the right way to proceed. Jamie Stone made the important point that although the bill is very important for the regeneration of not just the Gaelic language, but the Gaelic communities, of itself the bill will not achieve that; it must be part and parcel of a much broader strategy for the regeneration of the language. For example, broadcasting is not mentioned in the bill, because broadcasting is essentially a reserved matter—although Gaelic broadcasting is devolved. However, unless we have more investment in Gaelic broadcasting and more Gaelic broadcasting to spread the use of and to regenerate the language, we will not achieve our objectives. Therefore, an area for future action  by the minister, which is not included in the bill, is to pursue Whitehall and Westminster for a dedicated channel for Gaelic. With today's digital technology, that should be neither too costly nor too burdensome a responsibility.

Absolutely. It is always a pleasure to agree with Mr Brocklebank. To be fair to the BBC, its coverage of Gaelic on its main radio channels and its television channels has done enormous good for the Gaelic language in recent years. A channel such as QVC, which is a ghettoised shopping channel, does not stop people shopping in the normal channels—unfortunately. Gaelic comes into that category, in terms of spreading the use of the language and regenerating it. With regard to reserved bodies, the approach recommended by the committee, after some discussion, is that we should primarily go for co-operation. I think that that was the advice of the Welsh Language Board as well. Only if we do not get that co-operation from bodies carrying out reserved functions should we then seek a change in the law. I am happy—pending independence—to accept that position.

Absolutely, but we also have to bear it in mind that the Welsh Language Act 1993 was passed by Westminster before devolution and therefore automatically applies to reserved bodies; it has a different status because of when it was introduced. We also heard that there are four or five categories of official body that the legislation may apply to. There are devolved agencies, to which the bill applies. There are cross-border agencies with devolved and reserved responsibilities, and the bill applies to the devolved responsibilities but not the reserved ones, as a matter of statute. There are reserved bodies with reserved and devolved functions. Finally, in a category of its own, there is the Food Standards Agency, which is a department in its own right, and the committee has recommended—well within the competence of the bill—that the Executive introduce an amendment at stage 2 to ensure that the Food  Standards Agency, which is an important agency in terms of what the bill is trying to achieve, should be covered by the bill. I see the minister nodding approval. I take that as an indication that that recommendation is accepted in full. Unfortunately, Presiding Officer, I have run over time. There is much more, as you can imagine, that I would want to say about the bill. I finish by paying tribute to my former colleague, Mike Russell, who introduced the first Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill to this Parliament—an example that I followed last year to try to keep the issue alive. I am delighted that the Executive has lifted the torch and is prepared to strengthen the bill. I hope that we will get unanimity and that we can take forward the Gaelic language and secure it for the heritage of future generations as well as for the memory of past generations of the Gaelic community and Gaelic speakers.

I welcome the minister's comments about securing co-operation from Whitehall. Am I right in saying that an amendment to the Scotland Act 1998 is not required to transfer powers over reserved functions relating to the bòrd, if that is found to be necessary? I understand that only an order in council under schedule 5 of the act is needed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what independent assessment has been made of the costs and benefits to Scotland of holding the 2012 Olympics in London. (S2O-5049)

I draw the minister's attention to the document "Scotland backs the bid", which has been published by the Scottish Executive and its agencies and focuses on the advantages to Scotland of a London games. However, if no assessment has been made of the likely costs or advantages, is the Scottish Executive literally ignorant of what those benefits and costs to Scotland would be? Is the document's premise totally false?

But not at any cost.

Will Murdo Fraser clarify the Tories' policy? Is it what Mr Johnstone said, which is that they accept some wind farms, or is what Mr Brocklebank said, which is that they do not accept any wind farms?

Scotland is a nation blessed with massive energy resources. First, we had coal, which fulfilled our energy needs for hundreds of years. In fact, the coal reserve at Canonbie in Dumfriesshire is reputedly even bigger than the Selby coal field down south and it potentially has low-sulphur coal. Despite all the propaganda, 34 billion barrels of oil have been produced during the past 30 years, but another 28 billion barrels are left in the North sea and could be available during the next 30  years. As John Swinney pointed out, the great tragedy is that despite having contributed £150 billion in oil revenue to the UK Treasury, Scotland has barely seen a penny of that money and certainly very little has been reinvested in our infrastructure during the past 30 years. When it comes to gas, about 50 per cent of the UK's total gas reserves are in Scottish waters. Although the UK will become a net importer of gas this year or next, we still have a substantial gas reserve. In addition, on renewable energies, the EU has declared Scotland the wind capital of Europe. Certainly, from listening to Alex Johnstone, I can believe that.

That is a disingenuous misinterpretation of what Mr Gibson said, which was that if we had our own treasury in Scotland, the profit from wind, like the profit from oil and gas, would be circulated back into the Scottish economy instead of going to subsidise London and south-east England. In some ways, this debate is six months early, because the study to which Allan Wilson referred is the one that should inform the debate and the Executive's and the Parliament's decision making. The study that is being undertaken by AEA Technology—a company, by the way, that is withdrawing from the nuclear industry—will point out when and where we might face an energy gap in Scotland. The energy gap will probably occur between around 2025 and 2030. Once we get that study and get an indication from present trends of whether there will be an energy gap and, if so, its scale, we will have to decide. I take the point that the decisions have to be made sooner rather than later. No matter which option or mix we go for, we will have to start the process in the next few years, because we will have to go through planning, getting the capital investment and getting any new capacity up and running. We cannot wait for a decade or more.

The SNP's policy decision on nuclear power is based, like its other policy decisions, on objective analysis. The analysis of nuclear power is, first, that it is dangerous. There is no answer to the problem of nuclear waste. As Mark Ruskell pointed out, it will probably be 30 or 40 years before we have a national depository. It is disgraceful that we in Scotland have to land our waste on people south of the border. In my view, every country that produces nuclear waste should have to recycle its own waste. The waste argument is not the only one, because, secondly, nuclear energy is uneconomic. If the money that it took to bail out British Energy had been invested instead in renewables or the other technologies that Christine May mentioned, we would be much further ahead of the game than we are.

I would love to take an intervention—come, come, come—but I am in my last minute and I do not think that I am allowed to take one.

No, that is a pity.

Okay. On that basis, I ask members to support the SNP amendment, which is the only sensible one in the Business Bulletin  today.

rose—

rose—

I believe that the study is being carried out by AEA Technology, which is based at Glengarnock. What is the time horizon for the study? If it does not look 20, 30 or 40 years ahead, it will be of limited utility in planning our energy needs for the future.

When Robert Brown negotiates next year's budget with the Scottish public services ombudsman, will he consider the way in which commissioners' statutory requirements are carried out and, in particular, their very narrow interpretation of their responsibilities and remits? Will he consider such things before next year's budget is allocated?

I, too, congratulate Adam Ingram on obtaining the debate and on the work that he and others have undertaken on the project. I declare an interest: I live in Ayr, within a mile or so of the Burns cottage. Margaret Jamieson is absolutely right that the Burns facilities that we are talking about are not only in Ayr, but in many other parts of Ayrshire,  such as the statues of Burns in many towns, the works at Mauchline and the sites in Kilmarnock that she mentioned. Even when one goes further afield, into Dumfries or up the High Street in Edinburgh, Burns is all around. We should be particularly proud of Burns, not just because he is our national bard, but because he is celebrated in Ayrshire, Scotland and the world over. The Burns heritage in all its forms is a huge asset for Scotland, not just within our boundaries, but internationally. Which other national bard of any country has statues of him or her in places as far away as Melbourne, parts of Canada and the United States? Burns suppers are held all over the world, in places as far apart as Russia, South America and Japan, as well as in many other countries. The English national bard, Shakespeare, was a great man and writer, but who has ever heard of a Shakespeare supper anywhere in the world? There are none. We must pay tribute not just to Burns the poet, the patriot, the internationalist, the satirist and the man, but to Scotland, for producing someone of that genius and talent. We should not let that go to waste. Next Tuesday, it will be 246 years since our national bard was born in a wee cottage in the village of Alloway, just outside Ayr. In a few years, in 2009, we will celebrate the 250 th anniversary of Burns's birth. By the time we get to 2009, we should not be having debates such as this; we should be out there celebrating what has been achieved between now and then, not just in making the Burns cottage and the national park in Ayr a great magnet for international visitors to Scotland, but in linking together all the other facilities, as Margaret Jamieson mentioned. We should be proud of the Burns heritage. However, it is not enough just to be proud of it and to promote it; we must now invest in it heavily. The issue is one on which people from across parties, boundaries and counties and from every segment of society in Scotland can join forces. Let us make 2009 not only a year that we will not forget, but one that the world will not forget.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it and its agencies are taking to prevent Stoddard's factory in Kilmarnock from closing. (S2O-4959)

The minister will know that I have been in regular touch with Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire to get an update on the situation. I encourage him to provide whatever battery of assistance he can to any potential buyer to ensure  that the factory remains open. It is far better for the factory to remain open with more than 200 jobs than for us to lose all the 500 jobs that were there in the first place.

Is the First Minister aware that, contrary to his previous response, the House of Commons Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport has estimated that if current proposals go ahead, up to 60 per cent of existing lottery funding will be lost to organisations in Scotland, Wales and the English regions? Does he agree that that would be an unacceptable price for us to pay to have the Olympics in London?

What the minister is saying is extremely interesting, but it proves that the  question is complex. I understand that the technical work will not be completed until after stage 2, but it is incumbent on us to consider the full report of the implementation advisory group before stage 3 of the bill, which is scheduled for April.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will restrict myself to half an hour. This morning, I am wearing two hats; I am summing up on behalf of the Scottish National Party and I am speaking as convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee. I will try to strike a proper balance between partisanship and statesmanship—always erring on the side of statesmanship, of course. As I am the only member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee who was a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, it might be useful to remind members why we recommended in our lifelong learning report the merging of the further and higher education funding councils. Fundamentally, there were four reasons for that conclusion, which was reached with cross-party consensus and without any dissent whatever. The first reason was the increasingly blurred line between higher education and further education. As Christine May pointed out in relation to Fife, many people follow the first two years of their higher education in an FE college. Some 40 per cent of those who go on to take a degree at university take the FE route. We have two separate funding councils—the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council—but the Further Education Funding Council funds higher education as well as further education. Given the level of crossover, which did not exist 20 or 30 years ago, it seemed to us that it no longer makes sense to have two separate silos of funding. The second reason for our conclusion was a result of study visits that we undertook to the Crichton campus in Dumfries and the UHI Millennium Institute in Inverness and the surrounding area. The Crichton campus is an interesting project in which four universities have come together. I believe that it is the only place in the United Kingdom, and maybe even in Europe, where people can get a degree from four universities on one campus. The relationship  between Dumfries and Galloway College and the Crichton campus is close, as indeed is the relationship between the 13 FE colleges in the Highlands and Islands and the UHI Millennium Institute. Uniquely, the university of the Highlands and Islands is being formed from the bottom up, as it were, through the 13 FE colleges. The evidence that we took on both the Crichton campus and the UHI Millennium Institute suggested that major problems result from the need to negotiate separately with the Higher Education Funding Council and the Further Education Funding Council. It makes sense to have a single pot of money that can be allocated easily on a priority basis. The third reason was that the two funding councils are serviced by a single executive, so it makes sense to have just one council. That is where the recommendation came from and I am glad to say that we have reached the stage at which we have—I think—unanimity on the principle of the proposed merger. The merger is the centrepiece of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill but, as has been mentioned, the bill also covers a number of other areas. I start with fees. I speak as convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee when I say that although I oppose fees in principle, I accept that the Executive has a majority on the committee. I welcome what the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said in his opening remarks when he accepted the recommendation in the committee's stage 1 report that we should use an instrument that is subject to the affirmative procedure, rather than an instrument that is subject to the negative procedure. In fact, I think that I am right to say that two instruments will be needed to implement section 8 of the bill. I also welcome his commitment that before any such instrument can be brought to the Parliament there will be a statutory duty on the minister and his successors. I welcome the minister's acceptance of the committee's recommendations, but there is a case for going a wee bit further. I accept that the minister will never introduce top-up fees for as long as he is the minister but, with all due respect, we are writing legislation that will outlast him. At this point I become slightly partisan. I ask members to suppose that the Liberal Democrat minister is replaced by a new Labour minister, à la Charles Clarke, who believes in variable fees and top-up fees. If the legislation is not right, he or she will be able to introduce such fees.

The realpolitik is that a minister will be drawn from the majority Executive. The concern, which was expressed articulately by Mike Watson, is that the legislation has to outlast not only the current Administration but many Administrations to come. I ask the minister to accept our recommendation, to analyse the alternatives that have been suggested and to give us his assessment of them. In particular, as we will start stage 2 consideration of the bill on 22 February and we are scheduled to discuss fees on that day, I say to the minister that it would be helpful to the committee if the report from the implementation group were made available to us before we discuss the amendments. I say that in a non-partisan way. The evidence that we took suggested that there are, at the very least, loopholes to be closed; Mike Watson, in particular, covered that point extremely well. The committee will work with the minister to try to ensure that we get the legislation right. I will raise one or two other issues that members touched on in the debate. First, on the idea of a skills committee, I do not want to go into the detailed argument for such a committee because I do not believe that we should be over-prescriptive to the new council.

I am married to a former policewoman, so the concept of handcuffs is not new to me. If we look back at the history of the proposal, we see that something similar came out of the Calman report. It is not an entirely new suggestion and I think that it should be given serious consideration. The issue about medical graduates being able to travel to third-world countries is adequately catered for in the proposals. No one would want to stop medical graduates practising in the third world—indeed, we want to encourage that. I return to skills. The merged council will have a total budget of nearly £1.5 billion by the end of the current parliamentary session. That is a substantial amount of money. Some of it will be devoted to research, but about two thirds will be devoted to universities and colleges. The word "skills", of course, refers to the skills of doctors, dentists and vets who are trained at universities as well as to the vocational skills that come from further education colleges. The minister needs to consider skills policy and how it is implemented.  Given the way in which the responsibility for skills policy will be diffused among different agencies—Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have a responsibility for skills and careers, as do the new sector skills councils and their parent body the Sector Skills Development Agency—any new skills committee should be more than just an internal committee of the new funding council. The logical conclusion is that any new skills committee should be a cross-agency committee that can examine all aspects of skills and thereby provide a holistic approach to skills policy in Scotland. Speaking personally, I suggest that there is a strong case for making Futureskills Scotland a hybrid organisation between the enterprise network and the new funding council. Futureskills Scotland's work ought to inform much of the work of the new council. Although such policy matters are not specifically for the bill, they will need to be addressed as a result of it. Our stage 1 report also considered the make-up and membership of the new council and its sub-committees. The bill is absolutely right not to require members of the council's sub-committees, such as the research committee, to be members of the council itself. We want diversity in the membership of the research committee and the other committees. I strongly urge the minister that, when the time comes for him to appoint members of the council, he should not look for members from only within Scotland. Similarly, he should encourage the council to recruit international expertise for its sub-committees, especially the research committee, because that will help us to stay at the leading edge in many of the research activities that the new council will fund. My final major policy issue relates to academic freedom, which Mike Watson covered extremely well. We must address two fundamental issues, the first of which concerns academic freedom within the post-1992 universities. Our committee believes—on a cross-party basis, I think—that the legislative safeguards of previous education acts should be extended so that they cover not only the pre-1992 universities but the post-1992 universities. That would provide a level playing field between the two sets of institutions. Some people, such as the principal of Glasgow Caledonian University, have argued that such an addition to the bill is unnecessary because staff contracts already guarantee academic freedom. My answer to that is similar to my answer on fees: whereas staff contracts can be changed quite easily, it would be difficult to undermine academic freedom if it was built into legislation. A strong case exists for simply extending the existing legislative provisions for the pre-1992 institutions to the post-1992 institutions.  Secondly, academic freedom should also be extended to the FE colleges. We all agree that that is a desirable objective. For the same reasons that I have given previously, it is worth considering the insertion in the bill of a new section to that effect. Having gone through four sets of consultation, including the original Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee inquiry into lifelong learning, the bill is now near the end of the road. In this instance, the pre-legislative scrutiny process has done its job of ironing out the difficulties and sorting out the problems. Apart from on fees, the bill is the subject not only of cross-party agreement in Parliament but of a pretty broad consensus out there in the academic community in universities and colleges, and in the student community and elsewhere. We should address fees by reassuring people that the bill will cater for all possible future scenarios, when we might not have a minister who is so committed to not introducing top-up fees. On that basis, I hope that Parliament will give unanimous support to the bill. It is possible that some of us might have to abstain or vote against the bill because of the fees issue, but that will not be because we do not accept that the rest of the bill is highly desirable.

Will the implementation advisory group report before stage 2 consideration starts? I am sure that the minister appreciates that that would be extremely helpful to the committee in considering stage 2 amendments.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish  Executive proposes to take to address the issue of youth crime. (S2F-1339)

Does the First Minister agree that those initiatives are not working so far? Will he confirm that Monday's article in The Herald , about a leaked report that has been suppressed by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration since August, shows that there has been a 10 per cent increase in youth crime compared with the Scottish Executive's target of a 5 per cent reduction, which makes a 15 per cent gap between the promise, the target and the performance? What will he do to close that gap?

Does the minister agree that the full report of the sustainability review should be made public, and should be consulted upon before being acted upon?

I am sorry that no Labour member, other than the Minister for Communities, has seen fit to stay behind. I am particularly sorry that the local member, Mr McConnell, has not stayed behind, as the issue is important. As the rest of us leave to celebrate Christmas, the people of the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit are facing redundancy. Before I discuss the specific issues relating to the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit, I emphasise that the area in which the unit operates is one of the most deprived parts not only of Lanarkshire, but of Scotland. Recent statistics published by the Scottish Executive and the report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation have demonstrated that, in Scotland, the incidence of poverty and deprivation in North Lanarkshire is second only to that in Glasgow. The work of organisations such as the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit, which started as a voluntary organisation in 1991, is therefore vital to the people in the area. For the past 13 years, the unit has provided sterling support and service to local people, dealing in particular with those who are down on their luck, who are unemployed, who require help with benefits, who require training or retraining or who otherwise need the support of the unit to assist with their domestic and employment situations.  The unit currently employs five people full time and its work has been given many testimonials by local people. Everything seemed to be going fairly swimmingly until a couple of years ago, when the local social inclusion partnership, the North Lanarkshire partnership, and North Lanarkshire Council—to a large extent, they are basically the same organisation; they are certainly controlled by more or less the same players and participants—commissioned a review with a view to creating what is called an intermediate community organisation in North Lanarkshire. That review was carried out over a period of about 18 months in 2002 and 2003. As a result, the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit is now facing closure and the people who work for it are facing redundancy. Many of the MSPs who represent the area, including the ones in the chamber today, had written to North Lanarkshire Council and the North Lanarkshire partnership, as well as to other organisations, to ascertain the facts and figures in the review. To date, we have not been given a full or comprehensive statement on the review's conclusions or the basis of those conclusions. We know, however, that the Craigneuk unit agreed that there should be an organisation to cover the rest of North Lanarkshire providing the kind of services that the unit provides, which were not available in many other parts of the local authority area. We also know that the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit's staff and management committee, which is a voluntary body, assisted North Lanarkshire Council in putting together a package of information that became the basis of a successful application for European Union funding, resulting in a European regional development fund award of about £218,000. The basis of the submission was that, in its area of North Lanarkshire, the Craigneuk Development and Support Unit would act as the delivery mechanism for the implementation of the programme that had received European funding. Unfortunately, North Lanarkshire Council and the North Lanarkshire partnership have pulled the rug from under the unit. Basically, the work has been transferred to the new organisation that has been set up, which is called Routes to Work. I will in no way decry Routes to Work, which I am sure will provide many useful services to people in other areas. However, it is a relatively new organisation and it does not have the experience of the Craigneuk unit. It certainly does not have the same presence in the part of North Lanarkshire that the Craigneuk unit serves. We would all agree that the way in which the situation has been handled, the disregard for the voluntary efforts of the unit's management  committee, the disregard of the wishes of local people and the fact that the future of the five staff working at the unit—some of whom have made many sacrifices over the years to serve their community—has been totally ignored have been absolutely appalling. We are now in a regrettable situation in which, because the funds have been cut off, the management committee has been left with no option but to close the unit and make its staff redundant. That affects not just the Craigneuk unit, but two other services that are provided from the unit's premises—the Craigneuk benefit group and the area's over-60s lunch club. Particularly galling is the fact that in the very week when the staff are being made redundant, a press release from North Lanarkshire Council indicates that the Scottish Executive has agreed to provide an additional £33 million over the next three years—£11 million a year—for the provision of services relating to regeneration. Despite all that, the council is standing by and allowing the staff to be made redundant and the service to be abolished. It is the duty of the Parliament to record its deep disappointment and disgust about the way in which the unit has been treated. I conclude by reminding everyone here—there are not many of us—of the Scottish Executive's stated objectives in relation to such services. The Scottish Executive's policy is "to see a Scotland where public services meet the needs of people and not the demands of the organisations which deliver them"— such as North Lanarkshire Council or the North Lanarkshire partnership— "and where social justice is a right and not a privilege." The Executive's strategy is to "build on the firm foundations already in place." It is not to undermine and undercut existing organisations. The Executive also states that people should work "closely with community leaders and work together. There is no other way." Unfortunately, North Lanarkshire Council has adopted another way, which is detrimental not just to the unit but, more important, to local people in that deprived part of Lanarkshire.

I echo what Elaine Murray said about this being a good debate. There have been interesting and worthwhile contributions. For my money, Wendy Alexander made by far the most interesting speech. On the efficiency savings figures, she said that the Executive was "£700 million light". For the word "light", read words such as "out" or "wrong". We could use words such as "cheating", "fibbing", "con", "dishonest", "duplicitous" or "deceptive". That is what Wendy Alexander—

The language that I am using is well within parliamentary language. That is what Wendy Alexander—

I do not think that I have strayed, Presiding Officer, and I do not intend to stray. Wendy Alexander's accusations about the Executive's efficiency savings were a devastating indictment of the Executive's accounting procedures. Perhaps the figures are similar to those produced by companies such as Enron. Wendy Alexander said that the Executive, in estimating savings of just over £700 million, had got the figures out by £700 million. She also said that when the Executive announced those figures, Jack McConnell and the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform said that their key objective was to beat the UK Government's savings. However, it was said yesterday in reply to a parliamentary question that such comparisons are not worth the paper that they are written on. One cannot set beating the UK Government on savings as a key objective one week and say two weeks later that such a comparison is totally worthless. Beating the UK Government is either a valid objective or a worthless comparison. It cannot be both. Wendy Alexander's words will ring throughout Scotland. The interesting fact is that the people who produced the £700 million error in the figures are exactly the same people who compile the GERS report. They stand up and defend the GERS report, which has as much credibility as the efficiency savings estimates—none whatever. That was emphasised by Professor Midwinter, who was on "Newsnight Scotland" just before the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform. As Des McNulty said, Professor Midwinter is the most reliable source in Scotland for the figures. Professor Midwinter said that the Executive's figures were absolute nonsense, that they did not add up and that they were irreconcilable. One only had to see the performance of the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform in the same programme. He wriggled about and did not believe the figures himself. He could not explain where the fiddle was. We should not have any nonsense about the reliability of Executive figures. Indeed, Wendy Alexander's accusation is in itself justification for the Finance Committee to consider establishing a parliamentary budget office so that there can be genuinely independent and objective assessment of Executive figures on efficiency savings as well as of GERS and other matters. At the end of the day, if we do not get the figures right, the Parliament's credibility will be destroyed.  A parliamentary budget office could also take up the Finance Committee's recommendation to benchmark the performance of the Scottish economy in relation to the economies of other countries and those of countries that are similar to Scotland. In an otherwise excellent contribution, Phil Gallie said that the UK was top of the list in respect of economic performance internationally. However, we are not even in the top 10 in respect of GDP per head, although eight of the 10 countries that are in the top 10 are independent countries that are around the same size as Scotland. There is a lesson there about the relationship between the constitutional status and the economic performance of any country. I say to the Parliament and the Finance Committee that we should consider how we can benchmark ourselves, but we should do so with a reliable outfit that is independent and—unlike the Executive—not prepared to fiddle the figures. Merry Christmas.

In the light of an intervention that Mr Monteith made yesterday, and in the interests of clarifying Tory policy on spending commitments, will the member say whether he is in favour of the introduction of identity cards or, like Mrs Thatcher, against it?

This is intended to be a constructive and helpful intervention, as always, but in the light of what Des McNulty has just said about the need properly to cost the implementation of legislation, is not there  a case—there are other reasons why this should be done—for establishing for Parliament an equivalent to the USA's Congressional Budget Office, so that we can get assessments and estimates of cost independent of the Executive? Will the Finance Committee consider that possibility?

Does the Finance Committee agree with Professor Midwinter that the Executive's figures on the savings were mince and that they were fiddled?

First, I emphasise the point that Tricia Marwick made about the need to establish a parliamentary mechanism to oversee the appointments process. On 10 September 2002, the then Local Government Committee—which, ironically, was chaired by Trish Godman—was told by the then minister responsible, Peter Peacock: "Parliament will have ... a much more serious role in the appointments process than it has had previously and will have increased powers of scrutiny throughout the process. It will, of course, be for Parliament to decide how it manages its new role. I have suggested that it consider establishing a dedicated public appointments committee, but that is a matter for the Parliament to consider."—[ Official Report, Local Government Committee, 10 September 2002; c 3206.] The fact that we have taken well over two years to get even to this stage is, quite frankly, unacceptable. Sooner rather than later, we must address what mechanism we are to use for scrutinising the public appointments system. As Ken Macintosh and others have pointed out, it is vital that we do so, given the power that such appointees have. My second point is on the interpretation of the code of practice. The code has already been in operation in the UK, but it has not wheedled out the political bias in the system. Both north and south of the border, we still have a situation in which two thirds of the appointees who declare a political bias belong to one political party. That cannot be accidental. In the Scottish Parliament  elections, that party—the Labour Party—received 34 per cent of the vote, but it ended up with 66 per cent of the appointments of those who declared their political involvement. In her interpretation of the existing code, I hope that the commissioner will take into account the issue of equal opportunities, which is spelled out in the code. Equal opportunities should apply to members of political parties, but a total bias is currently built in for one party. The commissioner should use the code to get rid of that bias. In 2005, the Parliament must take the opportunity to break up once and for all the Labour Mafia that controls too many public appointments in Scotland.

Like other members, I begin by paying tribute to Margaret Ewing not just for securing this debate but for her 20-year campaign on the subject. I also pay tribute to Ann Loughrey, who has made Energy Action Scotland one of the most efficient non-governmental organisations in Scotland, if not in the United Kingdom. Margaret Ewing was right to say that there is a direct link between poverty in general and fuel poverty. I have been examining the statistics on the incidence of winter deaths over the past five years by constituency. The latest statistics—those for 2003-04—show that there were no excess winter deaths in only two parliamentary constituencies, Dumfries and Glasgow Kelvin, both of which are relatively prosperous parts of the country. At the other end of spectrum, some of the figures are very worrying, especially in Glasgow and Lanarkshire. The Hamilton North and Bellshill area accounted for one quarter of all excess winter deaths in North Lanarkshire, which has five parliamentary constituencies. There were 130 such deaths in Hamilton North and Bellshill and  Hamilton South. There is nothing to suggest that excess deaths occur in that area but not in Glasgow Kelvin because the weather is worse in Lanarkshire. Apart from the weather, there are three fundamental contributors to fuel poverty and excess winter deaths. The first, which many speakers have mentioned, is the relatively low income level of many households, especially pensioner households. One problem relates to pension credit. Only about two thirds of the people who are entitled to pension credit claim it. That is bad enough, but pension credit is also a trigger for assistance with gas bills, for example. Because a third of our pensioners are failing to take up pension credit, about 212,000 pensioners in Scotland do not receive the benefit of the Scottish Gas price cap to which they would be entitled if they claimed the pension credit. I hope that as well as considering specific Scottish Executive policies, such as the central heating programme, the minister will take up with his Westminster colleagues how we can increase uptake of pension credit, pending—I hope—introduction of a citizens pension, which is not only Liberal Democrat policy, but SNP policy. The other two contributors are housing conditions and energy prices. As was mentioned, gas prices are increasing by 12.4 per cent and electricity prices are increasing by 9.4 per cent. However, there will be nothing like 12 or 9 per cent increases in the basic pension, pension credit or any other benefits. It is clear that we can look forward to fuel poverty getting worse, not better, because the increase in energy prices is four times the increase in income for our poorer households. Again, I ask the minister to take up that matter with his Westminster colleagues. Until we increase income levels, we will not reduce fuel poverty. Unfortunately, that is all that I can say in four minutes.

Does the member accept that the western forces do not command the confidence of the Iraqi people? As long as they are in the country, is not there a real danger that we will create another Vietnam and that we could be there for years and years? Surely the ultimate outcome is further civil war in Iraq?

I apologise to members for arriving slightly late for the debate. I want to concentrate on where we are at the present time, rather than go through the history. However, I put on record my party's belief that the invasion of Iraq was unjustified and illegal. It is sheer hypocrisy for the Labour party amendment to state that it "affirms the importance of the principles of the rule of law", when Labour's own leadership has flouted international law in Iraq at every opportunity. The fact of life is that the US-British invasion of Iraq was all about oil and the need for the US to find an alternative location to Saudi Arabia for its bases in the oil-producing part of the middle east, where its position has become increasingly untenable. Therefore, it was no accident that US and British forces stood by and allowed every ministry building in Baghdad to be trashed except for the Ministry of Oil, which had the full protection of the US and British forces. The invasion of Iraq had nothing to do with weapons of mass destruction. It is clear that Bush and Blair knew that there were no longer any weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. That view on WMDs was subsequently supported by Robin Cook, Kofi Annan and Hans Blick. We are now dealing with the consequences of the disastrous decision to go to war with Iraq and we see those consequences day in and day out. I find it ironic that Duncan McNeil boasts that the Department for International Development in London has made available £350 million for the reconstruction of Iraqi schools and hospitals. How does that compare with the £6 billion that the Ministry of Defence is using to destroy the schools  and hospitals that the Department for International Development is trying to rebuild? The sum of £6 billion is spent to destroy, but there is only £350 million to rebuild. More than 100,000 civilian Iraqis have been killed, according to The Lancet , and more than 1,000 servicemen and women from the US, UK and other countries have been killed, including, most recently and tragically, five casualties from the Black Watch. Far from winning the hearts and minds of ordinary Iraqis, the continuing illegal occupation of Iraq by western forces is driving more and more Iraqis, particularly young Iraqis, into the hands of the terrorists, because they no longer have any faith in western so-called democracies. Our position is clear: we had no truck with the invasion and we believe that the on-going, illegal occupation is morally wrong and totally unjustifiable in military and humanitarian terms. However, I say to Frances Curran and the SSP that, having made such a mess of Iraq, the west cannot now make matters 10 times worse with a precipitate, unilateral withdrawal of troops by Christmas. To do so would be sheer lunacy on an unprecedented scale. I believe that such a policy would create a cauldron of internal strife and civil war, and an even greater catastrophe than the current one. With all due respect, I believe that advocating such a policy shows a total misunderstanding of the situation, because the greatest fear of ordinary Iraqis, and the Arab and Muslim community, is of Iraq becoming another Lebanon. The Sunni minority, which controlled the army and security forces under Saddam, has had its army disbanded, but not disarmed. The danger now is that a well-armed Sunni minority, fighting a well-armed Shia majority, possibly supported by Iran—not to mention the possible threat to and from the Kurds in the north—could plunge Iraq into a civil war similar to the one in the Lebanon in the 1980s. Iraq has desert borders with five other countries and it is not difficult to envisage the potential for insurgency on a grand scale from those five neighbouring states. If Iraq descends into a state of civil war, that would be disastrous not just for Iraq, but for the middle east and world peace.

I cannot, because I have little time left. The only sensible solution is for all western forces to withdraw, on a graded programme, and be replaced by a wholly Muslim international force. That is the only chance of bringing peace and stability to Iraq. Without peace in Iraq, there will be no peace in the middle east and without peace in  the middle east, there will be no peace in the world. That policy, allied to a settlement in the middle east to create a Palestinian state, is the only way of making the world stable again. Our position is clear. The war was illegal, immoral and unjustified, but we should not make the mess in which we find ourselves worse. Let us do the decent thing—let us withdraw our forces on a graded basis and replace them with a force that will have the moral authority to bring peace to the people of Iraq. I move amendment S2M-2132.1, to leave out from "all for all" to end and insert: "both Iraq and the international community that the United States of America, United Kingdom and other western forces be replaced as a matter of urgency by a force assembled under the auspices of the League of Arab States, with other appropriate international support."

In what service was the £200 million saved from Scottish Enterprise reinvested?

I do not think that any of us will take lessons from a Tory party that wasted billions of pounds on introducing the poll tax, trying to collect it, and scrapping it. We are still trying to collect it today, about 12 years on from when it was introduced. We could go through many of the Tories' other failures, such as the fact that they picked Devonport over Rosyth and how much that is costing the taxpayer, or the millions that they spent on privatisation. Look at the millions that were spent on privatising British Energy plc just for us to have to bail it out with another billion pounds in the past year or so. I do not think that we will take any lessons from the Tories on efficiency.

We all know how much was spent and who made the millions in profit from the privatisations of Mr Major and Mrs Thatcher. Let us move on to today. I reiterate something that Susan Deacon said. Those of us who believe in public services have a special duty to ensure that they are delivered as efficiently as possible. I hope that that aspiration is shared by members on all sides of the chamber. The question that we are being asked to consider is whether the document "Building a Better Scotland: Efficient Government—Securing Efficiency, Effectiveness and Productivity" provides any grounds for hope that the Executive will do what it says it will. Although some elements of the document might be acceptable, as a whole it is full of contradictions and, in many places, is based not on evidence but on wishful thinking, as Tommy Sheridan said. Let us look at some of the contradictions in the document. First, there is the issue of jobs. When Gordon Brown announced his Gershon-type economies, he said that we would be participating  with other devolved Administrations in the 20,000 job losses, which he had discussed with the Scottish Executive. When Tavish Scott winds up for the Executive, will he tell us how many of those 20,000 losses will come from the Executive's efficiency cuts and savings? Will he also tell us whether consideration has been given to the cost of job cuts? Redundancies do not mean that money is saved from day one. The cost of making people redundant has to be taken into account when considering the expected net savings. Does the document contain an assumption of the number of job cuts that there will be? If it does, what is that number, what will the cost of those job cuts be, and what will the effect be on the estimated savings? On the fire service, will the minister confirm which one of two statements is right? Was Hugh Henry right on 18 November to say that no decisions have been taken by the Executive on reducing the number of control rooms from eight, or is the document right when it says—and has built into its assumptions—that the number of control rooms will decline from eight? If it is the assumption in the document, will the minister tell us what assumption has been made about the number of control rooms that will be closed down and how many will be left? Until the minister answers those precise questions, the document has no credibility. Let us consider what the document says about procurement. There is an inherent contradiction in the idea of efficiency savings through procurement, which is not spelled out in the document. For example, if we go for cheaper procurement in road construction, that might mean that we contract people from outwith Scotland to undertake major road projects, which means that there will be fewer jobs in Scottish companies in Scotland. Has that been taken into account? In other words, what will be the economic impact of the savings on other Government revenues and expenditure? The fifth area that requires clarification is what assumptions have been made about the relocation of Scottish Natural Heritage to Inverness. One sentence in the document refers to the savings on car journeys that will result from some of the Executive's decisions. However, in reality, what will happen? Many of the senior executives will not relocate to Inverness, but will stay in Edinburgh and set themselves up as consultants. They will go to Inverness to get contracts from SNH and the extra cost of that will be built into the price that they submit for their contracts. Then, they will charge consultancy rates to Scottish Natural Heritage. Have all those calculations been made? If so, what is the revised estimated cost of SNH's relocation to Inverness?  Then there is Scottish Enterprise. When one looks at Scottish Enterprise's budget in the draft budget document, one finds the heading "Management and Administration", the cost of which is estimated to be £75 million this year, which is 18 per cent of the total budget, rising to £92 million by 2007-08. Why does an economic development agency require to spend nearly 20 per cent of its budget on management and administration? How much is wasted on consultants, some of whom are getting £1,000 a day and are people I would not send for the messages? Is that good value for money? Has the Executive looked at the consultancy budget? The minister has to answer those questions, otherwise his boss Mr McCabe will go down as the fiddler on the hoof.

The member welcomed the report on behalf of the Liberal Democrats. In the parliamentary debate at stage 1 of the Fire (Scotland) Bill in November, the Deputy Minister for Justice, Hugh Henry, said that before taking a decision on the number of control rooms there would be "a further round of consultation".— [ Official Report , 18 November 2004; c 11988.]  However, the Executive's document on efficient government commits the Executive to a reduction in the number of control rooms "from the current 8". Will the member clarify Executive policy on the matter?

I hope that the rest of Scotland takes three messages from this debate, the first of which is that this Parliament believes in sustainability and will take the necessary action to pursue such policies not just in relation to the economy but in relation to other fields such as planning and the environment. The second message, on which I will concentrate most of my remarks, must be that we want to maximise the economic and employment opportunities that arise from a sustainable economic policy. However, the third message must be that we are turning our backs on any form of luddism. For example, in today's economic age, it is complete nonsense to suggest that any new motorway is environmentally unsustainable. I live in Ayr and, without the M77 to Glasgow, the quality of life for many who live in and between those two places would certainly not be as good as it is today.

I will give way later. Moreover, suggesting that there is something inherently wrong with air links to other parts of the world sends out entirely the wrong message. Scotland wants to visit the world and our tourism industry and our business links depend on having good air links with the rest of the world.

I will in a minute. I accept that there is an issue around the taxation of aviation fuel, which is not decided in London or Brussels but must form part of an international agreement. I also believe that many emergent aircraft technologies will begin  substantially to reduce CO 2 emissions and tackle the misuse of fuel in the aviation industry. However, Scotland's Parliament has to send a clear, positive message about sustainability and exploiting its economic benefits. I want to concentrate on such benefits, because the bulk of this debate has been almost a rerun of the debate on renewable energy that we had two or three weeks ago. To some extent, that was inevitable. The real question that has to be addressed in any green jobs strategy is how we secure downstream activity. How do we get the jobs that can come from following a conservation and sustainability policy into the Scottish economy? In that respect, I want to highlight some practical examples that I hope that the minister and the Executive will take on board. Before I do so, I should say that we will not realise our full potential until we are able to offer incentives that we currently do not have the power to offer. I will not dwell on that point; instead, I will dwell in a moment on some of the shorter-term, practical steps that need to be taken. The minister says that the green jobs strategy is expected early in the new year; however, many members have pointed out that, in some cases, we have already missed the boat by years rather than months. As a result, this matter is now urgent. Furthermore, the strategy must be accompanied by an action plan. Although we are all signed up to "A Smart, Successful Scotland" as a long-term strategy, the problem is that people are not seeing any short-term benefits. We need more short-term and medium-term action to make any aims a reality. My first suggestion to the minister is that, although I welcome his announcement of £22 million for the new green jobs fund over three years, that averages out—even by Brian Monteith's maths—at £7.33 million for each of those years. Quite frankly, as far as meeting requirements and realising potential is concerned, that is peanuts. Bearing in mind that a conservative—with a small "c"—estimate for the average cost of creating a new job in Scotland is about £10,000, setting a target of additional 50,000 jobs will require a total investment of £500 million. Clearly, the bulk of that cannot come from the public purse. It must come from private sector investment, spurred on and assisted by the public purse. Two things are required to make that happen. First, there must be more of a spark from the public sector by way of tax incentives, grants or whatever. Secondly, however, we must consider better ways of getting companies to invest in the technology.

I will in a minute. We must recognise that it will sometimes take a number of years before investors get a return on their investment. Therefore, in partnership with the private sector, we must provide loans and venture capital that are far greater than those that we currently provide in Scotland.

I commented on that issue in detail during the recent debate on renewable energy. I want to finish making my points, because they are important. The scale of investment that is required from the private and public sectors to realise 50,000 jobs is substantially greater—by a mile—than £22 million over three years. We must face that fact and look at ways to close the gap. No one has mentioned the intermediary technology institute for energy—ITI Energy—which was set up primarily to act as a link between scientific research and the business community. It seems to me that one of the major opportunities for ITI Energy—or a major part of its remit—is to close the gap between what is possible and what is planned in relation to renewable energy and the jobs that come from it. To underline Sarah Boyack's point about using public procurement to advance our sustainable agenda, about 18 per cent of the GDP in this country is bought by the public sector. Therefore, let us use the influence and levers that that gives us to promote sustainability and the jobs that go with it. My final point, which I do not make as a party-political one, is that there is enough independent comment now to justify the need for the Executive to carry out an urgent impact assessment of the planned electricity transmission arrangements that are being agreed at a UK level and their effect on renewables in Scotland. When the minister publishes his strategy, I urge him also to publish an action plan and to recognise the scale of the challenge. We can then go out there and say that we can deliver 50,000 jobs, which are much needed.

That is not what the Conservatives told us.

Will the member give way?

The member suggested that privatisation created sustainable companies. Would he describe the privatised British Energy plc as a sustainable company?

Will the member give away?

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional measures it intends to take to make the public appointments system fairer and more transparent. (S2O-4034)

Does the minister recognise that, of those appointees declaring a political affiliation, two thirds declared an affiliation to the Labour Party? That is exactly the same percentage as before the Executive's measures were introduced. Will the minister now activate the promise made by Peter Peacock when he was the minister responsible and propose to the Parliament the establishment of a public appointments committee to oversee the entire process before it is brought further into disrepute?

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on bringing the motion to Parliament. Although I agree with the substance of Paul Martin's argument, I disagree that it is not right to bring such a motion before Parliament. We have to face difficult issues and we have to debate them openly and honestly in Parliament. I do not come at the debate from an especially religious point of view, but from a humanitarian and pragmatic point of view. Jeremy Purvis said that the introduction of euthanasia would not open up a new world of Harold Shipmans, but I disagree. It might not motivate people to mass murder, but the few people who might be motivated towards mass murder of the Harold Shipman kind would have a very easy excuse if we introduced such a law. Too often in recent years, we have seen cases—not only the Shipman case, but many others, particularly in nursing homes where there are old and frail people, and sometimes even in children's hospitals, both in this country and in north America—in which nurses have engaged in a kind of mass murder over a period of time. In their own minds, they have often thought that they were doing favours by bringing people's lives to an end. They believed that people's quality of life was no longer tolerable, or that the people were terminally ill and suffering too much. At the end of the day, I believe that life is life, even when issues around a person's quality of life are very difficult. Sometimes people who are thought to be terminally ill actually make some kind of recovery.  If a person is dosed up to the eyeballs with morphine, for example, it is understandable that he or she will want to end their life because they are suffering so much. If a person is lying in a hospital bed and they see the pangs of pain on the faces of their dearest loved ones when they come to visit, it is perfectly understandable that that person will want to relieve their loved ones' suffering, as much as their own suffering, by ending their own life as quickly as possible. In many cases, that would not be a rational decision, and accepting such decisions would not be a humanitarian approach to life. People often talk about the classic case of a person being kept alive on a life-support machine. There is no similarity between deliberately ending someone's life and switching off a life-support machine. I think that we would all agree that if someone is dependent on a life-support machine, switching it off at the right time is a tolerable and kindly act that is very different from euthanasia, which in my view is a cruel deception of humanity.

In the Further Education and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill, there is a statutory requirement for the newly merged council to set up a research committee. I do not expect the minister to answer in detail tonight, but I ask him whether he will consider the division of responsibility and the relationship between the research committee and the Scottish Science Advisory Committee.

Does the member agree that, when the ITIs engage in the high-risk activities that we are encouraging them to engage in and they fail in one or two projects, there is an onus on politicians not to use the media to criticise them heavily?

I join members in thanking Elaine Murray for securing this debate again this year. I also thank the Royal Society of Chemistry for holding its event, which is now in its fourth year, and for all the other excellent work that it does to promote science. I thank Holyrood magazine for the excellent supplement that it has produced in conjunction with the society. Given that I have only four minutes, I will concentrate on the economic aspects of science. That said, I recognise the breadth of the impact that science policy has on health, education, food, energy, the environment and a wide range of other aspects of government and parliamentary policy. I understand that tomorrow we will get the update on "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks". I hope that our scientific strategy is at the heart of it. When we consider the history of the Scottish economy, we can see that we have been at our most successful when we have been innovative and when we have given our scientists free rein to produce the new ideas, products and processes that we have needed down the years. That is true not only in terms of what it does for Scotland but in terms of the role that we have played internationally. We have only to think of television, the telephone and many other products that are of worldwide significance and which were invented in Scotland. That said, we face three major challenges, the first of which is the level of spend on research and development, particularly in the private sector in Scotland. The latest yearly figures that are available show that the private sector spent £600 million on research and development in Scotland. If we are to achieve the same level of private sector spend per head or as a percentage of our gross domestic product as other countries, we need to more than double the annual spend. We will need to spend an additional £750 million a year in the private sector in order to achieve the average R and D spend for Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. If we are to compete in tomorrow's world—indeed, we need to compete in it—we  must work with the private sector to get it to more than double its spend in the years ahead. Without the private sector, we will not be able to meet the second major challenge, which is to reap the downstream benefit of our scientific research. Other members have referred to commercialisation and the tremendous success of our university sector in working with the private sector on commercialisation. When we look at the telephone and the television and many other Scottish inventions, we can see that we have been excellent at research but poor at development. We need to spend time and money on getting development right as well as on getting research right. The final key challenge relates to some of the moral and ethical issues that the development of science requires us to face up to. I will mention only one: stem cell research. I am at one with John Kerry and Superman on the need to encourage, finance and develop stem cell research, albeit in a regulated fashion. Anything that has the potential to unlock the answers to so many of our medical and health problems, not only in Scotland but worldwide, has to be encouraged. Indeed, stem cell research should not only be encouraged, we should be prepared to invest in it. Those are the three key challenges. If we face them and meet them, we can achieve what I believe should be our objective, which is to make Scotland the science capital of Europe.

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria it uses when deciding whether to pursue legal challenges to court rulings. (S2O-3809)

Will the Lord Advocate review how his department has handled the Shirley McKie case, in which a legal challenge was mounted to a court ruling, despite promises that the then Minister for Justice made in the Parliament to Shirley McKie? Will the Lord Advocate pursue a settlement with her with all due speed, as the Executive promised?

rose—

Will George Lyon give way?

Will George Lyon take an intervention?

I shall be very quick. I agree entirely with George Lyon about the problem with means testing for the pension credit. Why is it, then, that the Liberals want to maintain means testing for 65 to 75-year-olds?

The member is being a bit disingenuous. The rule was that pensions should be increased either by the increase in earnings or by the increase in inflation, whichever was higher. That link was abolished when the Tories used the lower figure.

From what Robert Brown and Charles Kennedy have said, I understand that  Liberal Democrat policy is that a citizens pension would initially apply to over-75s but that, eventually, it would apply to those aged 65 and over, which is a similar policy to that of the SNP. Could the member clarify the situation?

I am glad that it was Karen Whitefield who moved the Labour amendment this morning, because she reminded me of one of our forebears, the late Peggy Herbison, who was minister for pensions and national insurance in the 1964 Wilson Government. She resigned from that Government on a point of principle, which was that means testing does not work. When the Cabinet decided to introduce means testing, she did the honourable thing, as she always did, and resigned. That is the difference between old Labour and new Labour. New Labour believes in means testing and looking after its rich pals in the City. Old Labour stood up for the poor, the pensioners and those in our society who need help. Old Labour had principles but new Labour is just a bunch of chancers. I say to Karen Whitefield that she should go and read Peggy's resignation statement—she might learn a thing or two about poverty and principle. Peggy Herbison resigned because means testing had been tried time after time. It was tried in the 1930s, when the Labour movement led the fight against it. The Tories did it again in the 1950s, the Wilson Cabinet did it in the 1960s and Heath did it in the 1970s. Now, we have Gordon Brown and Tony Blair doing the same thing. How is it that after seven years of Labour Government in London and with a Lib-Lab pact in Edinburgh 30 per cent of our pensioners still live in poverty? Surely that is proof enough that means testing does not work. The argument goes that the Government targets the poor, but if it does so successfully how are there more poor pensioners today than there were seven years ago? What really angers pensioners, and quite rightly so, is when they draw a comparison between what new Labour is doing for the rich and what it is not doing for the poor. Gordon Brown has just introduced rules that give 40 per cent tax relief up to £1.7 million. People can build their private pensions up to that figure and get 40 per cent tax back. Our pensioners would be lucky to get 1 or 2 per cent of that figure. They get a miserable £79 per week and new Labour does not care.

I will come to Robert Brown in a minute. New Labour does not seem to understand the problems that old people face. This week alone, we heard announcements of 12 per cent and 17  per cent increases in electricity prices, which, combined with the increase in council tax, will make our pensioners even poorer. I will take Robert Brown's intervention now.

Churchill used to call the Liberals mugwumps, but I think he was being unfair; they are just mugs. Robert Brown should read the policy statement and understand it. The figures are all there—I am an economist and I have checked them out. They add up much better than his figures do. We have heard all this discussion about scoring cheap points and reserved matters. The weather is reserved, but that does not prevent us from talking about it. The Scotland Act 1998 places a responsibility on the Parliament not only to legislate on competent matters, but to stand up for the people of Scotland. Nicola Sturgeon's motion is clear: it calls on us to put pressure on the Westminster Government to lift our pensioners out of poverty. How can anyone who cares about pensioners vote against a motion that asks us to pressurise other people to lift our pensioners out of poverty? I support the motion not because of what I heard from Karen Whitefield, but in Peggy Herbison's memory.

I will try to widen the debate and put the discussion on school education in the wider context of lifelong learning and the education system that we want in this country. I start by saying that I am not going to engage in party-political point scoring because education is too important for that. With all due respect to the Executive, and I mean this genuinely, it could have learned from the Irish experience. There is a general consensus in Ireland that one of the reasons why its economy has become a tiger economy in the past 20 or 30 years is that it gave priority, on a consensual basis, to tackling the problems in its education system and gave top priority to investment in education and educational reform. I say to the Executive, and particularly to Robert Brown, who mentioned the SNP idea of a convention, that the Irish brought all the key  players together at an educational convention. The host of that convention was not the Irish Government, but the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The OECD brought in its expertise to take not an inward-looking perspective, but an international perspective on Irish education.

I will give way in a minute. One statement in Peter Peacock's paper with which I agree is on the need to benchmark our performance internationally. Scottish education has many good aspects and outperforms some of our competitor nations in many subjects, but that is not a standstill situation. The money that our competitor nations are investing means that they could catch us up or overtake us. If the Executive builds education policy by a convention-type approach that uses the likes of the OECD and builds a national consensus that involves the left and the right, parents, teachers, pupils, students and other stakeholders in the education system, its educational reform will be more likely to be right and to stick, so that the system does not need to be changed a few years later. Such changes, which have occurred almost with Government after Government, have greatly contributed to education problems in Scotland and many have contributed to the morale problem in our schools, especially among our teachers.

Of course that is the case. I am just about to go on to that in the three or four points that I will make in the three minutes that are left for my speech. We tend not to perform as well as we could and should in our deprived communities. Often, a lack of performance in a classroom and in a school is a result not of teachers in that school being inferior to teachers in any other school, but of pupils' living conditions outwith school hours. One fault and gap in the minister's paper is the lack of a holistic approach. He has simply taken the old-fashioned approach of considering what happens to kids between 9 o'clock and 4 o'clock. What happens to them before 9 o'clock and after 4 o'clock often determines their performance.

The minister will find complete support for that approach from SNP members. I will highlight other, more basic, issues to the minister. As he knows, I have been a long-time supporter of free school meals. I will give the reason for that. Many Labour MSPs have privately spoken to me about the subject and one who was in social work before she became an MSP told me that she saw many kids who went to school with nothing in their belly in the morning. A kid who goes to school on an empty belly will not learn, perform or achieve until their belly is filled with basic food. That is why we need to take a much wider approach—in the spirit of community schools—to considering all influences on educational performance.

I will take Wendy Alexander's intervention because I always keep my promises to her.

Ms Alexander did not tell us where the quote was from. I presume that it was from one of her earlier articles.

I am sorry, but the reality is—[ Interruption. ] Look, I get enough heckling at hame withoot ony mair here. The reality is that such an approach—the Irish approach, the OECD approach, the Robert Brown approach—is the right approach. Reform, not  reaction, is important, and there would be reform from an SNP Government.

I congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on securing the debate. As we know, the construction industry forms a vital part of the Scottish economy and it is right that there is a cross-party group in the Parliament that works in partnership with all parts of the industry to promote the construction industry in Scotland. In the four minutes that are available to me, I should like first to underline the diversity of the construction sector. In the gallery are representatives of painters and decorators, heating and ventilation contractors, brickies, joiners and many other sectors of the industry. The construction industry accounts for about 12 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product, and if we add in building materials and associated industries, we have a substantial chunk of the Scottish economy. Today's announcement on housing, and particularly the substantial increase in investment in social housing, emphasises some of the challenges that the industry will have to meet in the next few years if it is to provide the new houses, the new roads and all the other projects that are in the pipeline. I will emphasise the three or four key challenges that face the industry, the Parliament and the Executive in trying to ensure that we have the capacity to realise our targets for housing, roads and the other projects. The first issue, which Marilyn Livingstone mentioned, is skills and the skills shortages in different parts of the construction industry. During the next few years, we will need to recruit some 27,000 people into the building industry in Scotland—half of that is due to natural wastage and the other half is due to the new investment that is coming on stream. However, we are nowhere near meeting that target. Despite the great efforts of the Construction Industry Training Board, the 5,000 modern apprenticeships that relate to construction and the sector skills council for the construction industry, we still need to do more to ensure that people with the right skills come on board in the years ahead so that we meet our investment targets. I hope that the minister will examine skills in the construction sector in particular, because as the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong  Learning he is in a unique position to take action on that front. The second issue is procurement. One of the major problems that the construction industry faces is that we have a bit of a bust-and-boom situation—perhaps less than in the past, because in recent years there has been more of a continuous boom. However, as Marilyn Livingstone mentioned, it is essential to have a predictable continuum of work for a period of years and not months if are to ensure that our indigenous construction industry can not only compete effectively here in Scotland but chase work elsewhere in the United Kingdom and in Europe. My final point, in the last of my four minutes, is on the availability of land and the planning issues that need to be addressed. In relation to water alone, it is reckoned that some £500 million of development is being held up because of the problems in the water industry in Scotland. By concentrating on construction and related industries we have the opportunity to give a major boost to economic growth in Scotland; members in all parts of the chamber agree that economic growth is our number 1 target. The construction industry can not only contribute to economic growth but help further to reduce unemployment in Scotland. I ask the minister to take on those issues on behalf of the industry—that will be of benefit not only to the Parliament and the construction industry but to the Scottish economy as a whole.

No problem, Presiding Officer. As this is my first speech to the chamber as the new convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I pay tribute first to Alasdair Morgan, the outgoing convener, for his work. He has been an outstanding convener of the committee, although the task was made easy by the quality of the other members of the committee from all parties. Secondly, I pay tribute to the outgoing clerk to the committee, Simon Watkins, who has serviced it for five years in a very professional way. Simon is one of the outstanding clerks in the Parliament and we should pay tribute to him for the work that he has done. Thirdly, I congratulate my Ayrshire friend Allan Wilson on his appointment as the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. He was previously a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, so I do not know whether it is promotion for him to become the minister. Nevertheless, I am sure that he will enjoy his new responsibilities. Informed by the quality of the committee's report, this has probably been one of the best-quality debates that has taken place in this chamber and in the Parliament in the past five years. In my five years as a member of the Parliament, I have never seen a committee report produce such a volume of response after its publication—aided and abetted by the excellent leaflet that was produced for popular consumption—or such a broad consensus, not just in the committee but in the responses from outside  to the report's main recommendations. That bodes well for the new politics of Scotland. Let us examine why renewable energy is so important and the background to the issue. There are three fundamental drivers of the importance of renewable energy. The first is the very substantial increase in the global demand for energy. Last year the worldwide demand for energy grew by 3 per cent. In the Asia-Pacific area, it grew by 6.5 per cent and in China it grew by about 12 per cent. That trend is likely to continue. However, simultaneously with the exponential growth in demand, there is increasing concern about the remaining global reserves of fossil fuels: coal, oil, gas and so on. The third driver is environmental considerations and, in particular, the need to meet the Kyoto targets. Renewable energy sources provide three fundamental benefits for Scotland, as compared with traditional sources. First, they make a substantial contribution to the reduction in CO 2 emissions and the environmental benefits that go with that. Secondly, they help us to diversify our supply of energy, which is essential in any modern economy. Thirdly, they reduce our reliance on imported energy, which is always good for any country, both financially and in terms of economic security. Let us be under no illusion about the scale of the challenge that we face, even compared with our European neighbours. Our target, which is ambitious for Scotland, is to have 18 per cent of our primary energy demand met by renewables by the end of the decade. Already three of our European partner countries—Sweden, Finland and Austria—have far exceeded that figure. For Sweden, the figure is nearly 30 per cent, for Finland it is more than 20 per cent and for Austria it is 21 per cent. We have some catching up to do. The committee's recommendations, if implemented, would help us to do much of that.

Absolutely. We need two mixes. First, we need an overall energy mix and diversified sources of energy. Secondly, we need a diverse mix within the renewables sector. One of the major points, if not the major point, that came out of the committee's report is the over-reliance on onshore wind energy to try to reach the 40 per cent target. I will concentrate for the next minute or two on the two areas of the report where there has been  criticism of the Executive. First, the committee's report probably reflects Scottish opinion on the Executive's response that it is not in favour of producing a national planning framework for wind farms. The committee does not agree with the extreme position that wants a moratorium on wind farms—and wants no wind farms at any cost—nor with the other extreme that wants the planning system to allow wind farms to be put almost anywhere, willy-nilly. Most people—certainly members of the committee—are, to use a phrase, in favour of the middle way. As the convener of the committee, I suggest to the Executive that the remit of the new forum that the minister announced this afternoon—which is a welcome development—should be to help shape Scottish planning guidelines for renewables development. I do not think that it says so in the minister's statement, but in the press release that he kindly provided me, the minister states that he hopes that the new forum will meet before the end of the year—that is only weeks away. As a compromise between the committee's recommendation on the national planning framework and the Executive's position of not wanting to engage in that, I suggest that one of the first jobs—in fact, the first job—given to the new forum should be to examine the need for a national planning framework. That would bridge the gap between the committee's position and that of the Executive and it would allow an objective look at the matter. I hope that it would give the Executive time to take any action that it may deem necessary.

That very neatly brings me to the second point on which, as was articulated by Mike Watson in his opening remarks, there is a degree of criticism of the Executive by the committee. There is clearly some disappointment on the committee—and, I sense, in the Parliament—that the Executive did not respond formally on a number of issues in its response to the committee's report. I suggest—subject of course to the committee's agreement—that since the minister is new to his role we invite him back to the committee, perhaps some time early in the new year, to give us an update on the areas that were not covered in the Executive's response.

On behalf of the committee, I welcome the statement that the minister has made. I hope that we can use that to bridge the gap between the committee's recommendations and the Executive's position. I will move on in—I hope—trying to build consensus between the committee and the Executive. The report made three other major recommendations. It identified a need for a Scottish energy policy. Again, there is broad consensus on that. The report also identified the economic benefit of alternative renewable energy sources. As a country, we have not yet done enough to identify the enormous benefits in exports, jobs and investments that can be derived from renewable energy sources. George Lyon and others have provided local examples of such benefits and we hope that the Executive will give attention to the matter in its green jobs strategy and other policies. I thank the new Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning for his suggestion. On behalf of the committee, we look forward to working with him and his Liberal Democrat boss to ensure that Scotland gets ahead in the renewables market in Europe.

We could have nearly completed the development by the time that the minister had finished his answer. Will the minister give a commitment that the necessary investment will be made in the road infrastructure for Hunterston? He may be aware that this is a 40-year project, which used to be called oceanspan. It will work only if the road infrastructure is put in place.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, but the debate will be introduced by my colleague Mike Watson, who is the deputy convener of the committee.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking in respect of the governance of Glasgow Central College of Commerce. (S2O-3407)

I thank the minister for his helpful reply. Does he agree that, when an employment tribunal finds against a college board, it is the responsibility of the board, which is in charge of taxpayers' money, to abide by the spirit and the letter of the employment tribunal's decision?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to improve the accountability of national health service boards. (S2O-3404)

I draw to the minister's attention the example of the succession of a general practitioner at the Rowallan medical practice in Blantyre, where a petition signed by three quarters of the patients was totally ignored by the health board and the area medical committee. Will he now review the rules governing the appointment of GPs and build in a statutory requirement that the views of the patients, while perhaps not being paramount, certainly have to be recognised? They certainly were not in this case.

To ask the First Minister what the up-to-date position is on his discussions with the Home Secretary in respect of the devolution of some immigration powers from the UK Government to the Scottish Executive. (S2F-1098)

Thanks for that unpredictable reply. In his speech to a fringe meeting on Sunday night in Brighton, the First Minister said: "There needs to be more flexibility in UK immigration policy to allow Scotland to address its falling and ageing population." What additional flexibilities does the First Minister  believe are required, especially to increase the number of work permits and skilled immigrants to Scotland? What progress is he making with the Home Secretary on those two points? When does he hope to be able to announce progress on those matters, either in the papers or in the Parliament?

This has been a very good debate, partly because we have had enough time for debate. Members from all parties have been able to speak and have been given enough time. I hope that the Parliamentary Bureau will learn that lesson for the future, although if Helen Eadie had spoken for eight minutes rather than six she would have managed to prove that the Tories were responsible for the disappearance of Shergar as well as everything else. One problem with the debate so far is that it has been conducted very much in the past tense. Quite rightly, members have considered the problems that have arisen with this building in the past six years. However, the story is not over yet, because the building and the project are not complete. We need to learn the lessons of the Fraser report in managing two major aspects of the project. First, as with every building project, there will be a period of what the construction industry terms snagging. In a typical building project, about 5 per cent of the fee is usually withheld until the client is satisfied that all snags have been dealt with and that all problems have been solved. Only when the project is complete is the client prepared to pay the final 5 per cent. We in Parliament must ensure that the project is properly completed and that the remaining part of the work represents value for money. A committee of Parliament—either an existing committee, such as the Audit Committee, or a specially set up committee—should ensure that the Holyrood project is completed to the satisfaction of Parliament and the nation. Secondly, there is the permanent phase of maintenance. One incredible feature of the project is that we still do not know what the long-term maintenance costs of the building will be. If we are to learn the lessons of Fraser, we must address maintenance costs and ensure that we implement in Parliament the systems that are required to ensure that those costs, whatever they happen to be, are permanently properly managed and professionally controlled. Andy Kerr made the point that the budget for the Parliament is top-sliced. That means that the costs come off before the Scottish Executive gets money for all the other services that are provided. Because the budget for the Parliament is top- sliced, it is particularly important to ensure that we get value for money. For every pound that is spent on this place, there is a pound less for the Executive to spend on schools, universities, the health service and everything else. Parliament has an on-going responsibility not to say that now that Fraser has reported, the matter is finished, but to learn the lessons of how we manage the building in the future. Other points in the Fraser report that are probably a bit tangential to the core issue of construction management have been referred to. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was absolutely right about the principle of ministerial responsibility: if a person is to be a minister, he or she must be prepared to take responsibility as any chief executive of a major company would. A minister must be prepared to take responsibility not just for his or her private office, but for the whole department. We should heed the words of an experienced ex-minister such as Lord James. There are also lessons to be learned about the civil service and how we scrutinise its work. Like Helen Eadie, I think that we should take up the suggestion that has been made by the highly experienced Barry Winetrobe in today's The Herald that there should be a new system for scrutinising the civil service. I hope that the SPCB, the Executive and Parliament will take up Lord Fraser's recommendation that we amend section 21 of the Scotland Act 1998. It is a farce that the modus operandum of the corporate body is dictated by primary legislation at Westminster. Even those who are not nationalists—I suspect even the Tories, once they get Shergar back—will support that recommendation. If the corporate body is to implement Fraser's other recommendations, it must have freedom to act. I strongly urge the SPCB and the Executive to get their colleagues at Westminster to amend the Scotland Act 1998, as has been recommended.

In light of what the member has just said, will the corporate body now press the United Kingdom Government to implement Lord Fraser's recommendation that section 21 of the Scotland Act 1998 should be amended?

I thank the Deputy First Minister for his best wishes—assuming that I win the vote in the Enterprise and Culture Committee on Tuesday. I look forward to working with him and my comrades from the five parties on the committee on promoting the enterprise, culture, tourism, sport and lifelong learning agenda for Scotland. I welcome his announcement of the second business in the Parliament conference next year. As the convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I will work with him and others to make a success of that. There is clearly a wide consensus throughout the chamber on the problems facing the Scottish economy, although there are differences in the  solutions offered. Before I offer some solutions of my own, I wish to take issue with three points that have been made this morning. First, I take issue with the comparative growth figures given by Wendy Alexander. Not for the first time, Wendy was ingenious with which figures she selectively chose for the comparison, so much so that, in a past age, she would have made Houdini look positively arthritic. Wendy compared the growth rates of the Scottish and UK economies with the growth rates in the euro zone and the United States economy. We all know that, since George Bush took over, with his version of voodoo economics, the growth rate in the US has collapsed. We also know that, because of the particular problems of the German economy, the euro zone has experienced much lower growth than it had done previously.

I will let Alex Johnstone in later, but I want to finish a point. I will draw a comparison, this time comparing apples with apples, rather than apples with oranges. Let us consider the figures that Wendy Alexander got from SPICe for the growth rate in the period that she mentioned, and compare Scotland's fairly miserable growth rate—barely touching 2 per cent on occasion and now forecast to go slightly over—with the growth rates in similar-sized economies. The Norwegian rate, for example, has been about 50 per cent higher than the Scottish rate. The Irish rate has been twice the Scottish rate. The rates in Finland, Sweden and Luxembourg have been one and a half times the Scottish rate. When we compare what is happening in Scotland with what is happening in similar economies, the picture is not nearly as rosy as Wendy Alexander would have us believe. In general terms, big economies have been underperforming in comparison with small economies, not only in Europe but throughout the world. That does not apply only to the growth rate. If we consider GDP per head, on 16 July this year, the United Nations Development Programme published a league table on human development throughout the globe; the UK ranked only 12 th . On the specific measure of GDP per head, the Norwegians had £5,500 more, not than the figure for Scotland, but than the higher figure for the UK as a whole. Norway was substantially ahead of the UK. Seven of the 11 countries that were ahead of the UK are of the same size as Scotland. In other words, the evidence is clear that small economies are achieving higher performance rates in growth and GDP per head than larger economies. That is why Scotland needs to raise its game, not only in productivity but in GDP per head—which is a  measure of living standards—and in economic growth.

Quite frankly, if Scotland had access to its own oil and other resources, far from being bust, we would be one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. That neatly brings me on to the second point with which I take issue. If we examine the paper that was produced by the two so-called professors who lecture at the Fraser of Allander institute for research on the Scottish economy—

Yes, they must be dishing out professorships like confetti in some of the institutions. When the two professors come to oil in their analysis, they say, "Oh, we cannot allocate the oil to Scotland, because it is volatile." Can members imagine the Norwegians saying, "We don't want that money, because it's not the same this year as last year"? Let us suppose that Wendy Alexander was a punter who did the lottery and that last night the jackpot was £2.8 million, although last week it was £3.3 million. If Wendy checked her numbers this morning and found that all her six numbers were up, she would have won £2.8 million. The professors' comment would be like her phoning Camelot and saying, "Thank you very much. I've won the jackpot, but I don't want the jackpot because it's volatile."

Thank you, Presiding Officer—it is like being at hame.

I will go now and hold a press conference to tell members my third point.

I agree with Christine May, but does she agree that the recent British electricity trading and transmission arrangements will do enormous damage to the renewable energy sector in Scotland unless they are changed radically?

Like many other speakers in this debate on this historic day, I want to say that the people out there on the streets of Scotland will judge the Parliament on the improvements that we deliver in the standard and quality of life in this country. I see that Peter Peacock is not in the chamber; I hope that when he returns this afternoon he will address some of Cathie Craigie's valid points, because the levels of literacy and numeracy in Scotland are far too low for a society that aims to be one of the highest-growth economies in Europe. I believe that, as we apply ourselves in the months and years ahead, the key word must be "audacious". Being audacious does not mean being aggressive or arrogant; it means that we are ambitious and that we are prepared to take the bold steps that are necessary to realise and to deliver on our ambitions. As a nationalist, I believe that this Parliament's powers are inadequate. I honestly believe that if we are to achieve the growth rates of which Scotland is capable, we need financial and economic powers to come from London to Edinburgh. That is not to say that this Parliament can do nothing to boost economic growth and our people's standard of living. I want to highlight eight examples of missed opportunities; the First Minister should have come forward on this historic day not just to give us more of the motherhood and apple pie that is called FEDS—people think that that is a reference to agents who should be in the Criminal Intelligence Agency. People are looking for practical policies that will make a difference to Scotland. I will begin with the subject area that John Home Robertson dealt with. One of the problems in Scotland today is that many of our energy industries are suffering as a result of Government policy that is very often made in London. I will give two examples. First, the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements that have just been signed could increase transmission costs for alternative energy suppliers in Scotland by up to 400 per cent. That is bad news for the environment, bad news for the economy, bad news for jobs, bad news for consumers and bad news for Scotland. Why is a Labour Government in London contradicting the growth policy of the Lib-Lab pact in Edinburgh? Secondly, as far as the oil sector is concerned, the issue is not just revenue—although, as Nicola Sturgeon outlined, that is important. We have one  of the lowest-ever levels of oil exploration in the North sea—not because there is nae oil, but because the incentives are not there. The oil industry employs 100,000 people in Scotland, and we will lose many of those jobs if we do not take action now to boost the exploration rate in the North sea. Let us look at other sectors. Many of the ambitions that were outlined five years ago were outlined today. Let us look at the past 10 days. Not only have we had the report on the economy to which Mr McLetchie referred, but figures were published yesterday on the numbers of under-21-year-olds who are enrolling in higher education this year. The numbers are not increasing—they are not even staying stable; they have gone down by nearly 3 per cent. Yet, we all agree that boosting that rate and maintaining the level of participation in the university system is essential to our economic ambitions. Let us look at business start-ups. The First Minister referred to the need to boost the business sector and yet the Committee of Scottish Clearing Bankers has shown this morning that there has been a 7 per cent decline—not a stabilisation, but a genuine decline—in the number of new businesses.

Yes, but the minister misses the point—it is obvious that he does not know too much about enterprise. If the trend in the previous quarter has declined by 7 per cent, the trend is downwards, not upwards; any mathematician—who is not here—would tell him that. When we look at Glasgow, we find that it is short of 120 primary schoolteachers. How are we going to deliver quality education when we do not even have the teachers in the classroom? Let us look at the water industry, which was mentioned by my colleague John Swinney. The Forum of Private Business estimates that development totalling £500 million in Scotland is ready to go, but the problem is that Scottish Water cannot deliver. Let us look at what else is happening down south that the Executive does nothing about. The whisky industry is being hit by new legislation on whisky stamps. Other measures that have been taken by the chancellor and others are damaging the Scottish economy. I remember the Deputy First Minister telling us four years ago that we had to look to the long term. I agree with that. However, that was a long term ago—it is time that  we started to see the long-term results from the so-called long-term policies. What we see is failure in health, education, transport, growth and in many key industrial sectors. I say to the Scottish Executive that we all want to see it raise its game. We will raise our game, but let us ensure that, for once, the Executive starts to deliver for the people of Scotland.

I draw the First Minister's attention to his promise to expand the business sector in Scotland. How does he reconcile that with this morning's figures from the Committee of Scottish Clearing Bankers that show a further 7 per cent reduction in the number of new businesses being created in Scotland? What specific measures will the First Minister take in the next year to boost the creation of new businesses in Scotland?

There is only one of them in Westminster.

I welcome the increase in the threshold for the repayment of the student loan, but point out that it is still about £10,000 below the threshold for repayment of the endowment that there would have been if the Cubie recommendations had been fully implemented. Secondly, there is the issue of qualification for bursaries. These days, a parental income of £20,000 is not a lot of money in comparison with the average national wage. Will the minister reconsider the qualification for bursary entitlement? Many people in relatively low-income or middle-income households are suffering as a result of the measures and are not qualifying for the bursary. My third point is about demand from students south of the border to come to Scotland. Like the minister, I welcome a mix of all nationalities in all our universities. However, the reality is that approximately 40 per cent of them come to the University of Edinburgh and another 20 per cent come to the University of St Andrews. We need to consider the pressure for places on individual  institutions and courses in Scotland. Will the minister discuss with the universities how that problem can be addressed?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received in respect of its proposals to set up specified tertiary education providers as part of its consultation process into merging the higher and further education funding councils. (S2O-2728)

I welcome the fact that the proposal from the former Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee to merge the funding councils will be the subject of a bill. However, does the minister recognise the folly of the proposals to divide the old and new universities into different categories? One of the key recommendations of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report on lifelong learning was that we should not make such divisive delineations in higher or further education. Will he admit that he got it wrong in that respect?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive plans to introduce legislation to amend the current law on rape. (S2F-911)

I think that I speak on behalf of the whole Parliament in welcoming that announcement from the First Minister. In the light of recent judgments, we are almost in a position from which it is very difficult to obtain successful convictions in rape cases in Scotland. Will the First Minister include two specific points in the remit of the Scottish Law Commission: first, the need to consider reform of the law with respect to intent to rape; and, secondly, the issue of whether we need a specific offence relating to male rape in Scotland? Finally, can he give us any indication of the timescale for the Scottish Law Commission's review?

I will press amendment 31.

The racing-pigeon sport is historic and has been important in Scotland and the rest of the UK. Dennis Canavan will be glad to know that Her Majesty the Queen is a pigeon fancier. I hope that that will influence the Tory vote on the amendment—I am a traditional crawler. The racing-pigeon industry and sport have a real problem in predation by raptors. Amendment 31 is designed to deal with just one aspect of the problem—attacks by sparrow-hawks on pigeons in lofts. Other problems arise in flight not only from  sparrow-hawks but from peregrines, but the amendment is meant to break the back of one problem. I will say what the proposal is not and deal with some of the propaganda from the RSPB, which is the royal society for the protection of some birds and not others. I want to protect birds of all types, including the pigeon and the raptor. The pigeon men are not in favour of a cull of raptors. We want a proper and rational approach to the problem. The amendment's purpose is to build into the bill the right of the pigeon fancier—the racing-pigeon owner—to protect their birds in the same way as other people protect their birds. Some people might say that deterrence is the way to deal with the problem. For the past 30 years, every known form of deterrent has been tried and has failed. There is no known long-term effective deterrent for the problem. Were such a deterrent available, pigeon fanciers would be happy to employ it. Their purpose is not to attack sparrow-hawks but to defend the pigeons in their lofts. Members will have seen photographs of some of the worst effects of attacks on pigeons. I do not think that anyone who cares about nature and about all birds can be other than disturbed by some of those photographs.  I want to refer to a study that has just been completed. I chaired a working party involving the Scottish Homing Union and the SNH. The conclusions of that study, which was not carried out in the best way, have again been deliberately misinterpreted and spun by certain people. The problem is not that 50 per cent of the pigeon population is attacked and killed by sparrow-hawks every year. There are concentrations around particular lofts and there are mass—often repeated—attacks on lofts by sparrow-hawks. Therefore, if the amendment is agreed to, it would not result in a massive cull of sparrow-hawks, but would allow the pigeon fancier to deal, under licence—I emphasise that—with the problem of rogue sparrow-hawks that continually attack the lofts of fanciers. That means that we could attack the problem without any significant impact on the sparrow-hawk population. I know that some people laugh at the issue and that many people regard it as a fairly peripheral issue, but it should be remembered that many pigeon fanciers—of whom there are many thousands in Scotland—have invested a fair amount of their money in their sport and are entitled to their sport in the same way that everyone else is entitled to theirs. They also raise a great deal of money for charity. Therefore, I say to members that they should  take the issue seriously and save the sport of racing pigeons from possible extinction within the next 10 years. I move amendment 31.

I remind Murdo Fraser that Ted Heath took Rolls-Royce into public ownership in the space of 24 hours in order to save it.

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on bringing this debate to the chamber and endorse the comments that he and Cathy Peattie have made. Alexanders Buses, TransBus's predecessor, has been synonymous with the Falkirk area for many years. As far as production and jobs are concerned, it has always been an important part of the manufacturing base, not just in that part of Scotland but in Scotland as a whole. Indeed, the export effort of that manufacturing facility has been very important to the Scottish economy. As a result, the onus is on us all to do everything we possibly can to ensure that the facility is kept open, that jobs are maintained and that the successor company is allowed to prosper in the Falkirk area. What is particularly annoying about what is happening—which has been caused by an Enron-type difficulty of the parent company in America—is that we are not talking about a failing enterprise. It is a very successful enterprise with high levels of productivity, high levels of exports and high levels of excellence. The people who are being penalised, the people who are losing their jobs, are people who do not deserve under any circumstances to have to make that sacrifice as a result of what has happened in the finances of the parent company. This issue does not affect the economy of just Falkirk. About half the people who have already been made redundant are from the Falkirk area, but the other half are from Stirlingshire, Clackmannanshire and other parts of central Scotland. Everybody is affected. As Cathy Peattie  said, the impact on the company and the local economy is substantial. Cathy mentioned the £5.9 million-worth of business for the 52 Falkirk-based businesses that benefit from the TransBus enterprise. In addition, another £20 million is spent every year on materials and supplies in other parts of the Scottish economy. Already there are indications of difficulties for local companies, where unpaid invoices are putting jobs and enterprises at risk. That is in addition to the TransBus jobs and enterprise. This Parliament must speak with a united voice and tell the Executive to do everything in its power to save what is a viable and profitable business in the Falkirk area. However, I must sound one note of dissension. I was very disappointed when the trade union movement refused to allow Michael Matheson to attend meetings. That kind of narrow view, when we should be mobilising every sector of opinion in Scotland, is quite reprehensible. I say to the trade union movement, "Do not wear a Labour hat; wear a Scottish hat. Represent every section of the community and let us have no more refusing to allow SNP or other representatives to attend meetings."

That was the council, Dennis. Michael Matheson wanted to attend a meeting and was refused by the trade union movement. That kind of action in this situation is not acceptable. Everybody who represents that area, whether they are Tory, Liberal, SNP or any other kind of MSP, should be invited to participate in meetings. We know what these kinds of company do: they divide and rule. We should not allow that to happen. We must speak with a united voice. Every party in this chamber should say to the Executive, "Save these jobs." We should say to the trade union movement, "We all want to work with you to save these jobs and make sure that the bus industry remains a key part of the Falkirk and the Scottish economy."

Karen Whitefield has cross-party support for her comments on Greengairs. I remind the minister that the First Minister made a promise two years ago to Greengairs and the surrounding villages that there would be no more landfill or opencast sites there. Will he give a commitment to reject the application from Eden Waste Recycling for the ninth landfill site at Greengairs?

Has the First Minister made representations to the Prime Minister to ensure that the Scottish result in the referendum on the EU constitution will be counted and announced separately? Once the constitution has been finalised by the heads of Government, will the First Minister consider undertaking a fundamental assessment of its impact on the economic and social life of Scotland?

rose—

rose—

My quotes were taken directly from a House of Commons select committee on which Labour members form the majority. Has the minister undertaken any evaluation of the maximum potential benefits? Can he put a figure on them? Are the potential benefits to Scotland anywhere near £70 million?

I am not against the Olympics; what I want is for the benefits and costs to relate to each other. Is Jamie McGrigor prepared to tell the sports clubs of the Highlands and Islands that benefit from lottery money that they are not to get any funding for the next 10 years because of the London Olympics being subsidised?

My speech will not be about defending some narrow nationalist point or promoting a kailyard mentality towards the global Olympic movement. Indeed, I wish London all the best in its bid to get the Olympics in 2012. London is a wonderful international city and it is well placed to host the Olympics in 2012. I also recognise the potential benefits to Scotland. Some of the pre-games training might be brought to Scotland and some games might be hosted here, for example football at Hampden or sailing at Largs—which is in the constituency of the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Allan Wilson. There is also a potential tourism spin-off, because people who come to London to see the Olympics might include a visit to Scotland. However, like the House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee, I have a number of concerns about the costs, funding and benefits of the London bid. In particular, I am concerned about the bill that is currently going through the House of Commons to set up a special lottery for the London Olympics. That legislation will have an effect on the revenues that the existing lottery fund generates and on the money that it spends on good causes and sports in Scotland and elsewhere in the United Kingdom. My concerns are shared by the House of Commons select committee, but similar concerns have been expressed elsewhere in the UK, including in Wales and in the north-east, the north-west and the south-west of England. If for no other reason, those concerns must be addressed because, as part of the approval process for the bid, the International Olympic Committee will carry out a UK-wide opinion poll next year to establish the level of commitment to London hosting the  games in 2012. If that opinion poll produces a negative result, because the Scots, the Welsh and people in the regions of England are unhappy with the proposed arrangements, it could scupper London's bid. Therefore, it is in the interests of the bid committee to listen to our concerns. The UK Government estimates that a total of £2,375 million in public subsidy will be needed for the bid. Of that nearly £2.4 billion, £1.5 billion will come from the national lottery. For the purposes of tonight's debate, we will assume that the estimate is right and is not like the estimates for the Dome or the Scottish Parliament building, which ended up costing twice, three times or four times the original estimate. Half of the lottery money—some £750 million—will come from the new Olympic lottery game. The other £750 million will come from "Existing sports distributors" and "Possible changes to the existing shares between 'good causes' after 2009-2012". On those figures, Scotland could lose well more than £30 million of sports money to pay for the London Olympics. That is equivalent to the total amount of money that the First Minister committed yesterday for football in Scotland between now and 2015. Scotland could lose a further £40 million or more from lottery funds that are currently devoted to good causes. Thus, Scotland could be robbed of a total of £70 million of much-needed money for sports and good causes to subsidise the London Olympics. Personally, I find that unacceptable. Even if we add up all the benefits that Scotland is likely to get from the London Olympics, under the present arrangements, the benefits are unlikely to compensate for the scale of the loss that sport and other good causes in Scotland would suffer. As I said, similar concerns have been expressed elsewhere in the United Kingdom. To make matters worse, Camelot estimates that 59 per cent of existing lottery income will be cannibalised by other lottery games. There will be a double whammy: lottery revenues for good causes will drop by up to 60 per cent and a huge chunk of existing spending will be siphoned off from existing lottery funds.

My position is clear: our contribution should be in line with the benefits that Scotland can get and we should not end up supporting the London Olympic bid at any price to Scotland,  Wales or the north-east, north-west or south-west of England. I agree with the most recent report of the House of Commons Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport, which said: "What is clear is that funding the 2012 Games, should the bid be successful, constitutes a potentially huge drain on the total funds available for the existing good causes, including grassroots sport (especially outside London where expected legacies will presumably be less). This is at a time when total Lottery ticket sales are only just poised to come out of a 5 year decline". The committee also mentioned the importance of promoting sport and a generally more active lifestyle, especially among children, which will be relegated among our public health priorities as a result of the loss of lottery money. To add insult to injury, the UK Government made all its commitments and statements without any prior consultation. There was no consultation with the sports bodies in England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland, and there was no prior consultation with the recipients of existing lottery funds for good causes. I doubt whether there was any prior consultation with the Scottish Executive, but if there was, what was its response? There was certainly no prior consultation with the Parliament. The London bid can be supported in principle, but not at the heavy price that our sport and good causes, Welsh sport and good causes, Northern Irish sport and good causes and sport and good causes in parts of England outside London will pay. They should not pay that price. As the House of Commons select committee pointed out, the creation of a separate lottery dedicated to the London Olympics would be "unnecessary, wasteful of resources and against the thrust of the Government's own strategy for sport." I reach the same conclusion as the House of Commons Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport, which is dominated by Labour, Tory and Liberal Democrats MPs and on which there are no Scottish National Party MPs. That committee says: "It is clearly desirable in principle that London should host an Olympic and Paralympic Games. But it should not do so at any price."

To ask the Scottish Executive what its plans are for the modern apprenticeship scheme. (S2O-1721)

In the latest available figures, the completion rate is running at approximately 52 per cent. Does the Executive have a target for the completion rate and what is it? What plans are in place to increase the completion rate from 52 per cent?

If Sarah Boyack looks at the independence budget that I launched yesterday, she will see that I covered waste disposal and what more we could do in that respect in an independent Scotland. I rise—not in a lazy way at all—to speak in support of the Green party motion and the SNP amendment. In doing so, I want to focus on landfill. I will first paint the national picture and then look at some of the local effects of current landfill policies. Landfill accounts for about 91 per cent of the disposal of municipal waste in Scotland. Although we are supposed to be grateful for the landfill tax, as all of us know, landfill is not the most environmentally sound way in which to dispose of municipal or any other waste. We require such a high landfill capacity in Scotland because we have failed to use alternative methods of disposal to their maximum. The landfill tax is not primarily driven by environmental considerations; it is merely a revenue-raising device that produces about £50 million for the Chancellor of the Exchequer every year from Scottish landfill. The landfill tax credit scheme allows landfill operators to use up to 20 per cent of their landfill tax for environmental purposes. However, it is often left up to the operators to decide how the money is to be used; in effect, they decide how to recycle the money. Needless to say, it is not in the interests of the operators to recycle the money into alternative methods of waste disposal. Far too little of the revenue from the landfill tax goes back into funding alternative methods of waste disposal. The decision-making process in respect of how the money is used needs to be reformed. I concede the point that Sarah Boyack made on landfill. We do not need independence to change the two matters that I have just raised; they could be changed tomorrow if the will existed in the Labour Government down south and the Executive up here. The issues to do with landfill are well within our grasp. If they were tackled, we could make a substantial difference to the way we deal with disposal of waste, especially municipal waste.  I want to pick up on the Environment and Rural Development Committee's very good report of earlier this year, which highlighted the particular issue of the Greengairs area in Lanarkshire. Many people now know not only about Greengairs but about the adjacent villages of Plains, Glenmavis and Wattston, all of which are badly affected by the number of landfill and open-cast sites in the area. At present, there are eight in total in that part of Scotland. The villages are becoming islands in a sea of landfill and open cast. Eden Waste Recycling Ltd has made an application for a ninth site of huge proportions, which the Executive is "minded to accept". I say to the Executive that it should look at the practicalities. In saying that, I remind the Executive of what Nora Radcliffe said about her inability to accept the concept of zero waste because we are not at the stage at which it is a practical proposition. One way in which we could make the concept of zero waste a practical proposition is by turning down such planning applications. The Eden Waste application is neither necessary nor is it desirable either in terms of the villages that I mentioned and their populations or of the national waste plan. I carried out a survey of the Greengairs population—I will mention three of the findings. The effects of landfill and open cast in the area have resulted in 50 per cent of households reporting health problems. That might not be unusual in many communities, but when people were asked whether they had suffered health problems before they moved to the area, 62 per cent indicated that they had not, but said that only since they moved to the area had their health suffered. People told me that one of the effects of the concentration of landfill and open-cast sites was the creation of insect populations inside their houses. If members were to go up to the lofts of any house in Greengairs, they would see beasties that they never knew existed. I invite members to do so at the earliest opportunity. Greengairs is a good example of the fact that the debate today is not an academic or theoretical exercise; it is about the quality of life of people in areas such as Greengairs. If we do not tackle the landfill problem, we will end up with more situations throughout Scotland like the one in Greengairs. I say to the Executive that of course I believe in additional powers—independent powers—for the Scottish Parliament. I also believe that the Executive could make far more imaginative and innovative use of the powers that it has to save Scotland from becoming the waste capital of Europe.

Are they over the hill?

By way of encouraging tourism in North Lanarkshire, will the minister encourage his colleagues in the Executive, particularly the First Minister, to turn down the planning application from Eden Waste Recycling Ltd for a new landfill site at Greengairs near Airdrie? The First Minister promised the people of Greengairs two years ago that there would be no need for further landfill sites.

I congratulate Donald Gorrie on securing this debate and on having two Cabinet ministers come to listen to his speech, particularly as they are both Labour members. They are obviously back in love with Donald. I agree with Ted Brocklebank about the time of year. It would be much better for tourism and for the international marketing of Scotland if the day was at a time of year when we could encourage people to come and enjoy some Scottish sunshine rather than some winter weather. The important point is demonstrated by what happens on 25 January each year. Burns night has no official recognition, although I am sure that the Executive is putting money into the new centre in Alloway in Ayrshire. Burns suppers are a good example of how something can grow from nothing into an international phenomenon. Many people who have been to Burns suppers in Scotland seem to be under the impression that they are held only in Scotland, but I am told that more Burns suppers are held in Russia than in Scotland. They are held the world over, in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, in parts of Asia and in parts of the middle east. They are held not just to commemorate the bard and everything that he stood for—his philosophy, his poetry and his music; they also promote Scotland effectively. St Andrew's day, whenever it is during the year, is an opportunity for us to market Scotland, but it is not properly seized upon. Unlike Burns suppers and hogmanay, most people in Scotland do not celebrate St Andrew's day. I dare say that many people do not know when it is, and that is a matter for regret. It is an ideal opportunity for us to celebrate what happens in Scotland but, more important, it is an opportunity to market Scotland abroad. Last week, the minister announced the rejigging of the area tourist boards and the additional money that is being allocated to VisitScotland. As we know, and as Ted Brocklebank said, St Andrew is the patron saint not only of Scotland but of many other countries. There might be opportunities for us to twin with some of those countries and to undertake joint initiatives to encourage tourism between those countries and Scotland. Tourism and marketing initiatives are often held on pegs such as that. Chris Ballance said that we should encourage people to take weekend breaks in Scotland—I say to him that I hope that they will come on low-cost flights—which could significantly boost tourism. After the debate, most members in the chamber are off to the Signet library to celebrate St Patrick's day. We could learn much from how the  Irish have turned that day into an international day to promote Ireland. I used to live in Boston, where St Patrick's day is a great day for everybody, as is Thanksgiving. Today, we will go to the Signet library, whose ceiling and internal architecture compare to those of other halls such as the Sistine chapel, albeit on a much smaller scale. We have much to show people—not only those from abroad, but people from Scotland. Great national treasures such as the Signet library are open to too few people—often to the elite of Edinburgh and its surrounding area. I hope that Donald Gorrie's idea of celebrating St Andrew's day is taken up and that the day becomes a national holiday. I hope that the Parliament takes the holiday on a Wednesday or Thursday every year. We should use that opportunity. Many people might laugh at the debate, but it is worth while. The idea is worth while, because it provides yet another opportunity to promote Scotland. The more we promote Scotland, the more we generate economic activity, jobs, wealth and all the rest of it. I hope that the minister will follow up last week's initiative with a new initiative this week.

If perchance the Tories were to win the UK general election in 2005, would they be committed to scrapping top-up fees before they are implemented in 2006?

I congratulate the committee on taking up the recommendation in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's legacy paper to make this issue a high priority. The committee's report is of a high quality, unlike the Executive's, which was one of the poorest that I have ever seen and one of the biggest damp squibs, although there have been a few damp squibs from the Executive during the past four or five years. The Executive's phase 3 report is called "The Competitiveness of Higher Education in Scotland" and it purports to consider the competitiveness of our university sector. The words "Europe", "European Union" and "OECD" do not appear in it, however; the report makes only a parochial comparison with what is happening south of Hadrian's wall. Does the Executive live in a little parochial kailyard and think that our universities relate only to what happens south of the border? Does it not realise that our universities must compete internationally and globally? We should compare ourselves not just with what happens south of the border, but with what happens in Europe, North America and particularly the far east and Asia. If we are to be competitive in teaching or in research, we must acknowledge that much of the competition is not south of the border, but in those other parts of the world. A serious, well-researched report would have pointed out that our competitiveness in teaching and research is under serious threat and has been chronically underfunded by successive Tory and Labour Governments, as a result of which many other countries have caught up and are exceeding our performance. We need only consider the average OECD figures. It is not just Scotland that is lagging behind; I admit that England has lagged behind even further in terms of spend per head or percentage of gross domestic product spent on universities. In order to catch up, let alone get ahead of the game, we will have to invest substantially more—both north and south of the border—in our education system. If we do not, universities in countries such as Singapore, Indonesia and Australia will continue to overtake us, as will universities in North America and our European counterparts. Let us forget the kailyard, get rid of the parochialism and consider the issues in a proper global and international context. Once and for all, let us agree to put an end to the kidology that Scotland's universities are still getting more money per head than their counterparts south of the border. The committee stated that the Executive's claims of a 20 per cent differential are factually untrue. It estimated a differential in Scotland's favour of 3.6 per cent in  the year 2000-01, which was three financial years ago. That competitive advantage no longer exists.

No, it does not, especially in relation to the universities. I will have to debate that point with the member when I have more time. As I said in intervening on Richard Baker, we must consider the total Government spend on research. For example, Scotland gets £2 million for defence research when our proportionate share should be closer to £40 million to £45 million. I ask the Executive to stop fiddling the figures and face up to the reality that we are not spending nearly enough on our education system.

I am prepared to give way to Jamie Stone.

Sorry about that, Jamie. There is no room for complacency. Every member present believes in creating a smart, successful Scotland, but we also need an ambitious Scotland. Our ambition should be not just to equal our neighbours south of the border, but to be among the best in Europe and the OECD countries. To achieve that, our universities and colleges will need real money. When we get the results of the spending review, I hope that we will see that money being made available.

Does the member accept that a narrow definition of funding has been used in comparisons of English and Scottish universities? For example, the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency spends nearly £450 million a year on research—£2 million of that comes to Scotland and the rest goes south of the border. When we bring in a wider definition of UK Government spend on research, we are diddled and fiddled right, left and centre.

The member makes a point about the spend in relation to the rest of the UK, but when we consider competitiveness we should surely compare ourselves with a much wider range of countries, particularly those in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. We spend about 20 per cent less per student than our OECD competitors. Does the member think that we should increase our spend to be able to compete with those countries?

Does the Executive now accept that there is no 20 per cent gap in spending per head between Scotland and the rest of the UK? There is not even a 3.6 per cent gap any longer, as that figure is three years out of date. Does the minister accept that there is now no competitive gap between north and south of the border in spend per head on higher education?

Has the minister ruled out a general public inquiry? If so, will any public inquiry be a local public inquiry? How wide would a local public inquiry's remit be?

I welcome the First Minister's statement—in particular, I welcome the inclusion of many of the proposals that I included in my paper on depopulation three years ago. I want to make two practical suggestions. One of our key objectives is to retain home-grown and foreign graduates in Scotland. Will the First Minister consider making greater use of the graduate placement programmes that are  currently run successfully by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise as a way of boosting the retention of graduates in Scotland and simultaneously helping small and medium-sized enterprises? Secondly, the First Minister said earlier that this was an initial statement and mentioned the problem of a relatively low birth rate. Will he address that issue and learn the lesson of countries such as Sweden and France that have attempted to boost their birth rate by introducing more comprehensive child care policies so that parents can mix career and family? That is something to which I am sure that everyone in the chamber would want to make their own contribution? [ Laughter. ]

I preface my remarks with some general comments. I do not believe that the modus operandi of the Parliament is anywhere near right. I hope that the reforms to question time that are being introduced by the Procedures Committee will be the start of wide-ranging reform of how we conduct our business. I  have three examples of where we still have got it badly wrong. The first is the way in which we schedule debates and the time that we allocate to important debates. Debates on the Scottish economy in the Scottish Parliament average 1 hour and 50 minutes. However, an average of 7 or 8 hours was allocated to debates on the Scottish economy at Westminster—big, bad Westminster—over the 20 years before this Parliament was set up. That does not reflect well on the Scottish Parliament and it does not fulfil what was meant to be our democratic ambition. Secondly—

Absolutely. Secondly, another general issue that I hope that the Procedures Committee will address is that of speaking times and the grip that the party hierarchies have on who speaks and in what order. I will address the specific issues—

I am thinking of the 35 Labour back benchers who are always struggling to get on to the list.

I think that it should be up to the Presiding Officer, but that is a debate for another day.

On FMQT—let's face it—John and Jack will never get the viewing figures of Des and Mel. The main issue for us is not whether 20,000 or 30,000 more people watch at 2.30 pm or 3 pm than watch at 12 pm. The maximum viewing figure for FMQT has never gone over about 50,000. FMQT—the highlight of the Scottish parliamentary week—could not, by any stretch of the imagination, be described as gripping the nation. It does not matter when it is held. Much of the reason for that is that, like question time, much of FMQT is boring to the average person watching television. That is the responsibility of front benchers and back benchers. There are some specifics about FMQT that the  committee has not addressed but which I believe, while perhaps not requiring a change to standing orders, nevertheless need to be addressed. A first-past-the-post member with a constituency interest is almost certain to be called to ask a question or a supplementary. List members are treated as if they do not have constituency interests. They have such interests, however. For example, anybody would agree—particularly Margaret Jamieson—that I have a particular interest in Kilmarnock prison. I also have a particular interest in the Greengairs issue, which is the subject of a question this afternoon. There are many issues to do with how supplementaries are selected and who is invited to ask them.

No. There are seven list members for each area, and the parties that have list members tend to have members who lead in particular constituencies. For example, it is reasonably well-known that I have taken the lead in recent years in most of the Lanarkshire constituencies, along with my colleague Linda Fabiani, while Michael Matheson has concentrated on, say, Falkirk. If that is known to the Presiding Officer, I would hope that it would be reflected in who is called to ask supplementaries. The idea that only first-past-the-post members have constituency interests is nonsense and does not properly reflect the make-up of the chamber. I have many other points to make but I do not have time to make them because, to get back to my second point, the arrangements for speaking times in the chamber are a nonsense.

I look forward to having a members' business debate on the future of the cheese industry at an early opportunity. I have a constituency interest in this matter: the Johnnie Walker plant is in Kilmarnock, which is part of the Central Scotland region. The chancellor's measure will have an adverse effect not only on distilleries but on the whole industry, including its bottling and distribution elements. I  totally agree with Brian Monteith and others that the chancellor is not attacking the basic problem, which is that whisky is overtaxed. For example, the tax on home-grown, home-made and home-distilled whisky is about 50 per cent higher than the tax on French, Italian or any other imported wine. It is incredible that we discriminate against our own industry which, as Jackie Baillie said, employs about 11,000 people directly and 30,000 indirectly in Scotland. I have no doubt that a substantial reduction in excise duty would generate additional revenue that would more than make up for any loss of revenue through alleged smuggling or excise fraud. Not only would it generate more revenue and sales in the UK, it would improve the case that we have been making for China, India and other countries to reduce the excise duty that they charge on Scottish whisky, which causes us major problems with our export market. As Jim Mather said, the knock-on effects of the measure will be substantial. It will have an impact on both the set-up costs of the industry and its running and maintenance costs. Increased costs mean that it is much more difficult to generate sales because as prices go up, the industry becomes less competitive and that, in turn, affects jobs and investment. Whatever our perspective, whether we are concerned about the promotion of whisky at home, the safeguarding of revenue, or the promotion of jobs, investment and exports, the measure is ill judged and ill considered. A clear message should go out from all parties in the chamber to ask the chancellor to change his mind and scrap this stupid idea.

I suggest that the minister read "A Public Enemy" by Ibsen, in which a character was in the same position as the minority of scientists and was proved to be right. Given that there is no conclusive evidence that MMR contributes to or causes autism, does the minister accept that there is no absolutely conclusive evidence that it does not? Is it not time for the Executive to take a more humane and flexible approach to the problem until there is conclusive evidence one way or the other?

I agree with the First Minister's policy of not rushing to judgment until we find out the real causes of the fire. However, at the right time, will he ask the care commission and the fire authorities to examine two other issues? First, in the guidelines that have been issued, is the minimum requirement for night cover in care homes still adequate? Secondly, as well as doing more to prevent fire, is there a need to do more during emergencies to evacuate residents who have limited mobility and who live on an upper floor?

I should first wish Christine May a speedy recovery. I always seem to follow her in these debates, although I must point out that I am in no way responsible for sticking the knife in—as she put it at the beginning of her speech. I also want to correct a comment that Christine May made at the end of her speech. We do not require a primary amendment to the Scotland Act 1998 to ensure that responsibility not just for the matters covered in the bill but for the whole field of energy is devolved to us; we merely require an order in council to change schedule 5 on reserved powers. The quicker that we secure that order in council to make energy a wholly devolved responsibility, the better. From what Shiona Baird said, I think that the Greens share that view. I remember the days of the South of Scotland Electricity Board and the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board. Both bodies had major advantages for the Scottish consumer, because they were what economists call vertically integrated organisations. In other words, they were responsible for transmitting electricity and distributing the energy that they created. Indeed, both even had retail functions. They represented an A to Z of electricity production, distribution and—if I can use a word that might have been common to Allan Wilson and his predecessors—exchange. I am concerned about BETTA, which will affect that situation and make us susceptible to changes in regulation that are dictated not by the interests of the Scottish electricity industry or the Scottish economy but by a bunch of bureaucrats in London. I want to concentrate on two of the objectives of the BETTA proposals, the first of which is, according to our briefing from the Scottish Parliament information centre, the establishment of "A common set of trading rules so that electricity can be traded freely across Great Britain".  Why do we need common rules for that to happen? After all, we trade freely in electricity with France. Moreover, we in Scotland send electricity to Northern Ireland without having to observe such trading rules. The idea that it all has to be controlled by a central bureaucracy in London in order to sustain a free market is nonsense. The free market that we are looking for is right across Europe.

Unfortunately, I do not have the time to give way.

I would love to engage the minister—indeed, I am sure that I will at some stage—but the Parliament's silly rules mean that I have only one minute left.

That is not your fault, Presiding Officer. I am sure that you would want me to go on a bit longer.

The second objective behind the BETTA proposals is the establishment of "A common set of rules for access to, and charging for the use of, the transmission network." As that takes no account of Scotland's interests, it is little surprise to find not only that Scottish Power criticised these daft proposals but that Scottish and Southern Energy criticised them heavily. Further, the Scottish Renewables Forum said that the proposals as they stand will damage the development of renewables rather than encourage it. Therefore, let us not endorse the bill and let us give the thumbs down in particular to BETTA.

I will, as always, stick to the time limit. I congratulate Fiona Hyslop on securing the debate. I utterly disagree with Bristow Muldoon, who said that the subject is not appropriate for a members' business debate. It is a very appropriate subject for a members' business debate because it not only encapsulates the concerns of two constituencies in Scotland but raises the fundamental principle of whether profit and prisons go together or whether they are difficult to reconcile. I speak in this debate because I already have a private prison in my constituency: Bowhouse in Kilmarnock. I say to those who are considering whether to set up private prisons—be it in Addiewell, Low Moss or anywhere else—that they should look at the experience of Bowhouse in Kilmarnock: it does not have a good track record. As well as the possibility of private prisons being established at Addiewell and Low Moss—or either—the possibility of a further extension of the facility at Bowhouse is under consideration. I will make my points as quickly as I can. First, I do not believe that profitability can be reconciled  with the proper running of prisons. Why is Bowhouse cheaper to run? The main reason is that it has cut back on staffing. The ratio of staff to prisoners in Bowhouse is lamentably low. People who are recruited are young folk who are often desperate for a job and have no experience in the prison service. The latest turnover figures, which can be found in the HM prisons inspectorate for Scotland report of August last year, indicate an 18.5 per cent turnover of staff in Bowhouse prison in Kilmarnock every year. That is way above the average for the past two years. Morale among the staff is rock bottom, not least because they are among the lowest-paid prison staff in the United Kingdom. Bowhouse prison is able to make a profit because it is run on the cheap. There is almost total reliance on technology, such as closed-circuit television cameras. When I visited Bowhouse about 18 months ago, I went to the metalwork room. One person was in charge of the room and there were 20 inmates. Obviously, in a metalwork room, the inmates have access to heavy kit and heavy equipment. There was a rotating camera, which could not see into every corner. I said to the governor that it was only a matter of time before a serious incident would take place. I regret to say that within 10 days of that visit a very serious incident took place: one prisoner assaulted another. Profits and prisons do not go together. As for accountability, I am fed up to the back teeth—as are other members—of putting questions about Bowhouse to ministers and receiving the reply that it is not their business and that I should write to Tony Cameron, the head of the SPS. And of the fact that when I write to Tony Cameron, he replies, "That information is private and commercially confidential, so we cannot tell you." All that I ask for is basic, raw information that we can get on every other prison in the country. Not only is Bowhouse profitable for a small number of people and unprofitable for society, it is run like a secret society. I say to the folk in West Lothian and Low Moss that they should oppose any proposal for a private prison at every opportunity as it is the worst thing that can happen to their communities.

When the First Minister talks to the Secretary of State for Scotland, will he also raise the issue of yesterday's decision in Brussels in respect of state-aid rules as they affect Ryanair's flights into Charleroi airport in Brussels? In particular, will he look at the implications of that ruling for low-cost flights into and out of Scotland, which are essential to the future of Scottish tourism? Will he hold appropriate discussions with the European Commission and the low-cost airlines to ensure that there is no danger to the expansion of low-cost airlines' activity in Scotland?

As usual, the Executive's motion is very self-congratulatory. However, I want to concentrate initially on the result of the Education Department's evaluation of a particular set of higher still reforms, which were built on the original recommendations of the Howie committee. The summary report, which I think was published last month, evaluates those reforms. I will quote objectively from the summary report—not in the spirit of trying to score party-political points, but in the hope that when the minister sums up he will tell us what he intends to do about the summary report's conclusions and findings and, indeed, when he will publish the full report. The report raises a disturbing number of issues and I intend to quote extensively from it. On literacy, the summary report states: "Comments received from employers, HE admissions staff, careers guidance staff and training providers suggested that literacy standards among school leavers were, in many cases, inadequate for either the world of work or Higher Education study." Certainly, when the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee—of which I was convener—conducted an inquiry into lifelong learning, the literacy levels of school leavers came up as an issue in the evidence that we received. Only last week, it was confirmed to me that the University of Strathclyde sometimes has to run remedial classes in literacy for students who are coming to study at its modern languages department. That is a wholly unacceptable position for a modern country to be in. I suggest that the issue requires the minister's urgent attention and that he should consult not only the education authorities but the universities and colleges.

I accept that more people are getting qualifications, but if our universities—I think that the University of Strathclyde is not the only one—are having to run remedial courses for intake students, we have a serious problem that must be addressed. The problem might be to do with the qualifications or the teaching or the assessment, but, whatever the reason, as a modern country that wants to be smart and successful we need to address the situation, which is unacceptable.  The summary report has concerns about the implementation of the higher still reforms and the impact of continuous assessment. In the department's own study, quite a number of people made this assessment: "The new qualifications are too complicated, (and rely on) too much use of continuous assessment. Students require time to absorb information so that it is retained for later studies." There was also major concern about composite classes, because there was a clear perception that such classes compromise standards. Indeed, the improvements in standards that were expected from the reforms have not been realised. The complexity of the assessment system was another issue. Overall, Howie's aim of easy-to-understand and easy-to-use assessment procedures has clearly not been met according to those who are at the front end. Minister, read the report. Publish the full report. Do not put it on the shelf. The minister must not congratulate himself until the job is done. It is clear from the summary report that, as far as the higher still reforms are concerned, there is still a big job to do.

I hope that the First Minister makes a better speech in Brussels this year than he did at the Burns supper that I attended in Glasgow last year. Will the minister guarantee that the opportunity that will arise in 2009 will be used to promote Ayrshire internationally? In addition, will he consider the possibility of renaming Prestwick airport as the Rabbie Burns airport?

I will mention two or three things that are growing into myths in Scotland before I go on to deal with the substantive issue. First, the Tories have an absolute cheek to say that they will not vote on behalf of Scotland when, for 18 years, they used their English majority to overrule every one of Scotland's interests and the Scottish people's democratic wishes.

I do not have time, unfortunately.  The second myth is the Labour-Liberal Democrat myth that tuition fees have been abolished. Sam Galbraith—God bless him, the only honest Labour politician of recent years—gave the game away the other night when he stated clearly that it was a myth in the minds, not the brains, of the Liberal Democrats that tuition fees had been abolished. How can they be abolished when, after students graduate, they have to pay them back? By definition, fees have to exist to be paid back.

Mike Rumbles has just proved Sam Galbraith right. The third myth, which was reiterated by Mike Watson, who has not done his research, is that there is a 20 per cent differential in our favour at the moment between the spend on universities south and north of the border. All the objective research shows that the differential is nearer 3 per cent than 20 per cent.

George Lyon's numeracy is as good as his literacy. We were talking about pounds per head, which totally defies the nonsense that he has just uttered. I will try to do something that neither the Tory speakers, Liberal Democrat speakers nor Labour speakers have done: deal with the fundamental issues. First, we need to ensure that our universities are second to none not only in the UK and Europe but, as Fiona Hyslop said, worldwide. We cannot create a smart, successful Scotland without heavy investment in our universities—the structure and the students. I hope that we are all agreed on that point. The second fundamental issue is that, to achieve that objective, we must recognise that Scotland's universities are grossly underfunded. Even if we were not having the debate about top-up fees south of the border, we would still face the need for additional funding for our universities. As I have only a few seconds left, I will deal with the third point. When the Cubie report was published, the SNP proposed a comprehensive  programme for the funding of our universities; we called it Cubie plus. The Executive did not implement the Cubie report—it implemented only part of it—but had it implemented the report in full plus the additional measures that the SNP suggested, we would not be in this situation today. I tell the Executive members to waken up, forget the cheap jibes and do something for Scotland's universities.

Obviously, there is broad consensus about the need to develop renewable energy. I say sincerely to Christine May that it is a pity that the debate has been marred by the press release that was issued earlier today. I remember that when she spoke in a previous debate, she said that she was against deceit and duplicity in politics. It would be a great tragedy for the Parliament if members' business debates were allowed to descend into an exchange of cheap jibes. In this case, many of the jibes were wholly inaccurate. I recognise that Christine May is a new member and I say to her that this incident is unfortunate. Perhaps the press release should have been headed, "Dear Jack, will you gie us a job the next time that you have a reshuffle?"

Sorry, I do not have time. I am sure that Jack will gie you a job.

Jamie Stone is guaranteed to get a job, especially after getting gag of the week. I hope that I get injury time for this, by the way.

The earliest form of renewable energy in Scotland was, of course, hydro power. The motion is not about renewable energy per se, but about its economic potential. The best example of huge economic potential coming from renewable energy is the development of the hydro-electric industry in the Highlands and Islands in the 1940s under the direction of Tom Johnston. The important lesson to be learned from the development of hydro power is not just the fact that an enormous number of jobs were gained during the construction period, when the dams were built, the pylons laid and the connections made.

The establishment of hydro-electric power also allowed the Highlands and Islands of Scotland to be developed economically and it attracted other industries that are totally unrelated to renewable energy. We must consider how we can do the same with whatever form of renewable energy we develop in future.  There are three essential ingredients for success. First, there must be a steady flow of projects to attract manufacturing activity. Without that, we will not be able to get the investment that we need in the downstream activity. Secondly, the economic development agencies must play a major role—and yes, subsidy is required at that stage. Subsidy is often required in new industries, so let us give subsidies to get the industry off the ground. The final ingredient is critical mass. There must be enough of any form of renewable energy for us to realise its economic potential. Finally, Presiding Officer, can I say—

We are back to this three-minute speech stuff, which is one of the reasons why—

—this Parliament's reputation out there is becoming so poor.

It is clear from the debate so far that there is broad consensus among members of all parties on the unacceptability—as David Davidson put it—of antisocial behaviour against emergency workers. We are all united in our recognition of the need to do something fairly radical and positive to deal with the problem; I think that we are also united on the need to send out a clear signal that the Parliament will tackle such issues vigorously and seriously. However, there are two or three issues that need to be emphasised. As the consultation paper makes clear, there will be major difficulties in crafting the proposed legislation. The paper refers specifically to how we define an emergency worker and an emergency situation; I will comment on that in a minute. There is also an issue around the profile of the offender. I will give two examples of that, both of which relate to a hospital accident and emergency department on a Saturday night. As Margaret Jamieson pointed out to me recently after one of her visits to Crosshouse hospital, the first thing that is noticeable is that, very often, the people who are causing the trouble are not necessarily those who have come to be attended to, but those who are in attendance with them. Sometimes, particularly after a good drink on a Saturday night during which someone has been injured—typically, in Kilmarnock and various other places, in a fight—it is not just the person who has been cut, stabbed or injured and one other person who go to the hospital; the trip to accident and emergency becomes an evening out. There tends to be most trouble when there is a crowd, particularly when drink has been involved, and yet it is probably difficult to pick out one person as the troublemaker from all those people. On prevention in accident and emergency departments, we need to consider measures such as having enforceable rules about who is admitted to the hospital. In general, the only people who need to be there are those who require medical attention and one or at the most two other people to lend them moral support and to ensure that they get home okay. We need to consider such matters, because although legislation is undoubtedly required, I suspect that it will not of itself be enough to tackle the problem. For my second example about the offender's profile, I will refer again to the accident and emergency department on a typical Saturday night. Sometimes the offender does not match Johann Lamont's description, although I accept that, nine times out of 10, the people who will fall foul of the proposed legislation will have form and a track record of such behaviour at any time of day and in any condition, with or without drink or  drugs.

We all agree on the need to tackle antisocial behaviour. The argument is about whether all the provisions in the bill are the best options. We will continue to have that debate about the bill, but there is no doubt that we are all united on the need to deal with antisocial behaviour. Sometimes the offender does not fit the typical profile—the person does not have form or a record and is not normally aggressive. The offender could be extremely upset because of the circumstances in which they find themselves, or they could be a disturbed person—David Davidson mentioned that—who cannot help or control their behaviour. In crafting the legislation, we must be humanitarian. We must acknowledge that, sometimes, the offender does not engage compulsively in antisocial behaviour. All those issues must be addressed. My final point is about resources, which have been mentioned by others. We can pass as much legislation as we like, but whether it is the dispersal provision in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill or the proposed legislation to protect emergency workers, it will not be implementable if it is not backed by the necessary resources, properly deployed, in the police service, social work services and other support services. The proposed legislation is part of the jigsaw, but it is not the total answer. A realistic and ambitious package is required to deal with a severe problem in almost every part of Scotland, whether it is rural or urban or is in the north, the south or anywhere else.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Sector Skills Development Agency about the establishment of skills councils covering Scotland. (S2O-1050)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the concern that has been expressed about the delay in the establishment of many of those councils. How many sector skills councils covering Scotland have now been set up compared to the target number to be set up? What budget will the Scottish Executive set aside in this financial year to fund sector skills councils in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive's financial services strategy group will be asked to report on the future of both Abbey National operations in Scotland and the potential consequences of demutualisation of Standard Life for the Scottish economy. (S2F-538)

While we recognise that the financial services sector is still growing at 5 per cent a year in Scotland, the announcements of the past 48 hours give cause for concern. Will the First Minister seek urgent meetings, first with Abbey National, particularly in respect of the threat of the transfer of £28 billion of asset management to State Street of Boston, which would have a damaging effect on Scottish financial services, and secondly with Standard Life and the Financial Services Authority, in respect of the possible demutualisation and its impact? Will he, along with the Secretary of State for Scotland, consider invoking section 18 of the Industry Act 1975, if that becomes necessary?

First of all, I want to join in the chorus of appreciation to Susan Deacon for securing this afternoon's debate and for her eloquent introductory speech. The fact that we have cross-party support for saving the horse racing industry in Scotland is very encouraging. Indeed, it was a treat to hear a Tory stand up and defend the need for continued regulation to save one of our industries. I have no doubt that that is the end of John Scott's career in the Tory party, but it was worth while. At this point, I must declare an interest. I live in Ayr and one of the constituencies that I cover as a list member is Hamilton North and Bellshill. The courses in both those areas are equally supreme in the service that they provide to Scotland. John Scott and Michael McMahon have already referred to the investment that is being made in those two racecourses and Susan Deacon  mentioned the investment that is being made in others. At this stage, it would be wholly inappropriate for any Government organisation to do anything that would endanger the level and quality of investment that is being made in this industry north and south of the border. If we include today's House of Commons debate, this members' business debate is the third on this issue since the Office of Fair Trading's stupid report and recommendation. The House of Commons also debated the matter on 18 September 2003 and, as I understand it from that debate, that House very much shares our opinion that the Office of Fair Trading's report and recommendation should be consigned to the dustbin. This is not the first time that we have had problems with the Office of Fair Trading. This time last year, we were talking about the need to defend our pharmacies against its recommendations. We eventually won that battle; we must win this battle too. Members have already mentioned the economic impact report of the horse racing industry in Scotland. As the figures have already been quoted, I will not repeat them—after all, I received the same briefing as everyone else—but I should point out that the issue does not just centre on the economic impact of this recommendation. Horse racing is as much a social and cultural activity as it is an industry. It might not be as highfalutin' as Scottish Opera or Scottish Ballet, but it is much more culturally important to those of us from a working-class background than those other aspects of our cultural life, important as they are. A day at the races is not just for punters, it is a family affair. For many families, it is a day out for maw, paw and the weans. It would be a great tragedy if we had to accept the recommendations of the OFT—or the office of foolish trading—and destroy a good industry that is expanding in Scotland. As a result, I hope that the minister will join us in sending a loud and clear message to his colleagues in the UK Government that, as far as Scotland is concerned, the OFT's recommendation is wholly unacceptable and that we want it to be consigned to the dustbin. In fact, if I was going to make a bet now, I would bet that the minister will agree to that and join us in putting the pressure on down south to ensure that that happens.

I welcome the First Minister's intention to modernise the civil service. I hope that one side benefit of that will be real answers to parliamentary questions rather than the Sir Humphrey answers that have become the Executive's habit. Does he agree with his Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services, Tavish Scott, who wrote in Holyrood magazine in  October that the time had come to make the civil service a devolved matter for Scotland and that Scotland should have its own civil service whose loyalty was to the Scottish Parliament and the Executive, rather than ministers in Whitehall?

rose—

I utterly agree with David Davidson. If we look back at the Finance Committee's recommendations over the past four or five years, we see that very few of them have been implemented. As Tavish Scott has recognised previously, one of the problems with devolution is that we do not control the civil service. The civil service controls ministers, and the resistance from the civil service to many of those recommendations is the reason why nothing happens.

Monteith—that is his name.

Where in Scotland is the £2 billion spent that is allocated against Scotland for defence? It is not spent in Scotland. Indeed, a fair chunk of it now is spent in Iraq.

In that analysis, is not Ted Brocklebank saying that the Tories failed, Labour failed and the Lib Dem-Labour coalition is failing? Is not the common denominator the fact that the economy has been, and is being, run from  London? Until we are run from Edinburgh, we will continue to fail, irrespective of which Tories are in power.

I share Christine May's aspiration that she should make a better speech next year. She started by saying that she had looked forward to the debate with excitement. It is well seen that she is a new member, because she is the only member who would look forward with excitement to a debate that Des McNulty started.

To be fair to Des McNulty, ever since Jack McConnell sacked him as a minister, he has been somewhat animated—so much so that I began to think last week that he was looking for a job with Disney as Mickey Mouse. Christine Grahame—sorry, I mean Christine May: they are two very able ladies. Christine May said that in financial figures, she hated deceit and duplicity, which she thinks are disgraceful. I agree with her. I say to her that if she is looking for deceit, fiddled figures and duplicity, she should read the publication that the Scottish Executive produced last week called "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland 2001-02". That document contains a litany of fiddled figures, lies, damned lies and not many statistics.

I would be absolutely delighted and I will give more than two examples. When the identifiable public expenditure per head in Scotland is compared with that for the rest of the United Kingdom, the premise is that we are supposed to be subsidy junkies. Then one looks at the detail of the figures. The Executive gives a figure for the revenue that was raised in Scotland. When one comes to the expenditure figures, however, the Executive does not give the figure for the money that was spent in Scotland, but the figure that was allocated by Treasury civil servants for the Treasury ledger charge against Scotland. When one takes away that fiddled figure and adds in North sea oil—according to these fiddled figures, none of the oil belongs to Scotland—one does not get a deficit of £8 billion, but a surplus of £5 billion for Scotland.  I say to Christine May and her unionist comrades on the Liberal, Labour and Tory benches—for it was Ian Lang who started the annual fiddle—that they should look at the figures. If they do so, they will realise that there is no basis for suggesting that we are the subsidy junkies of the UK. Let me take the figure for the non-identifiable expenditure, which was the part of the equation that was used to reach that conclusion. The expenditure is non-identifiable because, if the Executive were to identify it, that would destroy its argument. On defence expenditure, one has to use the figures for 2001-02, as they are the latest year for which figures are available for Scotland. Is that because UK Government civil servants cannot count or because it takes them an extra year to fiddle the figures for Scotland? If one looks at the defence figures, over £2 billion is allocated for Scotland. Where is the money spent? It is not spent in Scotland. If one looks at the Defence Research Agency's budget, we do not get 10 per cent or 8.6 per cent of its expenditure; we get less than 1 per cent. If we in Scotland had our fair share of the Defence Research Agency's spend, that would almost double the total amount that was paid annually into our universities and similar organisations for their research budgets. Where is the duplicity? It is on the Liberal-Labour benches here and on the Labour benches in London. Far from being subsidy junkies, we are being robbed blind as a result of being part of the union. If we take into account the multiplier effect and the knock-on benefit on jobs and additional revenue, far from being a poor nation, we would be a relatively rich nation; far from being a nation with high unemployment, we could have much lower unemployment; and far from being a nation in poverty, we could be a nation without poverty. I say to Christine May that, between now and next year's debate, she should go away and dae her homework. She should check out her figures and come back and tell the chamber the truth. If she does that, I am sure that she will agree with me.

I have two quick questions. First, why does the Executive allow the schools fund allocation to councils to be used to underpin the annual private finance initiative charge but not to fund prudential borrowing? Why has that distinction been made? Secondly, on page 175 of the draft budget document for 2004-05, under the heading "Statement of priorities", the minister says that his first priority will be to maximise "the benefit for Scotland of the First Minister's chairmanship of the group of EU regions with legislative power (REG-LEG)". How much money will we put into Regleg and what benefits will Scotland receive?

I accept Brian Monteith's criticism of the Holyrood cost, but is it not a fact that the poll tax cost the Scottish taxpayer twice or three times as much as even the Holyrood fiasco? And will he apologise for it?

George Lyon gives examples from devolved areas but, in defence research, Scotland receives only 1 per cent of current expenditure. If we had fiscal autonomy, we would have far more research jobs in Scotland in the defence sector alone. That is not to mention the £400 million—our share of the nonsense in Iraq—that we could have saved.

Did the member note what Elaine Murray said about waiting 100 years for any change? Obviously, Labour's new slogan is "Free by 3003".

That is all very interesting, but will the member say whether he agrees with Mr Monteith and Mr Murdo Fraser that we should have full fiscal freedom, or with his leader, David McLetchie, who wants a royal commission to take minutes and waste years?

In supporting the motion, I want to make two basic points, the first of which is the importance of the expansion of the European Union. Like Nicola Sturgeon, I welcome the expansion of the EU and I hope that it will continue to expand over the years. However, let us not kid ourselves—the expansion has a downside for Scotland. In our manufacturing industry, for example, we have already seen companies move their manufacturing capacity abroad. Volvo has moved capacity from Ayrshire to Poland simply because of the incentives that it can get there, as well as the cheaper labour rates.

Unfortunately, I do not have time. There have been other cases in which manufacturing capacity has already been moved to parts of eastern Europe. We are also going to find it very difficult to compete with parts of eastern Europe on direct investment. Once they are inside the EU, they will be allowed to offer far greater incentives than those that we will be able to offer. The downside to expansion could be important for Scotland. That is why it is important to have every possible Scottish voice at every level inside the EU—to protect Scotland's interests, if nothing else. My second point is more substantial; it concerns constitutional issues in Europe. Essentially, the EU recognises three tiers of government: state, nation and region. As far as representation in the European Parliament is concerned, a combination of population and constitutional status determines how many MEPs represent each member country and the parts within each member country. The UK Government should make a distinction between a nation within a state, such as Scotland, and an electoral region. We have regions in Scotland; we call ourselves a nation, not a region. Obviously, I look forward to the day when we can call ourselves a nation state, but at the moment we are only a nation within a state. It is a fact of life that, if we were a member state, we would have 13 or 14 members of the European Parliament. However, as we are not a member  state but a nation within a member state, we have a special status that is above and beyond that of a mere electoral region within the member state of one of the other nations. What Nicola Sturgeon is asking for is not just about a numbers game but a matter of principle. The principle is that nations within member states should be recognised as such. They should not be regarded as merely another electoral region. Therefore, they should not get just proportional representation in relation to population. As happens at the European level itself, representation should be a combination of population and constitutional status. That is why, in addition to the numbers game, it is important that we ensure that we maintain eight representatives, rather than have only seven. That will be a step on the way to the day when we can be fully represented with 13 MEPs as a member state within the European Union. I am sure that, given his position on the common fisheries policy, the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services might one day agree with us on that as well.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As a result of Mr McNulty's behaviour, the final SNP speaker on the list, Brian Adam, was unable to speak. Is it not therefore fair that the summing-up speech from the Labour party should be scrubbed in favour of Brian Adam's speech?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Members can read his website.

I could not agree more with John Home Robertson on the need for more time for particular debates. Does he agree that the first thing to do is to stop having so many debates on peripheral subjects and to concentrate on the bread-and-butter issues that people in Scotland worry about?

As usual, I will speak as a non-grandstander. I want to take members back to 1999. I remember the Parliament's first day, the expectations surrounding the Parliament and the anticipation of people in the streets outside about what the Parliament would deliver. A feeling of disappointment and disillusionment will be found among some in the streets now, not just as a result of the fiasco over the Holyrood building but because there is a general feeling among the public that we have not delivered according to expectations. I am a nationalist and obviously believe that the main reason for that disillusionment is that too many powers are reserved to Westminster and that the Scottish Parliament does not have real power—particularly in respect of economic affairs—that allows us to deliver. However, I will park that issue today and concentrate on another area in which we have not lived up to the principles and ambitions of the CSG and all those people who supported those principles. I will deal with some issues that have become noticeable since the last election—to be fair to the previous Procedures Committee, perhaps these issues were not as prevalent in the previous session as they are in this session. The first issue is the Parliament's agenda. More than all the technical procedures, it is the Parliament's agenda to which people out there pay attention. We hardly debate the big issues that we should debate, such as the economy, the European Union constitution and many other big issues. If we do, we squeeze the debate into an hour and a half or two hours. We appear to allocate more time to peripheral issues than we do to big issues. Many issues that appear on our agenda are more akin to those that appear on the agenda of a coonty cooncil or a parliamentary committee than those that should appear on the agenda of a parliamentary chamber.

I will come to that issue. The balance should be revisited, but the bureau—and in particular the Executive, which dominates the bureau—has a special responsibility. The First Minister gave an interview last week in which he said that he wanted the Parliament's reputation to grow. However, since the election, the Parliament's agenda has been dumbed down. When the Parliament was set up, many people said that they were worried that it would be another Strathclyde Regional Council. There are days in which we do not even reach its standard in the substance of chamber debates.

That was an exceptionally helpful intervention. Des McNulty must have been up all night thinking about it, as usual. I have to say that there were exceptions in Strathclyde Regional Council. We need to consider the Parliament's agenda. I will give an example. The manufacturing sector in Scotland is in deep trouble. I disagree with the Executive about the reasons for that and about how we should solve the problem, but we should devote much more time to the crisis in our economy. We could go through many sectors—such as transport, health and education—in which there are major issues to confront, but those issues are hardly ever debated in the chamber. If they are debated, not enough time is allocated. Why should a day and a half not be devoted to the Scottish economy? Instead of squeezing in speeches even to a daft six minutes, members could be given time to put forward an argument and articulate a case. Recently, I read Iain Macleod's biography. In his maiden speech in the House of Commons, he spoke for an hour and a half. Members will be glad to hear that that is not one of my ambitions in this chamber.

I thank the Presiding Officer for his timing. Surely to goodness we can raise our level, lift our horizon and unchain ourselves from some of the silly rules that are being used to gag us. There should be a better balance between the front benches and the back benches. With all due respect to our Presiding Officers, who are three excellent people, the fact of life is that David Steel sold the jerseys to the party bosses right at the beginning of the Parliament. I say to our new Presiding Officers that they should take back the reins of powers. They should not let the party  bosses determine who speaks, when they speak and for how long they speak. If they care about it, they should free up the Parliament and make it worthy of being a truly national Parliament.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that, as far the speaking times in debates are concerned, back benchers make up about 75 per cent of the membership of Parliament, but usually receive less than 50 per cent of the debating time?

I have three points to make. I welcome the fact that there has been a reduction of approximately 50 per cent in fuel poverty during the past seven years. Is it not now time to revisit the target of eliminating fuel poverty by 2016? If we have reduced the figure by 50 per cent during the past seven years, why can we not reduce it by the remaining 50 per cent during the next seven years? Instead of a target of  eliminating fuel poverty by 2016, which suggests a slowing down in the rate of activity, we should keep up the present pressure and try to eliminate it altogether by 2010. This is one of those rare occasions when moving the goalposts of Government targets would receive approval from members throughout the chamber. I ask the minister to think about that seriously. If, by 2010, we still had an outstanding problem such as the one that Tricia Marwick suggested, we could deal with residual issues after that time. Alternatively, we could deal with some of those issues now, but there is a case for revisiting the target in the light of the progress that has been made. Secondly, I encourage the minister to take an energetic and robust attitude to the energy companies who are charging customers in Scotland up to 12 per cent more for their power supply than they charge south of the border. That is unacceptable, and what makes it more unacceptable is that the additional profit that is generated by customers in Scotland is being used to cross-subsidise customers south of the border and to engage in marketing activity.

Unfortunately I have only four minutes. However, Jeremy Purvis needs the practice.

If we were independent, we would be in charge of our own energy supplies. In any case, an independent government would not have allowed a situation to arise in which the Scottish people in energy-rich Scotland were paying 12 per cent more than those in energy-poor England for their energy. We certainly would not be cross-subsidising the entry by Scottish Power, and the other Scottish energy companies, into new markets south of the border. What makes the situation particularly unacceptable is the fact that, on top of that 12 per cent differential, Scotland has a far colder and wetter climate. As I said, everyone—with the possible exception of Jeremy Purvis—will be behind the minister if she takes a robust line with the regulator and the companies to address that issue. I will make my final point in general terms, because I do not have any more time. I should first  say that, unlike Nanette Milne, Cathie Craigie and other members, I was not around in the 1940s to sit around the fire—I had to wait until the 1960s to do that. My final point is that we must not ignore the income side of this matter. Although the issue is by and large not a devolved responsibility, it is time that we sent a clear message to the Westminster Government that people still suffer from fuel poverty because their incomes are still too low. I ask the minister to address that issue as well as the others that I have mentioned.

Is financial security and governance part of the remit of the current Executive review of college governance? Will a review of the funding of higher education students in the college sector be included?

Does the member agree that, when we consider the level of poverty and deprivation throughout Europe, the countries that are the richest and have least  poverty are the small economies of Scandinavia, such as Denmark and Norway, and countries that are independent and able to pursue policies that suit them?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will now review its policy of not allowing NHS Scotland to provide single vaccinations for measles, mumps and rubella. (S2F-319)

I draw the First Minister's attention to Executive figures that came out last week. They show a 27 per cent increase in the incidence of mumps, a 22 per cent increase in rubella and an 18 per cent increase in measles. At the same time, there has been a 3 per cent drop in vaccinations. As long as some parents believe that there is a possible connection between MMR and autism, the figures will continue to show that trend. We should recognise that fact. Rather than take the risk of causing an outbreak or epidemic of measles, mumps or rubella, would it not be safer, as well as potentially more cost-effective, to offer parents the possibility of single vaccinations for their children?

I thank the minister for his comments on micro-credit. Where is the money that has been  earmarked being spent? We know where it is being spent geographically, but what is it being spent on?

The purpose of the debate is to make a positive contribution to and suggestions on enterprise development in Scotland, an area with which I have been involved for more than 20 years—ever  since I was 15. [ Laughter. ] I notice that the minister was quick on the uptake there. I point out two things to the minister and to the chamber. First, a group of people in Scotland has been promoting enterprise education for the past 30 years and I have been trying to persuade Scottish Enterprise and the wider enterprise network to provide support to that group so that it can participate in the International Society for Business Education. Last year, I attended the society's conference in Frankfurt, at which representatives from more than 70 countries participated to share the experience of enterprise education in places as diverse as France, Poland, America, Canada and Australia. The conference was extremely useful and I ask the minister to look into how that organisation can be developed and supported in Scotland. Secondly, I draw the chamber's attention—and the attention of the two new members of the Enterprise and Culture Committee in particular—to the Official Report of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's meeting on 18 March this year. In this chamber, we debated the schools enterprise programme for three hours with young entrepreneurs from schools, Tom Hunter, Chris van der Kuyl and two entrepreneurs who had received support from the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. I will make three points about that meeting, of which I suggest that members read the Official Report , because it makes for good reading on the subject. The major point that was made by the people from the schools, as well as by Tom Hunter and Chris van der Kuyl, related to the need for some limited form of micro-credit for the businesses that are set up in schools. I suggest that the minister considers the idea. One of the key features of any successful entrepreneur is the ability to manage real money. The minister did not outline in detail exactly what the money that he has committed to enterprise education is being spent on. It would be useful to hear that information in the wind-up speech from Peter Peacock—although I have never heard a speech from Peter Peacock that was not a wind-up. My second point relates to the need for matching funding, which Mike Watson mentioned. I asked Chris van der Kuyl and Tom Hunter whether they could follow the example of the PSYBT. I speak as the founding executive director of the PSYBT, which combined the Prince's Youth Business Trust and the EFY scheme, which was not called after Effie from Ayrshire, but stood for Enterprise Funds for Youth. Those two programmes were merged way back in 1988 to form the PSYBT. It so happened that the 40 th birthday of the Prince of Wales—I know that this  will appeal to the Scottish Socialist Party—fell in that year. We set a target of raising £40 million across the United Kingdom. Lord Young, who was the minister with responsibility for enterprise at the time, said that if we raised £40 million from the private sector he would match it pound for pound from the public sector and we ended up with a fund of £80 million across the UK. That was a revolving fund for investment in young people's new businesses. If I may say so—and I do not say it because the trust was set up by me—the PSYBT has been one of the most successful enterprise development agencies in the whole of the UK.

I shall take both interventions.

I am coming to that.

If Mike Watson reads the Official Report  of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee meeting on 18 March 2003, he will see that I asked Tom Hunter and Chris van der Kuyl whether, if the Executive put money into the programme, they could guarantee that the private sector would match it pound for pound. They gave a commitment that it would, as is recorded in the Official Report . I suggest that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning goes back to Tom Hunter and Chris van der Kuyl, and to others in the entrepreneurial exchange and elsewhere, to set them the challenge of matching pound for pound not only the £5 million that is being spent this year but the £40 million that is being spent over the next three years. My final comment is about what the Green party has said. I have to confess that, when it comes to economics, I have always regarded the Greens as being wired to the moon. That was confirmed this morning, because to say that there should be no  private money in the programme is utter nonsense. That is telling Tom Hunter to go and fish with his money and not to invest in the programme. That would be absolute madness of the first order.

Will the member take an intervention?

Mike Rumbles is in favour.

The first thing that I want to do is pay tribute to the work of the firefighters in Scotland. Far too often, we hear public service workers being castigated for being inefficient, for not caring about their job and for not doing as they are told. Some of the comments made earlier this year during the firefighters' dispute were derogatory to say the least and totally unacceptable. Today, we should make an unequivocal statement as a Parliament that we respect the work that firefighters do. Very few people in either the private or the public sector go to work every day knowing that they may need to put their lives or their own safety at risk in order to save others. It is not just about that aspect of the job; it is about horrific scenes that have a lasting impact on many of our firefighters and that no one in the chamber will ever experience. I hope that the minister will keep all that in mind when she is preparing the legislation and that she will seriously consider Margaret Smith's proposal that we build into the proposed fire bill or the antisocial behaviour bill specific requirements for the safety of fire crews. The increasing problem of attacks on fire crews is unacceptable in any civilised society.  Many of the points in the consultation document have been welcomed in the chamber as well as by the FBU and others. However, the document raises many questions that the minister must answer. First, there is the question of resources. If we are going to build in additional statutory duties, will there be additional statutory resources to make sure that the modernised fire service can carry out those statutory duties? On page 22 of the document, section 4.12 refers to a consultants' report that indicates that savings of £3 million could be made in procurement. How are those savings to be achieved? If those savings are achieved, will that £3 million go back to the Treasury or will it be reinvested in front-line fire services? We need answers to those questions. The minister referred to her desire to revisit the issue of the number of brigades in Scotland. I agree with Christine May that eight brigades in Scotland is probably the right amount. Why is the minister suddenly revisiting that question? Is it because she has been telt tae revisit it by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister—because they are doing it in England, the Executive has tae dae whit it is telt in Scotland. If that is not the reason, what are the criteria—

The minister can put her point into her speech. She would not let me in and I do not have time. She had 12 minutes and I have only six. What criteria is the minister using? Why has the minister made such a sudden decision if she is not taking orders from down south? The document refers to the need for new negotiating machinery.

I will take an intervention from a back bencher.

No, I do not agree. The document also raises the question of the need for new types of negotiating machinery, albeit at UK level. However, it does not give the Scottish Executive's view on the required changes to the negotiating machinery and the impact that such changes would have. There are many unanswered questions about  the integrated risk management proposals. Karen Gillon confused the difference between urban and rural quality of service with the separate issue of the need for minimal requirement of service. Why do we not build in minimal requirement to the new risk assessments?

I am in my final minute. I am sorry because Karen Gillon always asks a good question and I always give a better answer. We are told that the closure of stations will be a local decision. Will there be a local appeals procedure? Will there be a chance to revisit any unilateral and wrong decision that has been made by a chief fire officer? Finally, no details have been provided on the charging policy; is that the thin end of the privatisation wedge? If the minister is looking for support, she should give us answers to those vital questions.

rose—

Will the minister give way?

No significance should be read into the fact that I am on the front bench. [ Laughter. ]

Or into the fact that no one is behind me.

Yes, and Linda is leaving too—to go, I think, to Inverness. I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing the debate on this important subject. I too declare an interest: prior to becoming my secretary 10 years ago, my wife was a store detective for Boots and Woolworths. She has had direct experience of the kind of activity that goes on. The risk of violence is much greater in certain  areas, but it is also much greater in certain types of shops. Companies such as Boots have pharmacies on their premises and, unfortunately, where there is a pharmacy, there is a great tendency for people—especially people who are dependent on drugs—to go in and, if they do not get exactly what they are looking for, to threaten staff or to go even further. As Cathy Peattie pointed out, such people can threaten other customers as well. It is a growing problem and it will require special attention if it is to be dealt with properly. There are certain times of the week at which people are most at risk; for example, on a Friday or Saturday night. Somebody who works in a fish and chip shop, a fast-food takeaway or an all-night grocery shop or bakery is particularly at risk. As Donald Gorrie said, people sometimes come in who are out of their skulls, which is when the violent side of their nature takes over. Often those people are perfectly normal at every other time of the week, but if they have one too many it can tip the balance and the worst side of their character comes out. Very often the people who are on the receiving end are the shop assistants who work late at night, sometimes in extremely frightening circumstances. I live in Ayr and can think of particular parts of the town where on a Saturday night or early Sunday morning it is frightening to walk, never mind to work in a shop where groups of youngsters come in and exhibit threatening behaviour. There is no easy answer. As Donald Gorrie said, drug and alcohol abuse, which were mentioned in a debate earlier today, are clearly major issues to be addressed. Very often, where there is violence, there is drug or alcohol abuse. It is ironic that there is probably more alcohol abuse involved, because people who engage in drug taking and dealing in illicit products tend not to be such exhibitionists. However, people are very much in the public eye when they have had a lot to drink. We can see the effects of too much drink in any hospital, particularly in urban Scotland, but also in many parts of rural Scotland, late on a Saturday night or early on a Sunday morning. Those effects relate not only to violence against shop staff; they are often the result of fights that break out between individuals or gangs of youngsters. We should put on record our gratitude to the Scottish Retail Consortium, which has been extremely active in highlighting the particular problems from which its members suffer. I know that it has been in touch with every member of the Parliament to highlight the issue. This problem is increasing and the people at the receiving end tend to be among the lowest-paid members of our community. Very often they have  to work unsocial hours and are trying to meet the needs of their families as well as earn a decent income, which is not always an easy set of objectives to meet. Those workers are very often women, which makes them particularly vulnerable in the kind of situations that I have described. Donald Gorrie's idea of setting up something akin to the Nicholson committee to examine the issue, which Ken Macintosh is right to raise, is not a bad one. I hope that the Executive will consider that proposition in due course so that we can not only investigate the problem in Scotland but learn lessons from overseas. Other countries have experienced similar difficulties and dealt with them in different ways. I congratulate Ken Macintosh on raising the issue and hope that we will now have some action to deal with what is a serious problem.

When will the First Minister's review of higher education report? Will it rule out top-up fees in Scotland in  the long term and will it restore the spend on higher education as a percentage of total education spend, which is now required?

It is not often that I speak in justice debates as I tend to concentrate on economic matters, but this is an extremely important subject that affects every community in Scotland. I will make three points; I hope that the minister will take them in the spirit in which they are delivered. My first point—I will explain to the minister privately later why I am raising the issue—is that I think that it is time that the Executive checked progress in implementing the changes to the Scottish Criminal Record Office's fingerprinting service because of some recent difficulties. Unfortunately, matters are still sub judice so I do not want to say any more than that, but I draw the matter to the Executive's attention. My second point relates to an issue that Pauline McNeill mentioned—reform of prisoners. We seem to concentrate, with justification, on using prison as a punishment for crime. Other countries put much more emphasis on trying to reform people  who are serving prison sentences with a view to ensuring that a higher percentage of them do not reoffend when they get out of prison. It seems to me that we must put more resources into, and give more attention to, reforming an offender's character as well as punishing them for the crime. If I may say so, the private prison in Kilmarnock is particularly poor at performing that aspect of its remit, which highlights the danger of bringing the profit motive into the prison service—essential services such as reform and rehabilitation of prisoners are given low priority and do not receive the attention and resources that they deserve. My third point is that the profile of crime in Scotland and in many other European countries shows that drug or alcohol abuse is often involved somewhere along the line. The first committee that I served on in Parliament was the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee back in 1999. We carried out an inquiry into drug misuse in Scotland. I remember vividly going to Cumnock to take evidence in private from two drug addicts. They told us that it was their belief that up to 30 per cent of the population in Cumnock were regular abusers of drugs. Cumnock is a very poor community with high levels of unemployment and deprivation. The following week we went to Aberdeen, which is at the other end of the spectrum economically—it is a relatively prosperous area. We were again told by drug addicts who gave evidence in private in Aberdeen that they reckoned that up to 30 per cent of the adult population of Aberdeen were involved in some kind of drug abuse. That was specifically about drugs as opposed to alcohol.

I accept that point. The point that I am making is that we must address the issue of drug and alcohol misuse—alcohol is often a bigger problem than drugs—if we are to get to the root causes of crime in our society. Much of the debate is about, and much attention is paid to, what happens once the crime is committed. We must investigate better means of prevention. One way of doing that would be to improve dramatically the services that are available in respect of drug and alcohol abuse and misuse.  I have raised three points: first, I would like the Executive to re-examine the fingerprinting service that is provided; secondly, it should consider the rehabilitation—or lack of it—of prisoners, in particular in the private prison in Kilmarnock; and thirdly, the Executive should revisit the question of what additional effort needs to go in to dealing with the problems of drug and alcohol misuse.

I begin by expressing gratitude to the Executive, on behalf of the SNP, for supporting what our amendment says about fishing. The future of the fishing industry matters to the whole of Scotland, not just to the fishing communities that are directly affected. Any further threat to the industry must be resisted at all costs, irrespective of the source of the threat. I will try to widen out this debate on the future of Europe because I believe that there is a major problem inside the European Union. I say that as someone who firmly believes that Scotland's future lies inside the European Union, ideally as  an independent member state. There is undoubtedly a huge gulf between those who run the European Union and the people of the European Union. That was exemplified in the Swedish referendum last week. Despite what Helen Eadie said, the yes campaign was very well funded. It was supported by all the leading business organisations and all the—

Let me finish. I will give way to Helen Eadie in a moment. The yes campaign was supported by all the trade unions and all the main political parties. Despite the universal support of the political and economic establishment, the people of Sweden refused to accept the euro. That was not just a judgment on the euro. There is a general feeling throughout the European Union that those who are driving towards centralisation and driving through policies that appear alien, if not downright daft, are creating conditions in which people become increasingly sceptical or sometimes even hostile to the whole concept of the European Union.

The fact is that although the whole Swedish establishment was in favour of the euro and campaigned vigorously in favour of it, the people told it to get lost. As one Eurocrat observed last week, every time there has been a referendum in any country in the European Union, the result has been a very narrow yes vote or, as has been the case on most occasions, a no vote. The problem is not confined to Sweden or Scotland; it is a universal problem in the European Union.

Unfortunately, I do not have time. Politicians—particularly in the European Commission and elsewhere in Europe—had better listen to the people because, if we do not, they will turn against the whole concept of the European Union and its positive aspects.

I do not have time. That is why a referendum is absolutely essential. Every time we take a major step forward in respect of the European Union—or every time we take a  major step, whether one regards it as a step forward or not—we must take the people with us. If we do not, the people will lose interest. I have some points to make on the euro, although unfortunately, because of the time, I will not be able to develop them in the way I would like. Irrespective of one's position on the euro, the one thing that I would like the Executive to have the courage to do is to undertake an assessment of the impact of UK membership of the euro on the Scottish economy. The Chancellor of the Exchequer has published 28 papers on the euro, but the issues that are raised in the paper on the housing market, for example, relate to the market in the south-east of England and are entirely different from the issues facing the housing market in Scotland. We should have an informed debate when we come to the euro referendum, whenever it takes place. Whether one is on the yes side or on the no side, we should at least have an informed debate about the impact on the Scottish economy. It is a great pity that this debate is curtailed to one hour. I hope that we will have a much more wide-ranging debate on the future of Europe in the not-too-distant future. However, the main message has to be "Take the people with us", because if we do not we will sow the seeds of the destruction of the European Union in years to come.

Although Fiona Hyslop and I both went to Ayr Academy, the level of excellence in its history classes was never up to the standard of your classes at Belmont Academy in Ayr, Presiding Officer. Perhaps I should point out that the discipline at Belmont Academy was also excellent.

The issue is complex. After all, many factors contribute to indiscipline in our schools. I will highlight one factor that has not been mentioned so far in the debate—motivation. In some cases, pupils are unruly or undisciplined because they are not adequately motivated by what is going on in the class. That might be because of the curriculum or because they do not have a good relationship with the teacher. Indeed, the teacher's inspirational qualities might not live up to a pupil's needs. As well as examining a range of issues within the school and the many other important issues that Rosemary Byrne raised, we should find out how we can improve motivation among our young people in the classroom. I will give the chamber some examples in which practical steps could be taken to improve motivation in both primary and secondary education. One practical step relates to class sizes. We all recognise the importance of reducing class sizes in order to improve the quality of education. The evidence shows that a by-product of smaller class sizes is better discipline in class. That is because more attention is paid to each pupil and children feel more motivated when they are part of a smaller group where any misbehaviour is more likely to be noticed not just by the teacher, but by the child's peers in the class—in those circumstances, children often apply peer pressure on others to behave themselves.

I could not agree more with Johann Lamont—what she says is absolutely the case. However, I am arguing a point of principle: if class sizes were smaller than they are in many areas at present, that could contribute to better behaviour in the classroom. My second practical step would apply particularly to secondary education. We need to introduce more flexibility for children aged 14 and above. In some cases, we are forcing those children down a route to stay at school when in fact they are ready for further education or even vocational training.

I would allow such children to go to FE colleges. Earlier this year, in the first session of Parliament, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee addressed that issue in its lifelong learning report. We achieved all-party agreement that far greater flexibility from the ages of 14 onwards would be beneficial—

With Rhona Brankin in the chamber, I would never try to mislead anyone—I know that I would get three of the belt from her if I did. Flexibility is the key issue in relation to motivation. One of the reasons—although not the only reason—why we should introduce that flexibility would be to improve the motivational levels of those of our 14-year-olds who are not keen to take an academic route in school that will lead to university. I have given examples of practical steps that could be taken in respect of class sizes and 14-year-olds and, finally, I want to emphasise the importance of external resources and support. I do not have time to develop my point, but I specifically mention the resources that are available to help children with autism and in particular with Asperger's syndrome. Frankly, the  resources to support such children are still wholly inadequate to meet their needs.

When will a new chairman and a new chief executive of Scottish Enterprise be appointed? Will the First Minister give an undertaking on behalf of the Scottish Executive that the new chairman and the new chief executive will have the proactive support of the Executive? Will he tell the civil service to stop trying to micromanage the agency and let it get on with its job?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review police policy in respect of shoot to stop. (S2O-312)

I draw the minister's attention to a recent incident involving a woman in the Lothians. Will the minister discuss whether taking a more flexible approach is more appropriate in such difficult operational situations for the police, as has been indicated by a number of senior police officers in Scotland and south of the border?

Does the member accept that although the individual level of unemployment is lower than that in 1997, the percentage of households where no one is in employment is at its highest since that year and stands at 18 per cent in Scotland? That is the highest of any area of the UK. Is that not an indictment of the Tory policies that Blair and Brown are pursuing?

When the First Minister meets the new Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs, will he raise with him the possible transfer of reserved powers under schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998? Although I recognise that the First Minister is not a nationalist with either a big or a small n, there is a broad consensus in the chamber that the transfer of powers over the internal rules governing the operation of the Scottish Parliament, for example, should be transferred to the Parliament. Moreover, earlier this year, the Transport and the Environment Committee under a Labour convener recommended that powers over railways should be transferred. Will the First Minister therefore raise the issue of the transfers of some real power to this Parliament?

Will the minister comment on the allegations that are made on page 2 of this morning's Daily Record about a  legal loophole that means that those who are able to claim free prescriptions are not getting their entitlement to free school meals?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I appreciate being allowed to intervene at the second chance, minister. We heard that under the current private finance initiative-type arrangements the average rate of interest that is being paid by Scottish Water on moneys borrowed is 6.72 per cent. What would the percentage be if the money was borrowed at the current rate from the Public Works Loans Board? What would the difference be?

To ask the First Minister what arrangements are being put in place to recruit and appoint a new chief executive of Scottish Enterprise. (S2F-65)

I associate myself and, I think, my whole party with the First Minister's comments about Robert Crawford. Also, for the benefit of Duncan McNeil, I declare that I have no interest to  declare in the matter. Does the First Minister agree that it is very unfortunate indeed that the perception exists, rightly or wrongly, that the existing chief executive of Scottish Enterprise has been hounded from office by a right-wing campaign to do in Scottish Enterprise? If we are to attract the right kind of talent to regenerate the Scottish economy, no public official should be subjected to the kind of unfair attacks that were made on Robert Crawford. That should not happen to his successor. It creates a bad image for Scotland; it is bad for the economy and bad for the future of our country.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the light of the decision that was announced by the Fire Brigades Union just over an hour ago to agree a deal on the pay settlement, will you through your good offices ensure that time is made available next Wednesday at the earliest for a ministerial statement on the future of the Fire Brigade and the outcome of the current dispute?

On the distinction between reserved matters and devolved matters, are bank arrestments a reserved matter or a devolved matter?

I am always glad to hear that.

I, too, congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate. As Donald Gorrie said, we had a number of debates on debt in the previous session and we hope that we will get some action in this session. I will concentrate my remarks on one specific area. In the previous session, I proposed a bank arrestment bill. I will explain the background to that proposal and then ask the minister to answer a few questions in her closing speech. When someone's wages are arrested, a certain amount of money—about £70—is left in the  person's wage packet to allow them to live while the outstanding debt is resolved. Wages tend to be paid weekly or monthly, so the requisite amount is left. However, when someone's bank account is arrested, no money is left in the account. The result is that the person whose bank account has been arrested has nothing to live on until the issue is resolved, very often weeks later. That problem has become much more acute in recent years because, for example, many more pensioners now get their pension paid into a bank account rather than collecting it in cash at the post office. Similarly, many other benefit claimants get their benefits paid into a bank account. So, if their bank account is arrested and no money is left, they are left destitute. That has the knock-on effect that such people sometimes have to go to unscrupulous money lenders to borrow money to see them by until they can get the issue resolved and the arrestment lifted. In preparing my proposal for a bank arrestment bill, I worked with the legal sub-committee of the Committee of Scottish Clearing Bankers. The banks are very much behind such a measure, because they think that it would help not only them, but, more important, those whose bank accounts are subject to arrestment. I ask the minister to tell us whether she will take the measure forward. Because the legal experts in the Parliament—as opposed to the Executive—question whether such a bill would fall within the jurisdiction of our powers under the Scotland Act 1998, I ask the minister whether it is her interpretation that the Parliament could pass such a bill. I also offer her all the assistance that I possibly can by way of my research and contacts in the clearing banks. If the Executive is willing to take over the proposal for a bank arrestment bill, nobody would be more delighted than I.

It is strange that Lord James said three times that he was not persuaded of the need to extend eligibility, but he has not yet given us a reason why he is not so persuaded. Let me try to persuade him. It is a fact of life that child poverty is a key feature of Scottish society in 2003. The Executive's figures state that about 30 per cent of all children in Scotland are living on or near the poverty line, as defined officially by both the Executive and the United Kingdom Government. As Brian Adam pointed out, only two thirds of those described officially as being in poverty are eligible for free school meals, even after the original amendments introduced by the bill. I recognise that, currently, there is not a majority in the chamber in favour of universality and I am on record as regretting that. However, the purpose of the SNP amendments is focused on closing the poverty gap so that the one third of children who live in poverty whom are not currently eligible for free school meals—10 per cent of all children—will become eligible. I appeal to the Executive, and I even appeal to the Tories and everyone else in the chamber: if we are serious about the elimination of child poverty in Scotland, rather than just paying lip service to the idea, it would be absolutely ridiculous to deny access to free school meals to the 10 per cent of our children who live in poverty, according to the definition of the Executive and the UK Government. The purpose of the amendments is to ensure that poor children get free school meals. If we are to continue means testing for free school meals—it is clear that we will—such means testing should always err in favour of the poor. The great problem with means testing in this country is that it always errs in favour of those who are not poor. This meeting began with time for reflection led by Maggie Lunan, who quoted someone who said that we had got it wrong. I say to the Executive that, if it has got this wrong, it should right the situation by backing the SNP amendments.

I hear what the minister is saying; however, if the problem is lack of time, will he give an undertaking that he will ask his officials to consider those children who are officially defined by the Executive as being in poverty but who do not qualify for free school meals? Will he also undertake to bring forward an additional bill to close the gap to cover those who are living in poverty and who are not entitled to free school meals?

I recognise that the member is not in favour of universal free school meals. However, does not he think that the Executive should use the opportunity to introduce proposals to close the gap between the Scottish children who live in poverty—approximately 30 per cent—and the 20 per cent who are eligible for free school meals? That gap suggests that 10 per cent of schoolchildren in Scotland live in poverty and do not qualify for free school meals.

I support the amendment lodged by Fiona Hyslop. There is supposed to be a commitment in this Parliament to deal with child poverty. When Tony Blair and Gordon Brown took office six years ago, they said that they would end child poverty not just in Scotland, but throughout the UK, within a generation—within 20 years. That was six years ago and there are only 14 years left for them to end child poverty. Far from its being ended, however, not only is child poverty still with us, but it is getting worse in many parts of Scotland. The key question is what contribution free school meals can make to ending child poverty. The official figures show that about 30 per cent of Scotland's children live on or near the poverty line. However, only 20 per cent of children are entitled to free school meals. That suggests to me, and even to those who are not in favour of universality, that there is a big gap to fill to ensure that every child who lives in poverty is entitled to and takes up free school meals. If Fiona Hyslop's amendment is accepted, ministers will—if they are so minded—be able to close the gap. It is no secret that I am in favour of universality in relation to free school meals. I do not believe that every benefit or service can be universal, but certain services must be universal if they are to achieve their objectives. Had Rhona Brankin been in the House of Commons when the Education Act 1872 was passed, I wonder whether she would have stood up and said, "We do not need universal education because a lot of people can afford to send their weans to school." Had Mike Rumbles been around in 1909—and some of us think that he might have been—listening to the Lloyd George budget—

That so-called people's budget marked the last time that the Liberals worried  about the people. What about the introduction of universal old-age pensions—something that Mike Rumbles and I will no doubt benefit from in the not-too-distant future?

Mike Rumbles was up first; I will give him the chance to reply.

I hope that the percentage would be similar to the percentage of people who take up universal pensions and universal child benefit—of which I do not doubt that Mike Rumbles was a beneficiary many years ago—as well as the percentage of people who take up universally free education. The more people who take up free school meals, the better. Mike Rumbles also asked about costs. The bill is not an accountancy exercise; we must examine the benefits as well as the costs. Let us consider the benefits of free school meals. When a child goes to school on an empty stomach, they cannot study their lessons and benefit from education.

Will Cathy Peattie wait until I finish my peroration before she gets up? When a wean is starving and not properly fed, that child will grow up to be an unhealthy adult. What is the cost of that to the national health service, to employers and to everybody else? Come on, Cathy.

I am quite happy if the free school meal is at the start of the day instead of at midday. That is a reasonable suggestion and I do not think that there will be much of a dispute on that point. The key issue is one of principle and one that the Labour movement used—when it was a labour movement—to endorse: no child in Scotland, or anywhere else, should go hungry.

Children should not go to school hungry, they should not be at school hungry and they should not leave school hungry. Talking of hungry, I will now allow Iain Smith to intervene.

The SNP has a radical programme, not just on that issue, but on many other things. When Scotland becomes an independent country, we will seriously tackle child poverty—not merely to alleviate that scourge, but to eliminate it from our society. That is our ambition. We want not just to play about at the edges like a true Liberal Democrat, but to transform our society so that no child has to suffer from hunger or the effects of hunger. The issue of school meals is a litmus test for the Parliament. We have just had an election in which less than 50 per cent of the Scottish people voted. That is because people think that we are a waste of space and that we do not deliver for them. We talk to one another, but we do not deliver on the people's priorities. I say to every member that the Parliament will never get the support of the people until it delivers for the people. Making the advance that Fiona Hyslop has proposed on free school meals is not only the right policy, but should be used to symbolise the fact that the second session of the Scottish Parliament will not be a repeat of the first and that we will deliver on the people's priorities, not the politicians' priorities.

What about my reports?

I want to make a couple of very sharp points. First, the Deloitte & Touche report is not an independent consultants' report that considers the issue comprehensively and objectively. A definition and remit were given to Deloitte & Touche to suit the answer that the board wanted in the first place. That done, criteria were selected and the board members came back in and, against subjective observations of their own—not objective criteria set by the consultants—decided that the answer was Edinburgh. Requests to the board and to Professor McKelvey to tell us which criteria the board used still go unanswered. When I was in consultancy, people used to joke that consultants borrow one's watch to tell one the time. In this case, the board did not tell the consultants the time; they reset the watch to suit themselves. Rhona Brankin may have the idea that the Deloitte & Touche report is an objective report that can be taken seriously, but if she had studied the matter she would realise that that is nonsense. I am glad that she is no longer the minister dealing with the matter. My second major point relates to the need that Margaret Jamieson quite rightly emphasised for an economic assessment. We have a wider responsibility to the taxpayer, and not just for the financial viability of the SAC, important though that is. We have a responsibility to everyone in Ayrshire and Aberdeen who relies for their job on those colleges and campuses. It is absolute lunacy to shut down facilities in economies that are feeling the cold and which are up against it and place all those jobs and all that money in an overheated Edinburgh economy. I understand that Rhona Brankin has to engage in pork-barrel politics because she represents an Edinburgh  area. Let the rest of us consider the matter objectively and do what is right for the whole of Scotland.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the results of the area tourist board network review. (S2O-37)

I am disappointed in the minister's reply, given that his predecessor said to the chamber on 13 February that a decision would be made soon and would be announced soon after the election. It seems that we have delay, delay, delay. People in the industry are fed up to the back teeth of reviews and considerations of reviews; they want results.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will consider extending the statutory consultation requirements for the closure or merger of primary schools to nursery schools. (S1O-6704)

I thank the minister for his reply. Will he ensure that all local authorities, including South Lanarkshire Council, abide by the statutory requirements? I remind him that he has only five weeks to do so before the Executive changes.

One issue that has been raised by many of the minister's colleagues is the Tory deregulation of buses. Will there be a commitment in Labour's manifesto to the re-regulation of buses?

Like many other members, I take the opportunity to wish those who are retiring today all the best for the future. I particularly say a word or two about my colleague Winnie Ewing, because she has the unique record of having served in three Parliaments. She opened this Parliament—the first democratically elected Scottish Parliament—and she has been not only a great parliamentarian and patriot, but has become an icon for the people of Scotland. I congratulate her and wish her all the best. I could go round the chamber singling out many other people, but I want to mention only one other person. We should put on record our gratitude for the huge contribution that Henry McLeish made to the introduction of free personal care for the elderly. We wish Henry all the best in the future. As one of the younger speakers in the debate—

For members who were not here, I mentioned in yesterday's debate on the economy that I read the Toothill report way back in 1962, while I was in my pram. I received a query from the official report, which asked me to clarify what I was flicking through in my pram. I hope that the official report keeps a copy of that note for future reference. I want to discuss the pensions crisis that we face in Scotland and in the rest of the UK. Before I do that, I want to underline the points that have been made about the threat to our pharmacies. For many older people, the pharmacy is the focal point. It is not only where they collect prescriptions; in many cases, it is where they meet their friends. They often rely on the local chemist for advice, which might be on a variety of local issues, as well as on their health. We must unite in fighting any threat to our local pharmacies.

I was just about to congratulate Frank  McAveety on doing that.

As far as older people—and many others—are concerned, the other great institution is the local post office. It is regrettable that the threat to urban and, in the longer term, to rural post offices is still with us. That is of major concern to older people. I turn to the key issue of pensions. Many of the aspirations that Margaret Curran outlined in her speech are aspirations that we all share, not just for those who are retired at the moment, but for those who will retire in the years to come. A key prerequisite—the fundamental principle that must be fulfilled before anyone can genuinely enjoy their retirement—is the guarantee that they will get a decent weekly income on which to enjoy it. Any pensioner who lives on, or near, the poverty line and who relies on a pittance of a pension—the minimum income guarantee is more minimum than income—cannot enjoy their retirement, mix with their friends, go for a pint or do the things that people want to do when they have the time to do them. One of the most disgraceful measures that the Thatcher Government introduced was the breaking of the link between the annual increase in the pension and the increase in earnings rather than prices. If that link had been maintained, many pensioners would be up to £30 a week better off than they are.

The bottom line is that the breaking of the link between the pension and earnings has cost pensioners about £1,500—at today's prices—every year. The same is true of the Christmas bonus, which, to be fair, the Tories introduced. Initially, it was worth £10, but now it is worth only £1.25—about 10 per cent of its original value. I have not had time to develop all the other aspects of the pensions crisis. My basic point is that paying lip service to the pensioners is fine, but if it ain't matched with resources, that is all it is—lip service. We must guarantee that every pensioner has a decent income, so that they can enjoy their retirement.

What is the UK deficit over which Gordon Brown presides? Is it not now in the order of £80 billion? If so, does that mean that the UK is not a viable proposition?

I totally agree, now that I am no longer a consultant. Will Mr Mundell please tell us the breakdown—Miss Goldie was unable to do so earlier—of the £268 million? For instance, will the new technology institutes be safe? Will the £80 million that was to be spent on bureaucrats all go?

If there is a theme to the Executive's contribution, it is that of déjà vu. I am old enough to remember the 1962 Toothill report, which I sat in my pram and flicked through in great detail. It outlined all the infrastructure plans for the future of Scotland and what we needed to do. Harold Wilson was Prime Minister and Michael Noble was Secretary of State for Scotland. Throughout the rest of the 1960s, and through the 1970s, the 1980s and the 1990s, we heard the same old story about how we would sort out the growth rate, how we would get the infrastructure and how Scotland's economy would eventually grow to the same level as the UK economy. We were told that that would happen, but that we had to take the long view. We have taken a 40-year view but, after 40 years, the gap between the UK growth rate and the Scottish growth rate is not closing; it is getting bigger almost year on year. We have had 40 years of unionist failure under the Tories, then under Labour, then under the Tories, then under Labour, then under the Tories and then under Labour again. No matter which has been in office, the reality is that we in Scotland have never been in power in terms of controlling our own affairs. Only an idiot would not welcome the vast bulk of what Iain Gray outlined. Of course it is right that we are investing in broadband. Of course it is right that we are investing in skills, higher education and all the rest of it. However, no matter how good the microeconomic policy, if the macroeconomic policy is running against that tide, the microeconomic policy will never succeed.

Talking of micros, I give way to Bristow Muldoon.

My views on that are well known and I have no need to repeat them.  I will give a good, serious example of why I believe that economic and financial independence is so important. If the Scottish Parliament were an independent Parliament, I honestly believe that, instead of spending between £250 million and £300 million on the unjust war in Iraq, which is roughly our share of the cost, the Parliament—including, I suspect, most Labour members—would want to use that money for international aid. That is the kind of choice that an independent Parliament could make. Independence is not just about economic choices; it is about morality and, as I am sure Tom McCabe will remember, what Nye Bevan called the language of priorities.

There is no doubt that the majority of Scottish people are still not in favour of independence but, after all, it took many years for the Labour party to convince people about socialism. Once it had done that, Labour abandoned socialism. We live in a democratic society. The position of the Scottish National Party has always been the same. We will not achieve our objective of independence until the majority of Scottish people are prepared to vote for it. I do not know when that will be and Tom McCabe does not know when that will be, but the one thing that I am sure of is that independence will come. As Rabbie Burns said, "For a' that, an' a' that, It's comin' yet for a' that". In my final minute, I want to make two points on the economy. I return to the micro agenda that Iain Gray outlined. Although all members, with the possible exception of the Tories, would agree with the vast bulk of what he said, there is an issue about the scale of investment. Let me take the example of higher education. It is true that in Scotland we are spending 20 per cent more per head on higher education than is being spent south of the border. However, we are still spending 30 per cent less per head than our competitors in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries are spending. Until we judge and benchmark ourselves against the best, rather than the worst, we ain't ever going to lift ourselves out of the mire of low growth. Interest rates are a good example of macro policy. The United States interest rate is a third of the Bank of England's interest rate and interest rates in Europe are a third less than the Bank of  England's interest rate. We will not be able to compete unless we get monetary and fiscal policies that allow us to do so. That is why I believe that the Bank of England is not the bank of Britain. It is not only the Bank of England; it is the bank for England. Until we change that, we will go on having low growth for the next 40 years and we will be here in 40 years' time—I certainly hope to be here then—making exactly the same speeches that look to the longer term.

Will David Davidson give way?

I share Mr Davidson's aspiration of creating an environment in which investment is encouraged. As Miss Goldie could not tell us the answer, will Mr Davidson say how much of the £268 million cut in the enterprise network budget that the Tories propose Scottish Enterprise Grampian would take and what that would do for investment in the Grampian area?

Will the member give way?

I agree with John Scott's analysis of the Ayrshire economy but, as Miss Goldie failed to answer the question, will he say how much of the £268 million cut that the Tories propose in Scottish Enterprise's annual budget would come out of Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire's budget?

Will the member take an intervention?

I note that the Tory policy is to reduce Scottish Enterprise's annual budget by £250 million. Will the member give us three examples of the big budgets within Scottish Enterprise that would be cut?

What would the Tories cut?

I seek clarification. If everyone in Scottish Enterprise were sacked, that would save only £80 million. Where would the other £170 million of cuts come from?

Can the minister update members on the current state of the accessing telecoms links across Scotland project in relation to broadband and tell us whether the European Commission is likely to give it clearance in the light of the legal action that is threatened by Thus?

Has the First Minister received representations, as I have, from the parents and friends of servicemen and women who are already out in the gulf? Some of those servicemen and women have been in the gulf for many months and feel that they are ill fed, ill clothed and ill equipped—indeed, food parcels are being sent to some of them. If men and women are to be sent to an unjust war, will the First Minister, through his talks with the Prime  Minister, at least ensure that they are well fed, well clothed and well equipped?

How many young people will benefit from the £40 million being laid aside for enterprise education? What progress is being made in establishing a Scottish national association for enterprise education?

I support John Swinney's motion, but like George Reid and many other members, I hope that the anti-war factions will coalesce around a common position at decision time tonight. As Duncan Hamilton and many other members have said, it is important that the Parliament sends a clear and loud message, not only to the people of Scotland, but to everybody who is listening in Europe and elsewhere. I reiterate the sentiment that the issue of peace and war is far more important than issues of party or partisanship—there is no greater issue. In that context and spirit, I say to Johann Lamont that there is no division between the English, Welsh, Irish and Scottish people. In the same way, I do not believe that there is a division between the British, French, German, Swedish and other European people. Similarly, I do not believe that there is a division between the people of Europe and the people of America—all the people of the world are opposed to a war.

Although I am a nationalist, I am first and foremost an internationalist, which is the position of most members. There have been excellent speeches from members of all parties, but the speech that will ring in most people's ears is Susan Deacon's. She spoke primarily not as a politician or as a partisan player, but as a mother of two children. There are many children in the public gallery. When we discuss the possibility of war, we should be concerned not only about the mothers and children of Scotland, but about the mothers and children of Iraq, who have had 25 years of Saddam Hussein and 10 years of the consequences of UN sanctions. They have seen half a million of their children die from hunger. As Keith Raffan said, half of the population of Iraq is under 14—that is a lot of children and a lot of mothers. We should think very seriously before we give our name to an act of war against those people. When we fire the missiles, whether or not they are 95 per cent smart—which is a lot smarter than Tony Blair or George Bush—we cannot guarantee by any manner of means that they will not kill innocent children and mothers in Iraq. We should not fire those missiles or create a war for which there is no justification. The debate is not primarily about politics; it is about morality. Let the message go out that the Scottish Parliament is not only a Parliament of the people, but a Parliament with morality.

In relation to the article on Scottish Enterprise in The Scotsman last Friday, does the First Minister know who wrote the memo? Does he know who leaked the memo? If he finds out that it was written or  leaked from within the Executive, will he sack the person responsible? Does he agree with me, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and other sections of the business community that the campaign that The Scotsman has led for the past week to undermine the work of Scottish Enterprise is damaging not only to Scottish Enterprise, but to Scotland?

How much money have the Scottish Executive and its agencies invested in the Paisley Partnership Regeneration Company and how much of that money has been lost or misspent as a result of the mismanagement of the company by the board, which is mainly made up of Labour people?

Will the minister change the rules so that, on the day on which a child becomes three, they are entitled to free nursery education? Surely it should not be the case, as it is in the North Lanarkshire Council area, that poor parents have to pay £22.50 a week for their child to receive nursery education until the beginning of the new school term. Surely that defeats the purpose of getting people off welfare and into work.

I will not ask the minister to condemn anybody, but I will ask her about concerns over an organisation that is involved in the social inclusion area. My question is about recent events at the Paisley Partnership Regeneration Company and the departure of the chief executive, who was given a golden handshake of £22,000 of public money in return for being silent about what happened inside the company. Will she carry out a full investigation into the use of public money in that company?

A few months ago, the First Minister announced that there would be an announcement soon on initiatives—presumably in relation to reserved and devolved matters—to deal with the falling population in Scotland. In the light of the census report this morning, will he tell us when those measures will be announced?

As the minister said, one of the main measures for helping businesses to grow is regional selective assistance. How much of the funding for the current financial year is still left in the RSA budget? In other words, what has been neither committed nor spent? How will that money be recycled to help local businesses?

It is an indication of the success of today's debate that Brian Fitzpatrick has joined the SNP benches for the final speech. I begin my reiterating and reinforcing the "thank yous" that Annabel Goldie read out at the start of the debate and I supplement them with three of my own. First, I thank Annabel Goldie for calling me gallant, which is the first and probably the last  time when that will happen. Secondly, I thank Brian Fitzpatrick for saying that I am a calming influence. That is certainly the first time, and probably the last time when I shall be called that. Thirdly, in relation to the visit to Shetland, I thank Tavish Scott and Shetland Islands Council, which provided excellent hospitality. I got a feeling for Up Helly Aa. I shall concentrate on two or three key issues. I say quickly, by way of background, that the inquiry took place about a year after the committee was being put under enormous pressure to hold the inquiry during a time of crisis—if I can call it that—in the Scottish Tourist Board, which was undergoing a change of chief executive and suffered the resignation of the new chief executive. The committee took a clear decision not to hold an inquiry at that time. The purpose of our inquiry was not to hammer a nail into the coffin of the Scottish Tourist Board, to run down Scotland, to reinforce failure or to get a cheap headline. Instead, the purpose of a parliamentary committee is to examine a subject's long-term future. In this case it was the tourism industry—we had to find out where we need to be in four, five or 10 years and we had to consider our position in the international tourism market. We are all aware of the problems of the past four or five years, such as the reduction in tourist numbers, the additional problems that were caused by the events of 11 September 2001 and other unforeseen circumstances, such as foot-and-mouth disease. However, the challenge to us all is not to sit moaning and groaning and wondering why all of this has happened; instead, we must look to the future and do something about the situation. The tourism industry in Scotland has enormous potential. Last year, I did a calculation—on my own, believe it or not—based on Ireland's overseas visitor numbers, which include visitors from the UK mainland. If Scotland had the same overseas visitor numbers as the Irish, that would inject an additional £1 billion a year into the Scottish economy. That is the scale of the opportunity that is open to us through the tourism sector. So, the key question is: what do we need to do to get from where we are to where we want to be? The committee report addresses three fundamental strategic issues in that respect. First, as the independent research that the committee commissioned concluded, it is high time that we stopped contemplating our internal navel over the Mason-Dixon lines between this area tourist board and that area tourist board. To be quite frank, tourists from Germany, Norway, America and Canada could not care less about where the boundary lies between this toon and that toon in area tourist board terms—they want to visit  Scotland. They want to have the experience of coming to this country to see the scenery, meet its people, enjoy their ancestry and all the rest of it. The first clear message has to be that we should look outward, rather than inward. Our future lies in beating the competition in the international marketplace, not in examining our internal structures for ever and a day. However, the question thereafter is how we can best promote Scotland. There has been a lot of discussion about the BTA. No doubt there is concern south of the border—as there is north of the border—about the way in which the Department for Media, Culture and Sport south of the border failed to consult on the recent changes and simply implemented them. Indeed, there is much concern about that among MPs in London whose report called for the establishment of an English tourism board. I support that proposal: England needs its own tourism board, but there must be a consequential change to the BTA's role. We are simply saying—the BTA agrees—that we are not getting the benefits of the resources that have been invested in some hub offices to the extent that we could and should. VisitScotland needs urgently to piggyback on that resource much more than it is by putting its Scottish focus into those offices and promoting Scotland. If Gordon Jackson was able to promote to me the benefits of the private sector while we were in California, I at least got him to agree that, on the question of a Scottish focus, he was a nationalist. Indeed, he agreed with everything that the SNP said on that point. That was a real conversion. Our proposal is very practical. Of course, it has budgetary implications, because there would be staff involved; however, perhaps only one person and a secretary is all that is needed. After all, the other resources already exist—we simply need a Scottish focus. David Mundell and I took evidence from Eddie Friel, who used to run the Northern Ireland Tourist Board and now runs the Glasgow Tourist Board. Mr Friel was Northern Ireland's man in America at the time of the hunger strikes. During the year in which the hunger strike deaths happened, tourism to Northern Ireland from north America jumped by about 10 per cent. Eddie Friel went into the BTA office in New York as a Northern Ireland representative. He piggybacked on the research that had been done, but he put a Northern Ireland focus on it, as a result of which he was able to promote Northern Ireland. At that time, the Northern Ireland Tourist Board was much more independent than the Scottish Tourist Board. There is a possible case for VisitScotland to have its own representation in some markets where the BTA has no representation—it is horses for courses. It is like running any business; one  sends the sales and marketing people to where they can generate the most interest. The second major point that I want to make before I wind up is on transport links. There is no doubt whatever that one of the two fundamental prerequisites to realising potential is encouragement of the growth of low-cost airlines. Some 80 per cent of the people coming to Scotland from Oslo are Norwegian. I know and others know that—we see them in the pubs in Ayr and even in Prestwick every weekend, Presiding Officer. They come from Norway for the cheap drink. It is £8 a pint in Oslo, but it is £2.50 a pint in Ayr and probably £1.50 in the Labour club in Allison Street. It is a lot cheaper for them to spend forty quid getting into Ayr for the weekend from Oslo and save a bob or two on drink. We are talking about tourists to Scotland spending money in Scotland. I will be clear about what the committee is saying about BAA. It says that there is on the face of it, based on the evidence that we received, a prima facie case—as the Latin people used to say—for an inquiry into the monopolistic position of BAA. It does not have only one monopoly; it has two monopolies. It has a monopoly in Scotland and a monopoly in London. On the basis of the evidence, the combination of those monopolies might present the problem. We suggest that there needs to be a thorough inquiry, but BAA is coming back to us and saying that it is not true; however, if members owned a monopoly company, they would say the same. Unfortunately, monopoly and competition are—temporarily, I hope—reserved matters. Therefore, it is up to the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Select Committee or whatever to investigate the matter, but it must be investigated. Our tourism industry is too important for the future of Scotland for us to continue to receive only a fifth of the number of flights that Dublin receives, for example. This has been just a sketched conclusion of our report. I hope that the minister will take decisions based on our report. I do not care whether that happens before the election or whether someone else takes them after the election—as long as our report is implemented, the Scottish tourism industry will flourish.

On the issue of low unemployment, research from the University of Sheffield and the University of Warwick shows that the real level of unemployment is well over 300,000, not the figure of 100,000 that is given in official statistics.

After listening to that speech, I shall try to raise the tone of the debate. First, I suggest that Rhona Brankin reads the SNP manifesto from 1999, where we envisaged the establishment of Scottish Development International and promised the establishment of what we called "Come to Scotland", which the Executive has called VisitScotland. We also said that we wanted to make Scotland the science capital of Europe and  that we wanted to use the powers of this Parliament to maximum effect for the Scottish economy. It is not a case of us being converted to Labour policy. Labour has simply stolen our policy. Let us rise above that. An unemployed worker in Ayrshire, or one of the Boots workers who faces the prospect of redundancy in the next couple of years, listening to this debate will want to know what the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive will do for them. We are all signed up to the long-term strategy. We recognise the need to invest in science and skills as a way forward for Scotland. However, we also recognise the fact that we face short-term difficulty. One of the questions that the Parliament should address this morning is what we can do in the short term—until we realise the benefits of the long-term strategy—to improve job prospects for people in Scotland. I shall make several suggestions, which I hope the Executive will consider seriously. First, there is an enormous latent demand in the building sector that is not being met either because of a lack of proper skills or because of a lack of appropriate land availability. One of the immediate things that the Executive can do to remove the barriers to growth in construction is to address the problem of the vested interests that run the Construction Industry Training Board in the UK and to ensure that we can go beyond the expansion of modern apprenticeships in construction skills. I would like the minister to address the fact that the expansion of modern apprenticeships in construction skills is not driven by employment-based traineeships, which is a problem. If that situation can be addressed, we will go a long way towards creating new jobs in the short term in the construction industry. Secondly, there are problems with land availability and planning. I am currently dealing with a case in Ayrshire. The situation is nonsensical. A small, isolated piece of land that had planning permission for five houses no longer has planning permission because some bureaucrat in the council has decided that it has been rezoned. The land cannot be rezoned for anything other than housing, as it is too small for agriculture and is cut off by roads on each side. That is typical of what is happening the length and breadth of Scotland. Our planning laws are being implemented so restrictively that they are acting as a definite barrier to growth. We need to do something about that urgently. Andrew Wilson has covered the issue of reducing business rates. That urgent measure is desperately needed to create a more even playing field between ourselves and the south of England. Thirdly, there is an issue in relation to commercialisation. There is an underlying  assumption that we need to wait for five or 10 years for that policy to work. Last week, I spoke to a company that specialises in, and has a successful track record in, the commercialisation of science throughout the United Kingdom. It told me that it has identified 60 projects that it could get up and running in the next two years, but that it cannot do so because of the slowness of decision making in our universities. I say to the Executive: for God's sake, do not just lie back and wait for Gordon Brown's budget—get some action today, so that we can be seen to be doing something about the Scottish economy pending the achievement of our independence in the period ahead.

I am sure that we all agree that key to stimulating growth is investment in lifelong learning and education. Does the minister accept that even after the increases that have been announced in the past two years, our investment in higher and further education in Scotland is a third less than that per head of our European competitors? If we are to grow, that gap must be closed.

We would all welcome an end to the dispute on a mutually agreed basis. However, from the answer that the minister has just given, I ask that two points be clarified. First, if the dispute is resolved, will that mean that there is no intention to pass the legislation that the Deputy Prime Minister indicated that he wanted? Secondly, if the dispute is not resolved in the immediate future, what is the cut-off date by which a resolution must be reached before the Government abandons any idea of emergency legislation?

Is not it the case that, a few weeks before the Local Government Committee considered my bill, the Executive said that there was no need for legislation on the matter?

Like Donald Gorrie, I welcome the bill as a step forward—it is a significant step in the right direction. Now that we have debated the bill, we should look forward and think about how to implement its provisions. I would like to say something about the proposed establishment of a public appointments committee in the Parliament. If the Parliament decides to delegate its responsibilities to a public appointments committee, it is important that the membership and convener of that committee are seen to be objective, like the commissioner—the committee must not be dominated by members of an Executive party or an Opposition party. I hope that, when we discuss the composition of the public appointments committee, we will take into account the fact that its remit will be unique and that its structure and membership will probably need to be somewhat unique, too. That would be an indication of an act of faith by everybody that we are determined to make the bill work and make it work fairly, transparently and objectively. I hope that the bill is the beginning of major reform not just of the public appointments system, but of wider public administration in Scotland. There is certainly a feeling in some parts of the chamber—probably throughout the chamber—that we need to consider reform of the civil service and examine how it operates in Scotland. I hope that the bill will be the forerunner of a long-term programme of reform to make public administration more politically accountable, democratic and transparent. We cannot pluck numbers out of the air to say how many quangos or next-step agencies are required to perform the functions of government. That number will change from time to time and from function to function. However, the Parliament has created new quangos in the past few years. Despite George Robertson's promise back in 1997 that we would have a "bonfire of the quangos", something like 19 new bodies have been created since the Parliament came into being, although there has been a net reduction of four or five bodies overall. We should not think purely in terms of numbers; we must consider the effectiveness of the bodies and the need to achieve modern, efficient and  holistic public administration. For example, about 58 quangos or next-step agencies are involved in the administration of the health service in Scotland. I hope that we take a serious look at the number, structure and remits of those bodies to try to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the delivery of public services. Although the bill does not go as far as I would have liked, it is undoubtedly welcome and the SNP will support it at decision time at 5 o'clock—or earlier. We hope that the bill will bring about significant change in the nature of appointments. However, I say to the Executive in all honesty that it should be conscientious about the whole issue of cronyism. It should try to ensure that we do not have a repeat of the past, when one political party had an absolute monopoly on public appointments in Scotland. We want a new kind of Scotland—not one run by Lanarkshire Labour, but one that is open, democratic and transparent and of which we can be proud.

Can I take that as a request that I do so? [MEMBERS: "No."] Given the consensus, unity and agreement that is nearly breaking out  between the minister and me, members will be glad to know that I do not intend to take longer than two or three minutes. Everyone—both inside and outside the chamber—is agreed that it is important that the person appointed to the job has the full confidence of all members of the Parliament and of civic society. We are all trying to maximise the guarantees to ensure that that is what happens. We support the bill's provisions on excluding members of the House of Commons, members of the Scottish Parliament and members of the specified authorities from appointment as commissioner. I understand that, when we get down to practicalities, the proposed parliamentary committee on public appointments is likely to be the body that recommends who should be appointed to the position. Given that the minister has outlined some practical points about the definition and the need to ensure that the Parliament passes qualitative legislation, I am willing not to move amendment 7, provided he guarantees that he will support whatever measures the public appointments committee proposes to put in place to ensure the political neutrality of anyone appointed to the post of commissioner. There is unity on that fundamental principle. Tricia Marwick will say more about the matter, but it is a great pity that her stage 2 amendment on members of the House of Lords was not agreed to. That would have made the bill all-encompassing because, despite the fact that the minister has lodged an amendment that refers to those who have a vote in the House of Lords, all members of the House of Lords have a certain amount of influence that others do not have. Tricia Marwick will expand on that point. Provided I get that guarantee from the minister, I am happy not to move amendment 7.

I have the authority to say to Iain Smith that one of the applicants for the job on the Gaelic board was Professor Kenneth MacKinnon, who is the leading Gaelic language planner in Scotland and a former member of the ministerial advisory group on Gaelic. He was not appointed—but he does not carry a Labour party card. That is why he was not appointed. I find the defence of Mr Peacock's poodle amazing. Amendment 5 is not an example of McCarthyism. Labour party members are the mafiosi in Scotland. They use their networks—

No. The member would not take an intervention from Mike Russell, so I will not take one from him. If Mr Smith sits down and listens, he will learn. I will go through some of the points that the minister made, every one of which was nonsense. First he said that all appointments are made on merit. Why do the vast bulk of appointments go to Labour cronies? Mr Peacock said that less than 10 per cent of appointees declared a political affiliation. The latest figures show that nearly 20 per cent declare a political affiliation. He also asked how political activity could be defined. It could be defined in the code of practice. On the issue of how to define donations, the minister mentioned the legal definition of donations that already exists, which could be incorporated into the code of practice. It is total nonsense to hide behind the argument, "That cannae be done." When we appointed a standards commissioner, we agreed that the Parliament would approve the code of conduct that the commissioner drafted. The minister said that the Executive will consult on the code of conduct. Consultation is fine, but what happens if the Executive does not agree with the consultees and writes its own code of practice, giving the democratically elected MSPs no say in the matter? It has been said that the process will be politicised. How can it be claimed that the process is not politicised when 60 per cent of the members of one board carry one party card, another 20 per cent carry another Executive party card and the remaining 20 per cent are non-aligned and do not carry any card? It has been said that the process is not politicised, but that is absolute nonsense.  What is the difference between amendment 5, on people who have engaged in political activity, and the minister's amendment, on voting members of the House of Lords? Why is it justifiable—quite rightly—to incorporate that amendment into the bill, but not the provision that I propose? The reality is that the Labour party wants to run Scotland with its wee clique of bullies and does not want the system to be opened up. I am reminded of the old council housing system whereby the Labour party used the allocation of council houses to keep its political grip on Scotland; now, it uses the quango system to maintain its grip. I say to the Scottish Parliament and especially to those who call themselves Liberals that the system should be opened up and made democratic, and an end should be put to the mafiosi of the central Scotland Labour party.

As members know, the bill transfers the functions that are carried out at present by Dame Rennie Fritchie, the United Kingdom commissioner for public appointments, to a new Scottish commissioner. In doing so, we should consider the problems that Dame Rennie has faced in the past in trying to achieve her objectives. We need to go way back to the days of the Nolan committee and the Neil committee to consider the first principles of what we are trying to achieve in the bill, which is a public appointments system that is not only transparent but also fair in every respect. The system has to be fair to the applicant as well as to others. One of the problems that Dame Rennie has faced is that she has no power to veto an appointment or a proposed appointment on the  ground of political imbalance. In answers that have been given by ministers ever since the Scottish Parliament was established, and despite all the protestations the length and breadth of Scotland—

I will do so in a moment. Those protestations have been made in civic society as well as in the Parliament. No matter what period is examined, the figures show that anything between 60 per cent and 80 per cent of all appointees who declare a political affiliation came from one party, namely the Labour party. I cannot believe that 60 per cent of the talent in Scotland votes Labour when Labour scores less than 40 per cent in any election. There are even some Liberal Democrats with talent out there who could fill some positions. [MEMBERS: "No."] That is debatable. The purpose of the amendment is to fill the gap in relation to the new commissioner's powers that Dame Rennie currently has.

That is precisely the point. I do not believe that all merit belongs to one party. We have many talents in Scotland, and every other party is grossly underrepresented in the appointments systems. We are trying to ensure that the code of practice—the detail of the bill's implementation—will not be used and abused by the Liberal Democrat-supported Labour Executive to maintain the system of cronyism that it has practised in Scotland for years.

At present, people must do that when they register; they must declare their political activity. I am trying to build that into the code of practice.

That is why the law needs to be strengthened and why the amendment should be built into the code of practice so that, through secondary legislation, the Executive does not do the dirty on the Parliament by maintaining a system of cronyism by the back door.  The bill was supposed to be about the new politics, and about cleaning up Scotland. Part of cleaning up Scotland is to get rid of Labour cronyism once and for all. I move amendment 5.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I and many members were surprised to read in the newspapers about the Parliament's mail service being put out to tender. I speak on behalf of several members from all sides of the chamber when I say that we are concerned about that happening. Can you give us a guarantee that before any decision is taken to relieve the Royal Mail of the contract, it will be put to a vote of the Parliament, and that the SPCB will not take such a decision on its own and in secret?

Will you advise under what rules of the Parliament the contract has to go out to competitive tender?

I remind the member that Ms Alexander also pointed out that the Labour party had not had a new idea since 1906. The budget proves that to be correct.

I begin by exploding the myth that all is well in the Scottish economy. Two weeks ago, the manufacturing export figures for Scotland showed a drop of 25 per cent in manufacturing exports and a 36 per cent drop in the export of electronics. This week, a report from the University of Sheffield and the University of Warwick has shown that the real level of unemployment in Scotland is not around 100,000, but well over 300,000. A report from the UK National Audit Office, two weeks ago, showed that PPP is by far the most expensive way to finance public sector projects and leaves a legacy of debt to future generations. Just before Christmas, the figures on child poverty showed not only that child poverty levels in Scotland are not falling, but that child poverty is getting worse. The Executive's targets on health are being missed, both on waiting times and on waiting lists; its targets on education are being missed, particularly on literacy and numeracy; and its targets on enterprise are farcical. One of the key strategic objectives in the budget document is to increase the share of Scotland's gross domestic product that is spent on research and development from the current figure of around 0.8 per cent to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's average figure of about 1.8 per cent. In a reply to me, the Minister for Finance and Public Services confirmed that that would require an additional annual expenditure by 2006 of £750 million. Nowhere in the budget does that figure, or anything like it, appear. In other words, the targets are pure mythology, like the GERS document itself.

My priority would be research and development. Wendy Alexander is wrong—not for the first time—in that the SNP's policy is not to abolish the intermediate technology institutes. The  policy of our party is to increase the level of spend on research and development and to allocate additional resources from the enterprise budget to meet that objective. I do not have time to outline everything in detail, but I can tell members the gist of it. Putting science, research and commercialisation at the top of the economic development agenda is the sensible thing to do, because that is where the future jobs and prosperity will come from. My final point is about GERS. The document is about mythology rather than about reality. We hear all this nonsense about Scotland's alleged deficit. The UK figures this year show that the estimate for the UK fiscal deficit ranges anywhere between £30 billion and £100 billion. Does that mean that the UK is incapable of being an independent nation state? Of course it does not. We cannot say that Scotland cannot be independent because it has an alleged fiscal deficit and say that the UK can be independent.

I am afraid that I do not have time. The only way to achieve the targets on health, education, unemployment and manufacturing is to give this Parliament the sovereign powers over the Scottish economy to allow us to do that.

The penultimate paragraph of page 2 of GERS 2000-01 states: "The calculations required to derive Net Borrowing for Scotland are subject to imprecision due to the need to estimate a number of elements of both expenditure and revenue." In other words, it is a load of nonsense.

Will Wendy Alexander give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Sector Skills Development Agency about establishing sector skills councils in Scotland. (S1O-6318)

As the minister will be aware, funding for national training organisations—the predecessor bodies—will come to an end at the end of March. However, no substantive sector skills councils have yet been established. Will he urge the SSDA to pull its finger out and get the sector skills councils established? Does he agree that, rather than try to set up a business skills unit hub in Scotland when we already have one, the Executive should concentrate on its main job, which is getting the SSCs established?

Will the minister clarify two points that will show how far down the Thatcherite road this Administration and the Administration in London are prepared to go? In his statement yesterday, John Prescott said that he would consult on the way in which the proposed legislation would be processed, but he did not give a commitment to consult on the proposed legislation. Will the Deputy First Minister therefore give the Parliament an undertaking that no legislation that covers Scotland will be passed without the Scottish Parliament's explicit approval? If a settlement on pay and conditions is imposed, but the firemen still strike, will the Deputy First Minister contemplate a ban on firefighters strikes? Is that part of his consultation with Deputy Prime Minister Prescott?

I draw the minister's attention to the evidence from the University of Strathclyde's department of modern languages for the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's recent lifelong learning inquiry that the levels of literacy among some students who went to the university were so poor that the university had to run remedial courses. Will the minister work with her colleague the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning to deal with that problem and the general problems of transition from school to post-school situations?

I draw the First Minister's attention to the comments of Andrew Cubie, who said that the danger of introducing top-up fees south of the border is that they will deny access to higher education for poorer kids, both north and south of the border, because of the additional pressures that such fees will create. Will the First Minister consider the proposal—which has been widely accepted among the principals and students of Scotland's universities and by Universities Scotland—to recall the Cubie committee to give independent consideration to the long-term future of both student funding and institutional funding? Would not that committee be able to use the period between now and 2006 to ensure that Scotland's university sector gets the additional funding that it so badly needs?

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has for the future operation and membership of the Scottish manufacturing steering group in the light of recent developments. (S1F-2400)

I draw the First Minister's attention to the words of Hugh Aitken, the vice-president of Sun Microsystems' operations in Europe and Asia Pacific, who resigned from the group last week. He said: "I can't handle any more of these sessions. My head screams for a sense of urgency, a sense of change, a sense of innovation, a sense of what's best for Scotland." In the light of yesterday's fairly disastrous results on manufacturing exports, which saw a drop of 25 per cent overall and a drop of 35 per cent in electronics exports, does the First Minister agree that the long-term strategy in "A Smart, Successful Scotland" now needs to be supplemented with short-term, urgent action to save our manufacturing industry from total destruction?

Does the minister agree that a key part of promoting a healthier Scotland is to address the personnel shortages in the health service? To that end, can she tell me how many nurses, doctors and consultants the Scottish Executive has agreed to second to the armed forces in the event of an armed attack on Iraq?

I should like to request that, in seeking clarification, the  Presiding Officers establish why it is necessary to accept the McCabe amendment, instead of the Liberal Democrat amendment. What are the criteria for selecting amendments?

I will ask the First Minister two specific questions. First, will he address the inflexibility of some of the training schemes that are intended to reskill and upskill workers who are made redundant? I refer in particular to the fact that workers must be unemployed for a long time before they qualify for training assistance. Secondly, I draw the First Minister's attention to his own budget document, which rightly sets the objective of achieving the same level of research and development spending in Scotland as is achieved on average in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. The Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning pointed out in a recent reply that the additional yearly expenditure that will be needed to achieve that by 2006 is £750 million. How will the First Minister achieve that target, which is in his own budget document?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

In the interests of accuracy, I point out that the Bain report does not guarantee an 11 per cent wage increase for firefighters; it recommends an 11 per cent increase in the wages bill. There is only the potential to earn an additional 11 per cent, provided that very tough conditions are met.

On behalf of the members, I wish the Presiding Officers a merry Christmas and a happy new year. I am sure that we do that every time that we are not called to ask a supplementary question. I make it absolutely clear that I do not speak to the motion from a party-political point of view. The issue is far too important and the industrial dispute is far too big for us to play politics with it. The wording of the motion is deliberately based on that of a motion that the Northern Ireland Assembly unanimously agreed to in September before it was suspended. My motion has two purposes. First, it affords the Parliament the opportunity, which we have not had in the dispute, to record our respect for and recognition of firefighters not only in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom. It also affords us the opportunity to recognise the work that they do and the need for them to be given a fair and just settlement on their pay and conditions. The second purpose of the motion is to allow the Parliament to put some pressure on the Executive and the UK Government to adopt a more reasonable approach to dealing with the dispute and to try to settle it much more amicably than has been the case until now. The job of a firefighter is not easy. Our firefighters are a group of professional, dedicated and worthy men and women. They see their job not just as a job or career, but as a vocation in life. Their priority—indeed, their obsession—is to save lives and to ensure that people are protected from the effects of fire and associated hazards. When the rest of us leave a burning inferno, the firefighters go into it, often without knowing what they will find. Sometimes their experiences are too horrific for words. They often have to cope with situations  involving injury and death that are impossible for the rest of us to imagine. Having to witness people being burnt alive or seeing a child die at the scene of a road accident is part of a firefighter's lot. Indeed, being present at such incidents is part of the job description. From time to time, they also have to put their own lives in danger in order to save those of others. For all those reasons, our firefighters should be treated as national heroes, not demonised as if they were the enemy within. As Jim Wallace said in his foreword to the Scottish Executive paper "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future", which was published last year: "The fire service is one which has an enviable reputation for delivery." As with a small number of groups in our society, such as nurses and the armed forces, the nature of the firefighters' job makes them a special case, and they should be treated as such. In a modern society, essential workers such as firefighters should not be forced into a situation in which they think that the only way they will get a fair deal is by going on strike. Our firefighters do not want to be on strike; they want to settle the dispute round the negotiating table, which they would have done had the Government allowed them and the employers to do so. The firefighters want negotiation, not confrontation. It is not for the Parliament to decide the exact details of a settlement to the dispute or to determine what percentage increase the firefighters should get. However, it is the right—it is the duty—of the Parliament to set the record straight about some of the stuff and nonsense that some UK ministers and others have put about with regard to the firefighters' pay claim. The first myth that needs to be exploded is about modernisation. Far from being against modernisation, the firefighters have been demanding it. Indeed, they have submitted their own detailed proposals for the modernisation of the fire service. Furthermore, following last year's terror attacks, they have agreed to undertake new duties in relation to mass decontamination without any additional pay or benefits. The measures that the firefighters oppose are those that fly in the face of their professional experience and which are more about cost cuts and job cuts than about modernisation. For example, they oppose the proposal to reduce the number of firefighters on night shift, not because they are militant but because 75 per cent of people who are killed in fires are killed at night. Fighting a fire in the dark is, of course, much more problematic than fighting one during daylight hours. The common sense of the firefighters' position on that issue was exemplified two weeks  ago, during the fire in Edinburgh's old town. Had there been reduced night cover, who is to say how much further the fire would have spread or what damage or injury would have been done to individuals? Who in their right mind would take the advice of Sir George Bain, the vice-chancellor of Queen's University Belfast, on night-time cover, rather than that of the professional firefighters, who have years of experience on the front line? Sir George has never fought a fire in his puff. How would he like it if the firefighters told him how to run his university? The other modernisation proposals—some of which are equally crazy—are opposed for good professional reasons, not because of militancy and obstinacy on the part of the firefighters. I do not have time to go through each of the issues—I am sure that other speakers will do so. However, Sir George Bain's report was neither independent nor neutral. Sir George was knighted by the UK Government. He and his committee were appointed by the Government—without consultation with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The committee's remit was set by the Government, its conclusions were dictated by the Government and its proposals are a carbon copy of what the Government wanted. Let us forget Bain and get back to real negotiations. Let our firefighters get the pay rise they deserve and let us modernise the fire service—in the real sense of the word modernisation—rather than butcher it as Bain would have us do. Let common sense prevail.

I welcome the institutes' establishment, but I ask the minister to examine the competitor institutes in other countries, such as Singapore and Sweden, and the budgets that are allocated to them, which are more substantial than the budgets for the Scottish institutes. I realise that it is early days, but will the minister monitor the situation and benchmark the institutes' performance and budgets against their competitor institutes in other countries?

There is no significance in the fact that I am speaking from the front bench. [ Interruption. ] I will have no heckling from Christine Grahame. I congratulate Donald Gorrie on securing this important debate. The Parliament has discussed debt and the allied issues of warrant sales, poindings and attachments a number of times. However, I do not think that we have ever discussed the core issue of how people get into debt and what we can do as a Parliament, either acting unilaterally or in partnership with Westminster, to try to tackle the roots of the problem. I begin by making a plea for the minister to look at my proposal for a bank arrestment bill, which has been in the system for two years. The bill has the support of the legal committee of the Scottish clearing banks, which was actively involved in its drawing up. It would deal with an issue that was not included in the Executive legislation, but which the debt working party report highlighted as an issue that needs to be dealt with. Many people these days who in days gone by did not have a bank account, particularly  pensioners, now operate through a bank account. When their bank account is arrested, they are left with nothing to live on until the problem is resolved. If someone has their wages arrested, they are allowed to keep about £70 a week to see them by while the problem of repaying the debt is resolved and a schedule for repayment is agreed. Pressure is now put on pensioners to have their pension paid into a bank account, rather than by cash at the post office. Many pensioners, sometimes accidentally, find themselves overdrawn or in debt because of their inexperience of using, and inability to manage, a bank account. The purpose of the bank arrestment bill is to give to those people whose bank accounts are arrested the same treatment that is given to those whose wages are arrested. They would be left with enough to get by and enough for the basics of life until the counselling and agreed debt resolution procedures were put in place. I hope that now that we have a new minister, the Executive will take a more sympathetic approach to the matter. I have no doubt that we do not have time to pass my proposed bill before the election, but I will introduce a bill in the new session, provided that I get a guarantee that the Executive will not try to block it. That would deal with one of the consequences of debt. We have to examine the reasons for people getting into debt. In essence, we are talking about three broad categories of debt. By far the largest debt in this country is the debt attached to mortgages, but that is not generally problematic because the debt is associated with an asset and the liability is very often more than offset by the asset. We had problems in the past with negative equity and many people got into difficulty. That is a specific problem with managing the housing market, which is not the core of the subject tonight. The second category of debt through which people get into difficulty, and which involves by far the biggest amount of money, is consumer debt. In the old days, that happened primarily through hire purchase and people taking on far too much debt. These days, it is through the pressure to take on credit cards and all the rest of it. I remember, during a recent debate, Lyndsay McIntosh giving us an excellent display of all the mailings that she had received from companies trying to sell her credit cards—not her other mailings—within a fortnight. No doubt we will get another show tonight. That was indicative of the sheer pressure that is put on people daily to get into debt. We must do something about that, because that pressure and temptation leads a lot of people into debt. The third main problem is local authority debt. When we discussed warrant sales and poindings,  we found that more than 80 per cent of all warrant sales and poindings in every year that we looked at over the past 20 years were in relation to debt to local authorities. That debt was either in respect of the poll tax or, now that that has worked its way out of the system, in respect of council tax and/or rent arrears. I hope that the new legislation will assist in managing that. In the cross-party group that I have been involved in, and in all the work that I did with others on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill, the fundamental lesson was the power of early intervention. There is no point in waiting until people get so deeply into debt that they cannot do anything about it. Developing an early warning system and finding ways to intervene early will be key to the success of part 1 of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill, which we passed last month. I congratulate Donald Gorrie. Debt is not a party-political issue; it is a social problem that needs to be tackled. I look forward to a sympathetic response from the minister.

I thank all those who have contributed to the publication of the final report of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on lifelong learning. I thank the 120-odd individuals and organisations that gave us evidence in written and oral form, and the 200 people who took part in the lifelong learning convention earlier this year. I also thank members of the committee, especially Marilyn Livingstone, who will sum up on behalf of the committee. I pass on apologies from Annabel Goldie, the deputy convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, who is otherwise engaged this afternoon. I thank the clerks to the committee—Simon Watkins, Judith Evans and their team—who played a major role in preparing the report. I also thank the consultants and the advisers, three of whom are present in the distinguished visitors' gallery, for their input. Although the report has not received much publicity, it deals with one of the most important subjects that the Parliament will discuss. Lifelong learning—tertiary education and training—which covers higher, further, vocational, informal and community education is one of the most important of the Parliament's responsibilities. We now spend more than £1.3 billion a year of our budget on this activity. I say right at the beginning of the debate that we have much to be proud of in our education and training system. The message must go out from this debate that, although the committee has made 80 specific proposals for improving higher, further and vocational education, people should not interpret that as meaning that we are anything other than proud of our achievements in this field. As the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I get the opportunity to visit many of the institutions in Scotland that are involved in the delivery of higher and further education and training and vocational education  and training. There is a great deal for us to commend. Work on cancer research is being done at Dundee University and work on games technology is being done at the University of Abertay Dundee. The University of St Andrews has a centre for biomolecular sciences. Heriot-Watt University's department of petroleum engineering is working on a project that is funded by the General Medical Council to use oil technology techniques to improve chemotherapy in our hospitals. The University of Glasgow and the University of Edinburgh have centres of excellence in many disciplines and are way ahead in commercialisation. In our college sector, work on biotechnology is going on in Falkirk College of Further and Higher Education. John Wheatley College is working on improving access to higher and further education for people living on peripheral housing estates. At the Crichton campus in Dumfries, four universities offer degrees from one campus. We are making progress—albeit that we need to improve this—in establishing a university for the Highlands and Islands, which is long overdue. I could go through a list of employers' organisations, students' organisations and deliverers of community and vocational training that are doing an excellent job for Scotland. We can take pride in the fact that more than half of our school leavers go straight to university from school, which is one of the highest rates in the whole of the western world. That is an issue that needs to be debated—no doubt, my good friend David Mundell will mention it in his contribution. We can also take pride in the fact that 40 per cent of those going to university today come from the further education sector. That demonstrates the enormous contribution that the sector makes and the fact that further and higher education are coming closer and closer together. Despite all those pluses and despite all the strengths, there is no doubt that to face the challenges of the 21 st century, many things need to be done by the Parliament, the Executive—which has worked in close co-operation with the committee in the publication of our report—and by all those involved either as suppliers or consumers of education and training. We now face six key challenges. First, we face the knowledge challenge. In days gone by we lived in an agricultural economy; then we lived in a manufacturing economy and then we lived in a service economy. Tomorrow's world is going to be one of a knowledge economy, where knowledge is power and knowledge will rule supreme in determining who is successful and who is not.

Absolutely. I want to mention two other aspects of our report. One is citizenship and the need for our young people and others to have knowledge of the role of the citizen in our society. The second aspect is sustainable development, which Robin Harper will no doubt address. That is also critically important. The knowledge life cycle is rapidly diminishing. It used to be the case that, after one had been to college or university to learn a trade or to study to be a doctor, an accountant or an economist, one could probably have gone through most of the rest of one's working life knowing what there was to know and picking up any additional things that one needed to know without any further formal education or training. Those days have gone forever. Some of the knowledge that is imparted today will have changed dramatically in a year, or two years, or three years. Therefore, there is a demand for genuine lifelong learning. Education must not be seen just as a one-off experience that lasts from the age of five until the ages of 18 or 22. Learning will have to be a lifetime experience, so that we can stay ahead of the game. That is why many of our recommendations, such as the lifelong learning log, are designed to take account of the new knowledge economy. The aim is not just to record what people learn, the formal qualifications that they obtain and the informal learning that they undertake, but to use that as a tool to plan their careers and their route to further learning, which will enable them to fully realise their potential. We must face up to the knowledge challenge if we are to compete effectively in the 21 st century and to create a socially just and decent society. The second major challenge is what I call the fairness challenge—the social justice challenge or the access challenge. In spite of all the improvements and all the additional money, it is still a fact of life that someone who is the son or daughter of a banker, an accountant or an MSP has an 80 per cent chance of getting to university, whereas someone who is the child of a farm labourer or a postman has only a 14 per cent chance, on average, of getting to university. We must close that gap, because the children of the postman and the farm labourer are not failing to get to university because they do not have the intellectual ability to do so, but because the system does not work in their favour. One of the most impressive pieces of evidence that the committee received was given by Linda McTavish, who is the principal of Anniesland College in Glasgow, which is now an excellent  institution of learning. She pointed out that those who go through the education system in Scotland could be described by drawing a triangle and slicing it into three sections. At the tip of the triangle would be the small number of people who get on in life and in education. They have not only the intellectual ability, but the wealth of background to see them through, irrespective of what assistance the state provides. Those are the people who would get on anyway, almost regardless of what we did. The middle slice would consist of the people who get by. I probably come into the middle slice in only one respect—I am the son of a miner, the grandson of a miner and the great-grandson of a miner. I was the first ever member of the Neil family to get to university. I was only able to do that with the support that I got from tuition fees and grants, coupled with a summer job and the job of delivering the post at Christmas, which I still have to do on occasion. I am one of those who required the assistance of the state to get by. That enabled me to end up with a degree and to get on to the rung. When we get to the bottom of the triangle, we come to the vast numbers who neither get on nor get by but get nowhere, because they have not had the opportunities in life. In itself, that is bad enough. However, Linda McTavish pointed out to us that, if we invert the triangle and use that as an indicator of how resources are applied to those three groups, we find that the vast bulk of the resources still go to those at the tip of the triangle. Those are the people who get on and largely do not need the resources. A smaller slice goes to those in the middle, but practically little goes to those who are most in need. Many of our recommendations—such as those on improving the access premium in universities, on targeting part-time returners to learning and mature students, and on trying to get greater equality of esteem between FE and HE—are intended to address the fairness challenge, so that we can get those triangles to lie closer, side by side. The third major challenge that we face is the demographic challenge. Overall, our population is declining, but our working population is declining particularly rapidly. Let me provide, as an example, two statistics for the area that you represent, Presiding Officer—although I do not mean this to apply to your good self. The truth is that 50 per cent of those in work today in the Borders region will be collecting their pensions by 2010, which is in eight years' time. That is how big our problem of an aging working population is. If we look further ahead for Scotland as a whole, we see that the number of 15 to 19-year-olds coming on to the labour market will decline by one fifth by  2025. We face a demographic time bomb. Part of our challenge in lifelong learning is to address the problems that are created by that situation. The fourth challenge is the jobs challenge. The official statistics show that Scotland still has 115,000 people who are officially unemployed and collecting benefit. That lies side by side with vacancies in the building trade. In many parts of Scotland, one cannot get a joiner or a slater or an electrician or a plumber. In the oil and gas sector, there are major skills shortages in certain niches. Even in electronics, despite the recent rundowns, we have key niche shortages in project management and general management skills. We need to get far better not only at matching the unemployed to the job opportunities, but in ensuring that, overall, education and training help many more people to use that education and training both for their own and for the community's benefit. Over a lifetime, the earning power of someone with a degree is equivalent to over £0.5 million in additional income compared with those without a degree. For those with a higher national diploma, their earning power is still about half of that figure. It is in the interests both of individuals and of society to make use of that great reservoir of talent that lies among those, such as the unemployed, who do not get the chance. We need to try to ensure that, more and more, we have programmes such as modern apprenticeships that are geared to the needs of industry. We believe that the modern apprenticeship programme is an excellent programme. One of the recommendations of our interim report was that the age barrier should be lifted. That has already been done. Among our other recommendations for improving the programme and the way in which we spend the money was that not only should overall targets for such programmes be set, but they should look at the targets that are needed to improve our economic performance as a nation. The fifth challenge is the resources challenge. I acknowledge the additional real money that has recently been put into the system of higher, further and vocational education and training. It would be churlish not to recognise that additional investment. Compared with other nations, however, we are still underinvesting in our tertiary education and training systems. Canada spends 2.4 per cent of its gross domestic product on tertiary education and training. Denmark spends about one third more than we do. Our rate is approximately 1.2, 1.3 or 1.4 per cent, depending upon how it is measured and in which week the Office for National Statistics publishes the results. It is a fact of life and we all recognise that there will be an increasing need for additional resources and investment in the years to come. There will be  a debate about how that resourcing should be done, whether through top-up fees or whatever. I will say straight away that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee agreed on day one to park the issue of student finance. If we had made that an essential part of our report, we would never have reached the stage that we have today. We would have been bogged down in the party-political argument—important though that argument is—on student finance. We therefore parked the issue. I must, however, make two points. First, the committee is unanimous that whatever future system of funding is put in place, there must be a stream of funding for the institutions and a separate, albeit related, stream of funding for individuals. We cannot give all the money to individuals and let the institutions hang by themselves. We agree that that would be a recipe for disaster. Secondly, the committee has parked the issue of student finance in order to achieve a unanimous report. However, speaking personally—and most people agree no matter on what side of the fence they sit—we cannot continue to park that issue because it is urgent and must be addressed in the months and years ahead. The final challenge is that of delivery—mainly to finish delivering my speech 30 seconds within time. I have addressed some issues that will be taken further by my committee colleagues. I finish by saying that when I consider the challenges that we face in tertiary education and training, I am reminded of the challenge faced by Conrad's mariner when he saw the storm coming. He knew he could not dodge it; he had to face it, he had to fight it and he had to beat it. Let the message go out from today's debate that the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Executive, funding councils, employers, students and institutions are all going to work together to face up to these challenges so that we do not just make things better for our people, but so that we make our college, university and vocational education the best in the world. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the 9th Report 2002 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, Final Report on Lifelong Learning (SP Paper 679), and invites the Scottish Executive to take the report into account when developing the new strategy.

I, too, congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing the debate and on his speech. I agree with every one of his recommendations. It is a rare event in this chamber for us to be united to such a degree. Phil Gallie, Brian Fitzpatrick, Duncan McNeil and I are all on the same side of the argument. It is important that we speak with one voice. A loud, clear message should go out from the Scottish Parliament that we are united in our support for the consumer. We all have tales from our constituencies of people—especially older people and people suffering from early senile dementia—who have been victims of the mis-selling of utilities. Several  such cases have been cited this evening. Rather than cite more examples of the problem, I would like to refer to three aspects of what should be the solution. First, we need to consider the possibility of making independent advice readily available to people who have been approached by salespeople. I refer not just to salespeople who are involved in mis-selling, but to those who are genuinely selling an alternative method of energy supply. There should be an easy and readily accessible source of independent advice. The points that Brian Fitzpatrick raised in his speech in themselves justify the need for such independent advisory services to be available. I had a phone call last week from Scottish Gas asking me to change from Scottish Power to Scottish Gas. I would not have known the technicalities to which Brian Fitzpatrick referred and I cannot think of any organisation that I could readily have phoned to get advice to enable me to make an informed decision. We need to consider the possibility of that kind of advice being available and perhaps having the producer organisations fund it. Secondly, we should consider the need for a register, so that, as with land, every time that a change in power provider takes place, the company that takes over has to register the change. That would allow the regulator at least to monitor what is going on, perhaps initially on a pilot basis. We should certainly hold that in contingency if the power companies refuse to adhere to what Ofgem has declared and to the voices of this Parliament and, no doubt, the Westminster Parliament. A couple of months ago, the director general of Ofgem, Callum McCarthy, was before the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. Brian Fitzpatrick and I both raised the issue with him and I hope that we can claim some credit for the recent changes that Ofgem has made in regulation—even if we cannot, we will. My final point is on the definition of utilities. Inevitably tonight we have concentrated on gas and electricity, which are the energy utilities, but there is a similar problem in relation to the telephone companies, particularly with new companies coming into the market allegedly selling low-cost deals on calls. It seems to me that there is scope for us to send a message to Westminster that the new UK Communications Bill could have built into it additional safeguards for the consumers of telephone utilities. I make those points in a positive manner, in the hope that the minister will at least consider them.

Will the minister ask head teachers to work together with the university sector and highlight, for example, the work of the University of Strathclyde's modern languages department, which has to run remedial courses for new students to overcome some of their problems before they can engage in university education?

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister whether, instead of wasting public money on celebrating the union of the Crowns—

I am coming to that. My question is relevant.

If you will let me finish the sentence—

Well, can I ask—

I want to ask the First Minister whether it is not wiser to spend public money creating new jobs—

I apologise, Presiding Officer. I realise that I was trying to read out my supplementary to question 4. [Laughter.]  To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will review the criteria for regional selective assistance and other forms of support available to incoming foreign companies. (S1F-2212) I assure you, Presiding Officer, that that was not my supplementary.

Rather than waste public money on celebrating the union of the Crowns and the union of the Parliaments, the latter of which in particular has cost us dear, will the First Minister use that money instead to create new jobs for those workers who were made redundant in Mossend  and Dundee as a result of decisions taken by international companies? Will he tell us whether it is true that around £3.75 million was made available to Chunghwa for training, but that that money was never used for training? Will he give a guarantee that any moneys that are recovered from regional selective assistance funds will be reinvested in local companies to create local jobs, which are badly needed in Mossend?

I want to ask what the minister is doing to promote low-cost flights between Scotland and Europe in two specific cases. In the follow-up to the Scotland in Sweden event, what is he doing to establish a direct air link between Stockholm and Scotland? Will he examine the funding structure of Inverness airport, which acted as a barrier to achieving an agreement with Ryanair on establishing low-cost services into Inverness?

I will follow on from John McAllion's point. Is there not a central contradiction in the minister's policy? On the one hand she says that one size does not fit all, and that the policy should be flexible enough to ensure that we get horses for courses. On the other hand, in her statement she said that local authorities' housing debt will not be written off unless they go down the stock transfer road that she tells them to go down. The minister cannot have it both ways. She cannot say, "We will be flexible," and on the other hand say, "You will get the debt written off only if you go down the stock transfer route." My second point is on the important point in the minister's speech about linking housing investment to wider employment and other issues. We saw a report this week on child poverty and a report last week on unemployment. We know that there will be a shortage of 27,500 workers in the construction industry in the years to come. What discussions has the minister had with the Construction Industry Training Board and Scottish Enterprise on solving the skills crisis in the building trade?

I accept all the figures that the minister has just given and they are to be celebrated. One area in which we are way behind is our share of defence research expenditure, for which there is a huge budget. Although I would not wish some aspects of defence research to come to Scotland, will the minister give an undertaking that he will talk to the Ministry of Defence and the appropriate agencies about increasing Scotland's share of defence research?

I am not making a party-political point, because that would be wholly inappropriate. I accept that £50 million is a great deal of money. However, it is nothing compared with what is being invested in parallel institutes in Sweden and Singapore. We need to recognise the scale of investment that we must make if we are to compete.

I welcome the members of the Royal Society of Chemistry who are in the public gallery. This is the second speech that they have heard from me in 90 minutes, so either they are gluttons for punishment or they know a good thing when they are on to it. I suspect that it is the latter, of course.  I will concentrate on two aspects that go together: the commercialisation of research, and science education. I will refer back to the report that was published by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee about this time last year on university research and teaching. Four things need to be done if we are serious about commercialisation. First, we need to overhaul the research assessment exercise in the way that David Davidson mentioned and make it much simpler. The current system is crazy. For example, an academic who published four articles in prestigious journals would get the maximum brownie points through the RAE. However, if he or she took out a patent, they would get few brownie points. If they set up a spin-out company, they would get no brownie points whatever. Things should be the other way round. The situation is particularly ridiculous because many of our foreign industrial competitors would use the four articles in the prestigious journals to get the intellectual property required for them to patent a product and would get all the commercial benefit from that. Therefore, a total overhaul of the RAE is required. Secondly, we need to learn from the University of Cambridge model of encouraging the commercialisation of its academics' research. The tight funding of Scottish universities means that they are totally reliant on what is essentially marginal revenue from the sale of intellectual property and patents that result from research. However, the University of Cambridge makes no claim to any of its academics' research work. They retain the rights over it. Therefore, they have access to the intellectual property rights, the patent rights and so on. The spin-out rate around Cambridge has exploded because of that, creating new wealth and jobs on an unprecedented scale. In addition, those people to whom the university gave a chance are voluntarily donating to the university through endowments and all the rest of it. We need to consider doing a deal with our universities to repeat the Cambridge model. My third point is that the Executive's budget, under the heading of enterprise and lifelong learning, rightly sets a long-term target of getting the level of business spend on research and development up to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average. We currently spend 0.53 per cent of our gross domestic product on business research and development. To get to the OECD average, that figure needs to rise to 1.54 per cent. That means an additional spend, year on year, of £750 million on business research and development. We have to try to get to that level if we are to remain a modern, industrial and competitive nation. To the minister, I say, "For God's sake, get  ahead with the intermediate technology institutes!" It is taking for ever to set them up and a wee bit of energy, innovation and dynamism might help them to become a reality before we are all dead.

There are three aspects of the bill that I want to draw to the attention of the committee that will consider the bill at stage 2. I hope that we will be able to address the problems then. The first concerns the powers of the commissioner. We have a commissioner, but she is a UK commissioner and covers only a proportion of the non-departmental public bodies that are the subject of public appointments. In my view, it is important that the Scottish commissioner should have 100 per cent coverage of all public appointments and should not be confined to a partial remit. We must strengthen the powers of the commissioner to achieve political balance and to end other forms of cronyism. We need to deal not only with political cronyism but with the old boy networks that operate in Scotland. We need to break them down so that appointments are genuinely made on merit. Appointments should be made on the basis not of who people know but of what they know.

The situation with regard to political cronyism has not changed at all in the past year. Actually, to be fair, it has changed a wee bit. This year, 60 per cent of those declaring a political affiliation were Labour supporters, whereas last year the proportion was 61 per cent. That is a 1 per centage point improvement in 12 months. I give way.

What a choice! I wish the commissioner were here to advise me. I give way to Sylvia Jackson.

My point is exactly that. I do not believe that 60 per cent of those who declare a political affiliation are very clever people when they belong to and support the Labour party. The issue is one of merit. On a good day, the Labour party would get 40 per cent of the vote in Scotland. I do not see why it should get 60 per cent of appointments. There is clearly a political bias. With all due respect, most senior Labour spokesmen have admitted that there has been bias in the system. My fundamental point is not just to moan and groan about that today—although I have enjoyed doing so—it is about giving the commissioner the power to consider political balance and cronyism, whether that relates to party affiliations or people being members of other organisations, including secret societies. My second point is about the code of practice. It, too, has to cover the issues I have mentioned. Again I use the example of a political appointee. At the moment, the definition of political activity is fairly narrow. We have to consider the definition of political activity that is going to be applied through the bill or the code of practice. I do not believe that we can be satisfied with the existing definition. The other issue is the time scale. The only political activity that has to be declared is that which took place within the past five years. On occasion, political activity that took place six or seven years prior to the appointment might be relevant. We must consider that issue at stage 2. My third point is to repeat what I said earlier in the debate about the parliamentary committee. I see no reason for the delay in setting up the parliamentary committee. However, its structure is critical and I hope that its convener will not be a member of the Executive. Ideally, the majority of members will not be part of the governing coalition, or the party that will be governing after 1 May next year.

Let me confuse Iain Smith with the facts. His facts are wrong, and I refer to a ministerial reply to a question from me, given on 17 October. It is not 10 per cent of appointees who declared a political affiliation, but 23 per cent. That is a rise from 13.1 per cent a year ago. When the member is making allegations, at least he could get his facts right. That would be a novel idea.

I have spoken to the minister about the possibility of a new parliamentary committee. Why should we not, following this debate, ask the powers that be in the Parliament to establish that committee now? There is no reason for us to wait for the passage of the bill before setting up a committee to review the existing process.

I remind the First Minister that, when he was appointed, he promised to do less, better. To be fair, he has kept the first part of that promise. On the skills shortages in the construction industry, does the First Minister realise that there will be a shortfall of 27,500 skilled people over the next few years? Going on the official figures, we still have 115,000 unemployed people in Scotland. Is not it time that we did more to get more of those 115,000 people off the buroo and into work in the  construction industry?

When the minister meets the new Secretary of State for Education and Skills, will she ask him whether he has made any assessment of the impact of raising the starting age for primary education from five to six and lowering the leaving age for secondary education from 16 to 14, and whether he thinks that implementing such a policy at this time, when there is so much else happening in education, would be a sane and sensible thing to do?

Cannot we all unite behind the position that Tavish Scott proposed, which is that Scottish ministers should lead the Brussels delegation because the issue is primarily a Scottish one? The issue is about the exercise of power in Europe, not for constitutional purposes, but to save an industry that is vital to Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Yes. Presiding Officer, this is a serious point of order, and it is in respect of your duties under the Scotland Act 1998 to define the difference between what is and is not devolved. In this case, it is in respect of representation of the Scottish Executive at the Council of Ministers in Europe. I ask for clarification from the chair in respect of the application of article 146 of the Maastricht treaty, which defines representation at the Council of Ministers as consisting "of a representative of each Member State at ministerial level, authorised to commit the government of that Member State." Yesterday, we heard that Ross Finnie said he sometimes could and sometimes would not lead the delegation to Europe. Last night, we heard that the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs—the English department—said that only a UK minister can lead the delegation; a position that was repeated on radio this morning by Mr Finnie. How can that be the position, given Mr Finnie's colleague Mr Jim Wallace's reply to me on 10 September to a parliamentary question? In that question, I asked "the Scottish Executive at which European Council meetings its ministers have led the UK delegation"— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 10 September 2002; p 1519.]  in terms of article 146. According to the Executive, it has led, under the terms of that article, three times. Who is right—Mr Wallace, who says we can lead, or Mr Finnie and the English department, who say we cannot?

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr McConnell made his reply in Aberdeen after he apparently misled the chamber and had to explain himself as a result of a question from my colleague, Dr Ewing. He distinguished leading the UK delegation from leading discussions on a topic. My question relates to leading the UK delegation and is a simple constitutional question on which we need a ruling. Can a minister in the Scottish Executive lead the delegation to the Council of Ministers of the European Union? According to Mr Wallace, a minister can; but according to Mr Finnie, a minister cannot.

I refer the minister to the announcement that the First Minister made on "Newsnight Scotland" two nights ago, in which he stated his intention soon to announce additional measures to tackle depopulation, which was highlighted in the census report on Monday. Have those additional measures already been costed and included in the spending review and, if so, under what budget do  they appear?

I also congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. Sometimes I think that she is in the wrong party, although she is far too left wing to join new Labour. I want to support what Mike Rumbles said about the dental situation. Ever since the Tories changed the funding arrangements for dentists nearly 10 years ago, we have suffered a shortage of dentists. Indeed, the reason why they changed the arrangements was that, as a result of previous changes, demand for the services was going up too quickly and too many people were going to their dentists. The Tories cut—they did not cap— the fees that are available to dentists, which has resulted in the kind of statistics that Mike Rumbles outlined in his speech. I suggest that the minister revisit the fee arrangements for dentists. I am glad to hear of Mike Rumbles's conversion to the idea that we need to have Scottish solutions to Scottish problems, which the SNP has long argued in relation to dentists, nurses and so on. I was in the United States of America two months ago and noted that nurses in primary care and the hospital sector in some areas are being paid a lump sum of $2,000 to sign a two-year contract and are being paid a salary of about $80,000. That points to why we are short of people in our health service. It is a fundamental truth that, until we pay doctors, dentists, nurses and auxiliary workers—who are essential—decent wages and competitive salaries, we will never solve the problem of the shortage of people in the health service.

That is precisely the point: the UK bargaining scheme is totally inadequate for us to meet Scotland's particular requirements. I am arguing for a Scottish solution to a Scottish problem. There are many fundamental pressures on GPs. The supply of GPs is rising at the rate of 1 per cent a year while the number of consultations that GPs deal with is rising by 14 per cent a year. The average consultation time is still only seven minutes, but the recommended consultation time is 10 minutes. We need almost a 50 per cent increase in the time that is spent with patients. The availability of drugs causes a problem. For example, Infliximab, which can deal quickly with certain cases of rheumatoid arthritis, is not yet available in many parts of Scotland, including Ayrshire. If that drug were available, the pressure on GPs whose patients are sufferers would be substantially reduced because the patients would not have to attend the practice so often. GPs have experienced an increase in their responsibilities, not to mention their paperwork. The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, for example, has obviously put additional burdens on the primary care service. Another problem relates to what I call the knowledge life cycle. It used to be that what doctors learned did not change for five, 10, 15 or 20 years. Now, however, it changes monthly. Continuing professional development is a major pressure in the health service and in many other sectors.  In a short debate, it is not possible to go into all the details. I hope, however, that members have highlighted key points to which the minister will be able to respond.

I believe that this will be one of the first bills to be introduced by a subject committee of the Scottish Parliament. I hope that this welcome innovation is the first of many such bills that will come from the committees. The committee bill process is productive and allows a consensus to be built on issues that we all want to deal with. Like Karen Gillon, I started off as a bit of a cynic and wondered why we needed a children's commissioner. However, having read the material  and the evidence submitted to the committee and having listened to the debate this afternoon, I am in no doubt that there is a need for a children and young person's commissioner. I would like to make a number of points about the commissioner's remit and work programme. I have already referred to the qualifications that I think a commissioner requires, one of which is not to be a middle-aged male who wears a grey suit but someone who is qualified for the job. The main qualification should be a facility and ability to communicate effectively with children as well as the wider community. When we come to the appointment, we should consider appointing someone who is fairly young—perhaps even under the age of 30—so that we send out the right signal: that the commissioner is not another bureaucrat or part of another quango, but exists to serve a specific section of the community. The commissioner should be able to communicate effectively with that section of the community. I remember how important it was when I was a social worker in Kirkton in Dundee to be able to speak to people and have two-way communication with them. It is essential for the commissioner—of all appointees—to be able to do that. On the remit, I asked Jackie Baillie about the distinction between being able to investigate individual cases and considering generic issues. We discussed the example of the potential for abuse of children who are in care. Jackie Baillie's reply was that the commissioner would be able to investigate an organisation if there was an issue in that organisation, but could not take up an individual child's complaints. It will be important to be clear on that point when we legislate. I am not advocating the creation of another layer of investigation by the police, social workers or the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. However, if, for example, a number of children go to the children's commissioner and make a complaint about a care home or a care organisation, will investigation of those cases be within or outwith the commissioner's remit?

That is precisely my point. If a group of children went to the commissioner first, I imagine that the commissioner would refer the matter to the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care or, in some cases, to the police. However, we should not draft the bill in such a way that, when children go to the  commissioner, the commissioner feels as though it is outwith their responsibility to do something. My point is that the drafting of the bill on that point will have to be precise and clear so that it is not unduly prohibitive. I take the point about not wanting at this stage to give the commissioner the ability to investigate individual matters. Nevertheless— [Interruption.] I am sorry. Alex Salmond is making a point about his speech on my pager. [MEMBERS: "What did he say?"] I am not telling. It is a secret. [Interruption.] Excuse me. The trouble is that it is not possible to reply on a pager. I make the point about the remit for individual cases. On the commissioner's work programme, the commissioner should take up a number of issues. I will make a general point before I mention three or four areas in which the commissioner has a role. Karen Gillon stressed the point in her introductory speech. The commissioner will not be an Executive appointment or an Executive appointee; they will be a parliamentary appointment and a parliamentary appointee. That is absolutely right, because the commissioner is independent. However, if the commissioner is critical of the Parliament, the committee, the Executive or political parties, the Parliament, when it comes to the reappointment after five years—and unlike the House of Commons when the post of parliamentary commissioner for standards came up for reappointment—must be big enough not to use that as an excuse to get rid of a person who is prepared to stand up, face the truth and report honestly. The appointee must be fearless and prepared to face the Parliament, even when they think that the Parliament has done something wrong or has not done something that it should. I hope that the committee will consider that point and perhaps make recommendations on it. I would suggest that, in the fourth year of the commissioner's term, the year before reappointment, we ask the commissioner to review, with the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, whether her or his powers are adequate, and establish whether there is a need to extend the commissioner's powers, possibly with regard to some categories of individual cases. A review of the commissioner's powers after four years' experience would be useful, although we might not be able to incorporate that into the bill. I wish to mention some areas of concern that I hope the commissioner will be able to take up. The first is that of special needs. In dealing with constituency cases, I have been struck by the fact that there are particular categories of children who, despite the various infrastructures that are in place, are still not properly served by the system, specifically children with Asperger's syndrome or  other conditions in the spectrum of autism. We have not yet got our act together at a local or national level to deal with children in such categories. The needs of children who find it difficult to articulate their own needs particularly require to be addressed. In this country, a child of a middle-class professional family has an 80 per cent chance of going on to university, whereas the child of an unskilled worker has only a 14 per cent chance. I would like the children's commissioner to find out why that is the case. There is clearly an economic angle to that statistic, but I do not think that the argument is uniquely financial, and the issues around the conditions of children need to be investigated. There is also the matter of getting children's point of view on, for example, television violence and the influences on their behaviour, both when they are children and in later life. Finally, there is an urgent need to examine the particular needs of child carers, whose requirements we still have to meet. I hope that those were useful suggestions—they were certainly intended as such. I totally support the proposal before us. I will go and phone Alex Salmond now.

I am fairly new to the debate and I seek a genuine point of clarification. Where is the borderline between an investigation into an individual and the investigation of an organisation or body? Under the committee's proposals, would an investigation be allowed into—for example—allegations of abuse in a children's home or an organisation that ran children's homes, or would that be regarded as an investigation into an individual and therefore disallowed?

I agree with that point. Does Karen Gillon agree that the personality of the commissioner is critically important and that the last thing that we should do is appoint a middle-aged stuffed shirt who cannot communicate with children—even if the colour of the shirt is heather?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to a report on the front page of The Herald this morning, in which it is stated that the Deputy First Minister will announce the new Cabinet policy on proportional representation for local government at the Lib-Dem conference in Brighton next week. Given the importance of that policy, should the Deputy First Minister not announce it in the chamber?

With all due respect, the way in which the story is written makes it clear that the Deputy First Minister will be speaking in his capacity as Deputy First Minister and will announce Executive policy. Is your ruling that, if it is Executive policy, it should be announced in the chamber?

rose—[Interruption.]

I am always delighted at the reception that I receive from Labour members.

They are warmly welcomed—by the teeth. I draw the First Minister's attention to the report published this week by the London-based constitution unit, which points out that Scotland has been in surplus for 22 of the past 23 years. Is not it time that the Scottish people had access to that money, which has been drained away to the UK Treasury in London? If it were spent in Scotland instead of in London, we would be a growing economy instead of an economy in recession.

I am sure that, like me, the First Minister will appreciate that the problem is not confined to Glasgow. In parts of Lanarkshire recently, we have witnessed young people at school carrying knives. Will the First  Minister look into the problem of rogue retailers who sell knives to children? Will he review whether the law that deals with such traders is strong enough or whether additional measures are required?

The minister has described the budget as a budget for growth. Will he estimate its impact on the growth rate of the Scottish economy over each of the next three years? Moreover, how much of the additional money for further education will be earmarked to deal with the cash crisis in a number of our colleges?

The first thing to understand is that the Lib-Lab Executive is neither smart nor successful. For 39 years since the rate of growth was first recorded in 1963, the Scottish economy has grown at a rate consistently below that of the UK economy. There is consistently a 28 per cent gap between performance in Scotland and performance in the rest of the UK. If we compare the performance of the Scottish economy with that of the south-east of England, we see that the gap is not 28 per cent but nearer to 75 per cent. If we had had anything like the growth level of the south-east of England, Scotland would indeed—

Unfortunately, I do not have time, because of the stupid four-minute rule. Iain Gray's amendment mentions the long term, but we have been through the long term for the past 40 years. The same speeches were made in Westminster over those 40 years, during which we have had 16 years of Labour Government and 24 years of Tory Government. It did not matter which party was in power; the result was the same. The Scottish economy has been in continual relative decline.

The Liberals will never get another shot. They have had 80 years to rest. The potential wealth of Scotland in natural resources probably makes us the richest country per head in the whole of Europe. As Jim Sillars used to say, Scotland is the only country to get poorer and poorer as the oil flowed faster and faster. The coalition parties try to ridicule the case for independence, but they should consider what a London-based accountancy company said only two weeks ago. It said that we in Scotland should at present have interest rates of 2 per cent less than that set by the Bank of England, because of the state of our economy. Wendy Alexander should note that that London-based accountancy group admits that we have a set of economic circumstances in Scotland that are different from those in the south-east of England. In my view, the Bank of England should be renamed the Bank for  England, because it has done nothing for Scotland.

I did not mean to tempt everybody up at the same time. Of course, we are all united on the need for a science and skills strategy. The SNP manifesto in 1999 envisaged VisitScotland and Scottish Development International. We envisaged making Scotland the science capital of Europe. I know those manifesto commitments word for word because it was I who wrote them into the manifesto. We stand four-square behind that strategy, but as long as interest rates and fiscal policy are controlled in London we can have as many strategies as we like up here and it will not matter a toss. I said toss, not tosh, Presiding Officer.

A 1 per cent difference in interest rates would wipe out Scottish Enterprise's budget at a stroke. That budget is worth about 0.5 per cent of gross domestic product in Scotland. A 1 per cent increase in interest rates would more than make up for Scottish Enterprise's budget. That is the scale. That is the difference. That is the vision. That is why we need control of our own economy in an independent Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I associate myself with Brian Fitzpatrick's dignified comments. All members are united in wanting to commemorate last year's horrific events. There can be no worse deaths than those which the people in the twin towers met a year ago today. I have lived and worked in the United States, in New Hampshire, and some of my best friends are from the United States. In no way am I in the category of being anti-American. I like American  people. America is a mixed society in all sorts of ways and the people have a lot to offer. On the whole, they are very genuine and warm. However, although there is much to be admired in America, we should not confuse our friendship with the American people with our ability genuinely to dispute some of the policy positions of the American Administration. When we remember the people in the twin towers and consider why there is terrorism in the world today, we must relate that not only to what has happened in the past but to what might happen in the future. It is relevant to the debate that we discuss the Iraqi situation, because it is about the relationship between the United Kingdom and the United States as well as between the different nations that make up the United Nations. The SNP is not a pacifist party. We clearly gave our backing to the international community in its campaign against Saddam Hussein in 1990. We share the horror of what Saddam represents to the Iraqi people and to other people within that area, but that in itself is no justification for unilateral action that could destroy the lives of many innocent Iraqi people. We must bear in mind the substantive points that Mike Rumbles made in his speech about the fact that we must deal not only with the effects of terrorism, but with the root cause of terrorism. I could think of nothing better designed to create more Osama bin Ladens in this world than if we go into Iraq and bomb the place to smithereens. That would create enormous resentment, not only in Iraq. Besides the inhumanity of doing that to innocent men, women and children, such actions would have a fundamental and immediate effect throughout the middle east and rest of the world. When we consider possible military action of the kind that is being contemplated by the United States, possibly in alliance with the UK and the state of Israel, we must also examine the potential consequences of any such action. Whether the objective is to change the regime or to get rid of weapons of mass destruction, there are different ways to skin the cat. If we skin the cat the wrong way, we could create a bloodbath in the middle east and a much more dangerous world in the future for ourselves, our children and our children's children. I therefore believe that it is right in a debate such as this, which is about our relationship with the United States, that we say to our friends in America and to the many politicians on the right and left of American politics who are opposed to unilateral action against Iraq that we share their misgivings and doubts and that we call on the Administration of America not to make the world an even more dangerous place by taking reckless action against the state of Iraq.

It has been an interesting morning. We have heard about Jamie Stone's cold turkey at Christmas—no doubt with cheese—and Cathie Craigie wants me to put a price on my head. There is no chance of that happening. There is a broad consensus about the problem of fuel poverty, the need to tackle it and give it a high priority—many high-quality speeches have mentioned that. However, some gibberish has been spoken that needs to be corrected. I want to focus on some key fundamentals in respect of tackling fuel poverty. I welcome all the Executive's initiatives, but we should recognise that, even when those initiatives are fully implemented, there may still be fuel poverty and cold, damp homes, as many people do not come under their ambit and will not qualify or be eligible for assistance. I want to highlight three issues. First, fuel poverty cannot be isolated from the general issue of poverty in society. Whether we are discussing child poverty, pensioner poverty or any other kind of poverty, we should remember that many people who live in poverty must live in fuel poverty as a consequence. At the end of the day, there is only one fundamental and simple way to tackle poverty—by putting money into the pockets of the poor, one way or the other. We should ensure that they get decent jobs—which is the preferable option—ensure that they have decent pensions and that children have decent standards of living. Until society is prepared to put real money into the pockets of the poor, poverty will continue and fuel poverty will also continue. That is a basic truth—it is a fact of life and not an opinion. The Parliament does not have the power or resources to tackle poverty at its roots. Secondly, I agree with Phil Gallie, which is unusual for me. He said that there should be cheap forms of energy in this country. However, his suggestion that cheap forms could be obtained from nuclear energy is absolute nonsense. I asked Bill Aitken what the Conservatives would do if British Energy threatened to go belly up. Would he be prepared to put in £500 million on top of the other billions of pounds of taxpayers' money that we have wasted in the nuclear industry to save British Energy? That should happen only if, in return, it comes back into the public sector. If there is any industry that should be publicly owned in this country, it is the nuclear industry.  Nuclear energy is not cheap energy. Lloyd Quinan made the important point that, in Scotland in 2002, we are discussing the incidence of fuel poverty and tackling it in perhaps five, 10 or 15 years, but we are living in a country that is not just the most energy-rich country in Europe—in global terms, Scotland is about the fifth or sixth energy-richest country in the world per head of population.

Not at all. After the events of the past few days, I would have thought that for any Liberal Democrat to call someone else irrelevant would be something of a joke, given the situation that the Liberal Democrats face in the Administration. There is no longer either a coalition or a partnership. The old boys are certainly not being pally together. Scotland is an energy-rich country, and not just in respect of oil. Scotland provides 30 per cent of natural gas for UK consumption. It is rich in uranium, coal, wind power and solar power. According to the European Union, Scotland is the renewable energy capital of Europe. That begs the question, why are we so energy rich, but so poor in respect of fuel poverty?

I would be happy to debate energy supply at any time. I understand that gas and oil reserves are finite, but latest reports on reserves in the North sea and the Atlantic state that they will last at least another 40 or 50 years on the basis of current consumption. Therefore, there is no short-term problem to be faced and I am sure that, in 40 or 50 years, the technology will exist to replace those sources of energy with renewable sources. Unfortunately, my time is running out. The final point that I want to make is that the Executive's fuel poverty initiatives are welcome, but we should recognise that some policies that have been implemented at Westminster fly in the face of the policies that the Executive has implemented, particularly in relation to certain tax policies that the chancellor has implemented. As we are discussing energy and fuel poverty, I should point out that, in his budget this year, the chancellor levied an additional £7 billion of tax on the oil  industry in Scotland. The argument about whether he should have done so seems to be over for the time being, but now that he has done so, we should get that £7 billion into the Parliament and earmark a good chunk of it to end fuel poverty, not in 2016, but by, say, 2006 so that people who are alive today will not need to live another 10 or 12 years in fuel poverty.

Will the member give way?

Phil Gallie mentioned the need to work with Westminster. One of the things that Westminster has done in the past six months is to impose an additional tax burden of £7 billion on North sea oil over the next few years. Should not that money—or at least some of it—be earmarked to deal with fuel poverty in Scotland?

It always helps Bill Aitken with his time to accept an intervention. British Energy plc is not exactly a major success story. Is the member in favour of bailing out British Energy with up to £500 million of taxpayers' money?

After that comment, the words "forked tongue" come to mind. I draw the minister's attention to the real state of  Kilmarnock prison. Far from being a model of excellence, it is an absolute shambles, as illustrated by an article in today's Daily Record , in which a warder who has left the prison confirms what I have been saying for months. Does the minister realise that drugs and weapons are rife in Kilmarnock, that employee morale is cripplingly low, that the warder who left the prison was left in charge of 92 prisoners, that the pay and conditions arrangements mean that, in February, he was paid just 56p above the minimum wage and that, when he was under attack, it took five minutes before another warder was on site? As he says, "Prisoners are treated like kings while the prison officers are treated like slaves." Will the minister lift the scales from his eyes, conduct an independent investigation into the running of Kilmarnock and recognise that, if this shambles is the best example of privatisation in the prison service, it should not be repeated?

In his statement the First Minister concentrated on the environmental side of the earth summit. The other major issue that was addressed at the summit was world poverty, which should concern all of us. World poverty is not a reserved matter, but a matter for all of humanity. I have three questions for the First Minister.  First, will he consider the proposal by Glasgow Chamber of Commerce to establish the equivalent of a Scottish know-how fund, so that we can assist more directly those poor people of the world whom we can help? Secondly, does he agree that it was disgraceful that the head of Government in the United States boycotted the earth summit, given that the US is responsible for 25 per cent of the world's pollution? Thirdly, does he not think that the worst thing that could happen in relation to world poverty would be a US attack on Iraq?

I thank David Davidson for clarifying the advice that he gave the shadow Treasury team, although I have to say that Conservative policy is still not clear. In the meantime, should not the money that is raised from the windfall tax be earmarked for spending in Scotland?

Given the level of attendance in the chamber, perhaps some members are already away to Skibo Castle for the golf. Who could blame them? I congratulate the Finance Committee on another excellent report and on a job well done. I begin by making a couple of process points and then I will try to deal with some issues of substance. The process points relate to table 4.1 on page 15 of "The Scottish Budget 2003-04", with which I know the minister will be familiar, and to the projected funding for the careers guidance service. Anyone from outside who looks at that table would take from it that we were to spend nothing on careers guidance in subsequent years, although the careers guidance budget is going to be incorporated into the budgets of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. I make a plea: in future budget tables, at every stage, we should still highlight the amount spent on careers guidance, albeit as a subsection of the Scottish Enterprise budget. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee made a major recommendation that the budget allocated to the careers guidance service should continue to be transparent for the obvious reason that that would allow us to measure the budget and to ensure that appropriate investment continues to be made in that service. My other process point is about the same table and the spend on investment assistance. As the minister knows, the regional selective assistance programme is undergoing a major re-engineering exercise. As part of that work, a venture capital fund has been established with moneys specially laid aside from the RSA budget. The Executive must consider how to present that information, as we must be able to examine the input to the RSA budget and, separately, the input to the venture capital fund and the outputs. That will allow us to see the additional benefits—such as jobs and successful businesses—that are being produced from levering funds in from the venture capital fund. I know that the minister may not be able to give specific answers today, but I would appreciate it if he would consider those process issues, as they are quite important for parliamentary monitoring. I also draw his attention to the other  recommendations in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report on the budget process. In particular, I draw his attention to the need for further investment in both enterprise and lifelong learning. Everyone always pleads for more money, but one can see from the state of our 46 further education colleges that about two thirds of them face major problems with structural deficits. Those problems did not arise over the past year or two. They have been building up since the colleges were decoupled from the local authority system. Some of our traditionally well-endowed universities are also facing financial difficulty. We have major problems in that regard. If we are to maintain progress, for example, in increasing the percentage of people who go to university from school, then we are reaching the stage where many of the financial issues will have to be resolved in the next few years. Having made those specific points, I want to move on to points of substance that are about the context in which the Executive's budget is decided. First, of course, the Executive does not decide the overall amount that is available to it. As members will know, the chancellor in London decides that amount.

Well, if God blesses the chancellor, he might be the only one who blesses him. I have several further points. I am not going to labour the first point, which I think is obvious, but I believe that this Parliament should decide the overall level of funding and should have greater responsibility. An additional £7 billion will be extracted from the Scottish economy by the Treasury in London between now and 2010 as a result of the introduction of the windfall tax on oil. I believe that at least some, if not all, of that money should be earmarked for reinvestment in Scotland.

I agree with Jamie Stone that that would be interesting, but it would also be highly unusual. Given that, within our lifetime, the Conservatives are unlikely to be in a position, here or in London, to do anything about those matters, I will treat the issue as purely academic and theoretical, if Mr Stone does not mind. The other important point is that the minister reiterated, rightly, the five priorities for Scotland. However, if one compares outputs with each of those priorities, the outputs are wholly unsatisfactory. One of the priorities, clearly, is  health. We see what is happening in the health service in terms of waiting times and waiting lists. Another priority is education, but the announcement of the new investment programme for schools represents only one third of the total investment requirement for schools. The outputs for further and higher education, again, are lower instead of higher or better. Key measurements, such as those for child poverty, show that the situation is getting worse, if anything; it certainly is not getting significantly better. On pensioner poverty, we still have the same proportion of pensioners in Scotland living in poverty as we had five years ago when the Labour Government was elected. There has been a welcome reduction in unemployment during the past five years, but unemployment in Scotland has risen by 25,000 in the past year. Of course, the consequences have still to feed through from the events of this week. On the transport system, the railways are in one of the worst situations in living memory and we have made no substantial progress in road transport. The A77 upgrade has still not been started and, as Brian Adam said, the Aberdeen western peripheral has not been given the timetable for going ahead. The Borders railway is still a dream, and many other projects besides. The figures show that congestion and traffic pollution are worse today than they were four or five years ago. Crime is another of the five priorities. We will perhaps hear later today the outcome of the crisis meetings yesterday between the Lib Dems and the Executive in relation to youth crime and youth courts. I believe that the crisis has been partly resolved by the Lib Dems backing down as usual. No matter which of the five priorities one picks, the outcomes are getting worse and not better. Instead of encouraging the chancellor to pursue a policy of reducing the overall percentage of gross domestic product that is allocated to public investment and spending, we should increase that percentage further. In the key areas, such as wealth creation, in which I am primarily interested, research and development—

I am coming to a close, Presiding Officer. I will pick only one of my 10 examples. Consider research and development in Scotland. The rate of spend on research and development is half the UK average, and the UK average is half the European average. In Scotland, we would have to quadruple our investment in research and development to get up to the European average. That is only one of the prerequisites to building a smart, successful Scotland.  The minister should measure the outcomes, but he should not only do that. He should also do something about them and improve them dramatically.

rose—

I will keep my question short. The other big budget increase in Chancellor Brown's budget was the introduction of the windfall tax on oil. Will the member tell us whether scrapping that tax is Tory policy, or do the Tories want to keep the revenue and earmark some of it for spend in Scotland?

First, will the minister consider using some of the additional allocation for further and higher education to address structural deficits in colleges and universities? Secondly, will he find out whether it is now possible to bring forward the start of the upgrade of the A77? Thirdly, will he commission a study to consider what additional savings can be made over the next 20 years by getting rid of expensive public-private partnerships and private finance initiative schemes to fund public projects?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will first take up what Brian Monteith said about there being no evidence on the issue of stigma. That might be the case in Fettes College and George Heriot's School, but it is not the case throughout the education system. I suggest that Brian Monteith, before he speaks as an education spokesman—

No, sit down Mr Monteith. I have only three minutes.

Mr Monteith should read the bill's policy memorandum, which contains the research evidence from the education department that proves without any question that there is indeed major stigma relating to the current system of administration of school meals. Secondly, I want to correct a word that I am sure that Margaret Jamieson used inadvertently. She described the bill as introducing "compulsory" school meals. They would not be compulsory. They would be free and it would be up to each child whether they wanted to accept the free school meal.

Unfortunately, I have only three minutes. Can I say also that the word "cost" has been used a lot. It is estimated, not by Tommy Sheridan, Alex Neil or John McAllion but by the Executive, that the cost of providing universal free school meals would be £174 million a year. The  Education, Culture and Sport Committee made the point that that figure does not include capital costs. That is a fair point, but it would cost £23 million to introduce swipe-card technology. That money could be better spent on bigger and better school kitchens and bigger and better school dining facilities for children. On the claim that there is no money to fund universal free school meals, the Executive last year had an end-of-year surplus of around £700 million—the money is there. Angus MacKay said at a press conference that there would be a surplus the following year of £1 billion. We have just had an additional windfall tax from oil of £7 billion. Why not use some of that money for the children of Scotland? In any case, "cost" is the wrong word. The School Meals (Scotland) Bill represents an investment in the future. The Scottish Parliament information centre and others have published research that shows that the cost of obesity to the health system in Scotland is £150 million a year. If we introduce nutritious free school meals, as Scandinavian countries have done, we will make a major saving, reduce the level of obesity and, for those who are worried about the money, reduce the cost of obesity to the health service. I must make my final point now. Unfortunately, three minutes is a nonsense for a debate of this kind. It is no wonder that Parliament's reputation is so poor outside. Instead of worrying about stupid things such as high hedges bills, we should pass the School Meals (Scotland) Bill to prove that Parliament can begin to realise the dreams and expectations of the people of Scotland, who supported the creation of Parliament.

He is a Liberal Democrat.

In the minister's evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, he said that there was no proof of any causal link between the take-up of school meals and whether they were universally available. Has the minister read the research by Dr David Player, which shows that in those parts of Sweden that have reverted to charges for school meals, uptake has fallen and the health of children has deteriorated? Will he study that evidence, as it provides proof that, despite his evidence, there is a clear correlation between the universality of free school meals and their impact on health?

Does not the First Minister think it ridiculous that civil servants who work for the Scottish Executive report to Tony Blair and Sir Richard Wilson in Downing Street, rather than to him?

On a point of order.

On a separate point of order, Presiding Officer. Tomorrow's debate on free school meals has been allocated one and a half hours. The present structure of debates means that the front benches will have a total of nearly an hour and the back benches will have only half an hour. Will you examine the allocation of times and attempt to re-establish what was intended in the consultative steering group principles by ensuring that the back benchers have at least as much time in the debate as the front benchers?

Perhaps the First Minister shares the member's concerns, which is why Mr Wallace was offered a different portfolio.

I, too, will make a short speech. The University of St Andrews was founded by papal bull in 1411. As well as producing some first-class economists, such as Alex Salmond and Andrew Wilson—

There is a downside to everything.

Absolutely, and the member's cheeses are wonderful as well. The image of the university is still one of an old-fashioned institution that perhaps belongs more to the early part of the 20 th century than to the 21 st century. That image is unfair. I was up there two months ago and went on a guided tour with the principal, Dr Brian Lang. One of the most impressive things that I saw was the new centre for biomolecular sciences. The university's research record in biomedicine and bioengineering shows that it is a first-class institution and its centre of excellence is of world renown. We should use the debate to try to update the image of the university among the general populace in Scotland, because St Andrews is one of the finest education institutions not just in Scotland, but in Europe. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee took evidence on the bill from Iain Smith and from representatives of the University of St Andrews, as well as from the other universities in Scotland. There is universal support for the bill. As the policy memorandum points out, there will have to be one or two technical amendments at stage 2, but I do not anticipate that those will be controversial. We are satisfied that the level of consultation on the bill was more than satisfactory and I join the Executive, Iain Smith and others in commending the bill to the Parliament.

What will the total spend on the new careers service be this year and what will it be next year?

On a point of order.

We have had two replies on the same subject from two ministers. Those replies contradict each other, so one minister, by definition, must be misleading Parliament. That is not a point of argument; it is a point of order.

I too will be brief. First, as usual, the one organisation that has a fixed quota is the Labour party. A minimum of four of the eight nominees support the Labour party. As we have seen time and again, this is the latest example of new Labour cronyism, which is acting like a cancer throughout the body politic in Scotland. I agree with all speakers on the need for women's representation. We must also examine ethnic minority representation, because the nominees are supposed to reflect civic Scotland. Without proper representation of women, ethnic minorities and non-Labour supporters, there is no way that the nominees can represent civic Scotland.

I am amazed that Cathie Craigie has insights into the results of our list meetings, which do not take place until the middle of June. I anticipate that in our shadow cabinet, in the ranks of our junior spokespeople, in our parliamentary party, and in every council group the length and breadth of Scotland, we will make sure that women and ethnic minorities are properly represented. When we form the Government next year, we will open up appointments to proper democratic scrutiny by passing a public appointments bill, and put an end to the cronyism that is inherent in these eight nominations.

I begin by making two points about the proposed energy institute and the other two institutes that are to be set up. First, I want to put down a marker with members of the Parliament, and indeed with every politician. The whole purpose of those institutes is that they are long-term projects that operate in high-risk ventures. If they are operating in high-risk ventures, some of those ventures will fail. I hope that, when the first failure comes along, members will not condemn the institutes out of hand because they have had a failure. The whole purpose of the institutes is to take risks, innovate and do something that no one else is doing. There is all-party backing for the institutes, but as politicians, we should not be small minded when it comes to having to back them if, for example, the Daily Record and others are baying for their blood because they have lost £1 million here or £1 million there on failed ventures. We must back the institutes to the hilt to get real value for money over 10 to 20 years. My second point is that Brian Adam is right. We have talked about the institutes for far too long. If I were Iain Gray, who is the new minister, I would send a memo today headed "Action this day" to Bob Crawford at Scottish Enterprise. The time for talking and planning is over; it is time for action. Time is moving on. All our international competitors are investing rather than talking. They are doing. They have institutes up and running and will outpace us if we do not move quickly. I am sure that the minister will have the support of every member if he tells Scottish Enterprise to get its finger out and get things moving—in Ayrshire parlance—in respect of the institutes. I want to talk about the oil and gas sector. With all due respect to Mary Scanlon, whom I love dearly, I say that I have never heard so much hypocrisy in the chamber. She is a Thatcherite who is complaining about oil revenues. If it had not been for oil revenues, Thatcher would never have been able to subsidise the south-east and do all the things that she did in those miserable 18 years.

On Wednesdays, the lottery jackpot is £3.5 million. It is usually £6 million or £7 million on Saturday nights—in fact, this Saturday, there is  a jubilee-guaranteed £10 million. If I win the jackpot on Saturday night, I will not turn it down because it has varied since Wednesday. I remember the arrival of the first drop of North sea oil. The unionists told us that it would not last a year or two years. Then they spoke of five years. When it started to flow, they said, "You can't go independent because Scotland will be too rich if it is independent. There will be too much money, the exchange rate will go through the roof and the Scottish economy will be destroyed." They then said that the oil would last only 30 years. This morning, they admit, 30 years after production started, that there is as much oil left in the North sea to exploit in the next 30 years as was exploited in the previous 30, and that is without taking into account reserves in the Atlantic ocean. We are the mugs of Europe. What other nation has discovered oil and become poorer as its oil flowed faster? Mary Scanlon was in Russia last week. She should go to Norway, which is a wee, independent country with a population of 5 million. It is rich in oil and has nearly full employment.

Unfortunately, I do not have time. I would love to take Rhona Brankin on on this matter. The health service in Norway is so well off that if someone has a bronchial condition or a skin condition that would benefit from a period in the sun, the health service sends them to Portugal or Spain for a fortnight. I give fair warning to the unionist parties that if we put that in our independence manifesto, they are finished for ever.

My question is similar to the one that I asked Nora Radcliffe. Given that the additional tax will raise £7 billion between now and 2010, does the member support the proposal that a percentage of the money should be earmarked for the implementation of the Falkirk action plan?

That was not my question.

I do not disagree with the member, but if the proposed tax increase goes ahead—as appears likely—it will raise about £7 billion in additional revenue between now and 2010. Does the member accept that a large chunk of that £7 billion should be earmarked for investment in the north-east of Scotland's infrastructure?

In his speech, Iain Gray said that the details of the energy institute would be announced at a Scottish Enterprise press conference in Glasgow. Is it not a disgrace that we are to have another fanfare from Scottish Enterprise tomorrow, but the details are being kept from the Parliament today? Does John Young agree that the minister should be announcing the details today in Parliament, rather than with a fanfare in Glasgow tomorrow?

Will the member take an intervention?

Can we therefore assume that the four Liberal Democrat ministers will vote for Mike Rumbles's Liberal Democrat amendment at 5 o'clock tonight?

A distinguishing feature of the DTI scheme is the £600 incentive. Will the Scottish Executive, working with the industry, provide a similar incentive for companies in Scotland?

I congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on securing the debate. It is clear that there is all-party support for a fundamental review of the building industry. I emphasise what Marilyn Livingstone and David Mundell said about the importance of the construction industry. It is important not just because of its sheer size; it has knock-on benefits for Scotland's indigenous economy. If the construction industry is expanded, many sectors of the economy will also be expanded. We are often talking about indigenous business, indigenous jobs and indigenous projects that are of maximum benefit to the Scottish economy—that is not the case in respect of some inward investment projects. Over the next few years, the construction industry faces enormous challenges. It is estimated that about 27,500 people will have to be recruited in the industry over the next four or five years, 13,000 of whom will replace those who have retired from the industry and 14,500 to fulfil the investment ambitions of the private and public sectors. Those 27,500 recruits represent a massive opportunity, not just for the industry but for the Scottish economy. I hope that the minister will refer to that in his closing remarks. Some of Robert Brown's points about problems with training are particularly important in relation to the college sector, where the economic viability of courses is often called into question and there is not the throughput required to make the courses viable or to achieve the target of 27,500 recruits. Another important issue for the construction industry is quality. Members have referred to the problem with cowboys. There is only one long-term way to solve that problem—to raise quality standards in the industry. I would like the minister to comment on what is happening down south in relation to the quality mark scheme and what he  intends to do about a Scottish equivalent. The Department of Trade and Industry is providing £600 to applicants who register in the quality mark scheme through the construction licensing executive scheme. No such assistance is currently available to the industry in Scotland. That means that building companies in Scotland are at a disadvantage and we must rectify that. The other area that needs to be reviewed is the cash retention system within the industry. Something like 95 per cent of all the companies involved in the building sector employ fewer than eight people. However, as much as 20 per cent of those companies' total turnover is tied up in cash retentions. That has a serious knock-on effect for cash flow and profit and loss in the industry. I hope that the minister will address cash retentions and the need for registration. We are always hearing businesses say, rightly, that there is too much regulation but, in a sense, the construction sector is an industry that needs slightly more regulation if we are to tackle problems such as registrations, quality control and the imposition of a quality mark scheme. All those issues are urgent and all of them are a key part of ensuring that the building trade can make a full contribution and realise its full potential for the Scottish economy. For far too long, politicians have ignored the building trade. It is high time that the Parliament and the minister, as the key person in the Executive, put construction right to the top of the agenda.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the terms and conditions of private sector cleaning and catering contracts at Hairmyres hospital, Lanarkshire. (S1O-5204)

I visited the hospital two weeks ago. In ward 1—the cancer ward—the toilet had been cleaned only once that week and, even then, it had not been done satisfactorily. In addition, the food that was being served up was not fit for human consumption. As a matter of urgency, will the minister intervene to get Hairmyres hospital sorted out? [Interruption.] The local member, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, should read his local newspaper and see the real concern instead of shouting abuse at me.

When will a decision be made about the ending of postcode prescribing for infliximab, particularly as two months ago the National Institute for Clinical Excellence south of the border made the decision to make the drug generally available?

Members of all parties have produced statistics on a variety of issues, such as the number of nurses who leave the profession, the number of nursing students who leave before completing their courses, nurses' ages and nurses' pay. In my opinion, the principal issue is the individual nurse and what the nurse represents in terms of hospital care. Last week, when I visited someone in Hairmyres hospital, I found that there were major problems in the contracts for catering and cleaning. I was in a ward where the food was absolutely abysmal—I would not have fed it to a pig, never mind to a patient—and where the bathroom had been  cleaned only once in a whole week. The person who stood up for the patients and who caused the most fuss was the nurse in charge of the ward, supported by her staff. She was prepared to put her neck and her career on the line for her patients. We have to recognise that kind of dedication. The nursing profession does not just want lip service from the Parliament and the Executive about how much we value our nurses. We will have to take action to prove that we value them. Until we do, all the figures on the student drop-out rates, on the lack of retention and on morale problems will continue to get worse. The major, although not the only, bone of contention for nurses is undoubtedly pay. The major bone of contention between the Executive and the Scottish National Party is over how we should deal with the issue of nurses' pay. The Executive believes that there is only one solution, which they allege to be a United Kingdom solution. That solution is to pay every nurse the length and breadth of the UK exactly the same. That fails to recognise that, south of the border, special rates are already paid. Ever since the health service was created, special rates have been paid in London in recognition of higher living costs. There are also special allowances to boost recruitment and retention in areas of staff shortages—for example, among low-paid nursing auxiliaries, nurse consultants and matrons. Discretionary points will also be given to entice those who have reached the top of their field in nursing to remain in the NHS. All that proves to me that differential pay structures are not new. We should not automatically react against the idea. We face a particular situation in Scotland. If we do not solve the nursing shortage and the morale problem, all the money that we spend on the health service will not cure its ills. That is why we believe that it would be perfectly fair and acceptable to have a differential pay structure to recognise the special problems in Scotland. Until we have one, the problems of the health service will not be properly addressed. I hope that when the minister winds up—whichever minister it is—we will be told why it is okay to have differentials south of the border but not north of the border. If figures are coming out tomorrow, why can the minister not give them to the chamber today, rather than making us wait for the Daily Record or The Herald tomorrow morning?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has plans to review the law in relation to crimes involving knives. (S1O-5142)

The minister says that the existing  law is effective. Is he aware that in the Strathclyde police area during the last three years of the period for which figures are available the incidence of crimes involving knives rose by 46 per cent? Is he aware that the justice department does not centrally collect statistics on the levels of prosecutions, fines and sentences relating to such offences? Will he now review the law, and will his department at least collect the statistics so that we can measure the success—or otherwise—of the existing law?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I will make three or four points that have not yet been made. The first is about sustainability in Scotland. The size of Scotland's land mass and its level of natural resources in relation to the size of population that it needs to sustain give Scotland as a whole, and the Scottish economy in particular, a major advantage. However, the population forecasts for the years to come pose dangers for the sustainability of the Scottish economy. One forecast has it that the population of Scotland will go down from over 5 million to something like 3.8 million by 2066. If that happens, the sustainability of the skills base of the Scottish economy will be called into question, as will the sustainability of many aspects of community life, simply because the reduction in population will mean a substantial increase in the ratio of those who need to be kept by the rest of society to those in work. The Scottish Executive needs to face up to that. It is an economic and educational issue—it is an issue of sustainability. It covers every area for which the Scottish Executive is responsible. Secondly, I will pick up briefly on something that the minister said about nuclear energy in his opening speech. In reply to a question from Bruce Crawford, he said that we would need to make an assessment of the future of nuclear energy, which should be dependent on finding a way of recycling the waste safely. There is no doubt that nuclear waste is a key issue. However, the issue is not just the waste; it is the dangers of nuclear power while it is operational, particularly in such days of terrorist attacks. On a recent visit to Dounreay, I asked how safe our nuclear installations would be from a terrorist attack. To tell the truth, I was not wholly satisfied with the response. We must acknowledge that potential threat. My third point relates to opencast mining. There is no doubt at all that one of the biggest blights on our environment is the concentration of opencast mining in a few geographical and local authority areas. One of the matters that I would like the Executive to examine is the possibility of placing a  tonnage tax on opencast mining and using the revenue for reinvestment in the environment in the communities and the wider areas that are affected. I understand that bonds and guarantees have to be given in the specific areas used in opencast, but those do not cover wider community interests. I wish to make a point that supplements and, I hope, complements what Murray Tosh said about the development aspect of sustainable development. The environment, particularly in comparison with other countries, is one of our great assets. I do not believe that we are doing enough to develop environmental tourism. Alasdair Morrison was quite right to raise the subject of economic opportunities. I can think of the enormous opportunities that lie in his constituency, particularly in the area around the Minch, which has been neglected for far too long. A number of speakers have mentioned renewable energy, which is another major area. The key thing is not to see sustainable development as a negative, a barrier or a constraint. It is all those things in many respects, but it also represents an enormous opportunity for Scotland, which we cannot afford to miss.

Will the member give way?

Not many members would disagree with the remarks that the minister has just made, so will he condemn utterly the US Government's actions in completely ignoring the agreements on environmental sustainability that were reached at Kyoto and elsewhere? Will he also condemn the contemptuous way in which the US Government has dealt with the international community in respect of that issue?

Will the member give way?

The former Scottish Office Tory minister, Allan Stewart, said that independence in Europe was far preferable to unionists than devolution. Does Phil Gallie agree?

It is a great pity that those on the Labour benches could not rise to the occasion, because what we are talking about is the future of Scotland and the future of our people. I want to concentrate my remarks on the European dimension, which has been barely mentioned by the unionist parties. Although we  went into the union with the United Kingdom, we must recognise that we are all now part of a much bigger union—the European Union. Ten, 20, or 30 years ago, many of the major decisions on economics, agriculture, fishing and trade, and on matters such as education, employment law and social security law were made in London. Perhaps in those days it made sense for us to go to London. However, it is now a fact of life that 60 per cent of the legislation that goes through Westminster emanates from the European Union through the European Commission or the Council of Ministers. This nation of Scotland must reassess its position in the context of the European Union and have no concept of separatism, no barriers to trade, and no concept of barriers to the movement of people or capital within the European Union, which currently has 15 members but will soon have 27. What should Scotland's position be? Should we be a provincial Parliament with limited power that can do only small things for our people? If not, should we be like the Dáil, the Parliament in Brussels, the Parliament in Lisbon, and the Parliament in Vienna and be able to do things for our people? There is no reserved power at Westminster under schedule 5 of the Scotland Act 1998 that covers any subject in which Westminster's governance of Scotland would be superior in any way to Scottish governance of Scotland through an independent Parliament. The other aspect of independence is that we would be at the top table, not only arguing for our self-interest, but making a positive contribution to the development of Europe and the European Union. The members on the unionist benches must waken up, lift their eyes, and raise their horizons because, sooner or later, Scotland will rise and be a nation again.

There is a clear difference between being one of 14 länder in Germany, where no land dominates the rest, and our position in the United Kingdom, where we are faced by titanic England which, with 85 per cent of the votes in the House of Commons, can overrule at any stage the rest of the UK. There is no comparison between federalism in Germany and the unitary state in the UK.

Will the member give way?

Is the member aware that the First Minister has been invited by the European Committee of the Regions to submit a report on the future constitution of Europe? Is not that an ideal opportunity for Scotland to assert its position in Europe instead of accepting the regional-provincial position that we have at present?

Will the member give way?

As he is talking about Irishmen, may I ask Mr McLetchie why it is that no Irishman in the Republic of Ireland has ever reapplied for membership of the United Kingdom? If the union is so great and if independence is so bad, why are the Irish delighted to be independent?

I thank the minister very much for taking my intervention. Is she arguing that the current list of reserved powers should be the list of reserved powers for ever and a day? Does she see the day—as did the late Donald Dewar—when some of those reserved powers, even within a unionist framework, should be transferred to this Parliament? If so, which powers would she like to see being transferred?

Does the minister agree that the fact that there have been bids totalling £1.8 billion demonstrates how much of a backlog there is in Scotland in relation to updating and refurbishing our school buildings? Does the minister agree that, instead of using expensive private finance initiatives to refurbish our schools, it would be more sensible for the windfall tax revenue from North sea oil to be allocated to the Scottish Parliament for expenditure on education rather than going down the plug hole in the Treasury in London?

Under rule 8.1.2 of the standing orders, I move a motion without notice that we postpone this afternoon's debate until next week and use the hour and a half for proper scrutiny of the budget debate. It is clear that we have failed to have such scrutiny this afternoon. Members are being treated with contempt.

I think that we had this argument before Christmas, on individual learning accounts. I think that I won the argument and that I can move a motion without notice under rule 8.1.2 of the standing orders.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the latest report by the chief inspector of prisons into HM Prison Kilmarnock is due to be published. (S1O-5013) I can tell the minister that the answer is in fact that it was published on Tuesday of this week.

Having read the report, does the minister realise that the privatised Kilmarnock prison is the most violent prison in Scotland? Is he aware that when I and the convener of the Justice 1 Committee visited the prison a month ago, there were 27 prisoners and only one warder in the metal workshop; that the closed-circuit television cameras do not see the whole of the workshops; and that a few days after our visit one prisoner nearly coshed another prisoner to death? CCTV cameras do not break up fights in prisons. Is the minister also aware of—and what is he doing about—the fact that, as is shown in the chief inspector's report, the prison is understaffed by 13 officers? Officers at Kilmarnock are the lowest paid in Scotland and are looking after the highest-paid prisoners. Does not Clive Fairweather's report prove that privatisation of the prison service is a total disaster?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is a separate point of order. I draw your attention to rule 3.1 of the standing orders, which says that "the Presiding Officer ... shall act impartially, taking account of the interests of all members equally." Given that that is a requirement of the Presiding Officer, why did you to agree to the Executive demand, made only yesterday, to make a statement on the budget, and then allocate only half an hour for that statement? I have spoken to a number of members in various parties in the chamber and there is widespread concern that only half an hour has been allocated to something as important as this. To be frank, that is not acceptable—especially for back benchers, who will have practically no opportunity to ask any questions. I ask for your answer—

Under standing orders, I have three minutes to make my point of order. I ask the Presiding Officer, in his answer, to outline the procedure for moving a motion of censure against the chair.

The prison failed the inspection.

Will the member draw attention to the fact that the remit for PricewaterhouseCoopers was not to evaluate or audit the figures, but to support decisions that had already been made?

Will the member give way?

In Kilmarnock prison's metalwork workshop, there is only one prison warder for 27 prisoners at any point. Indeed, sometimes one warder is in charge of up to 60 prisoners as they are moved from one part of the prison to the other. Is that consistent with the remarks that Bill Aitken has made? Is that a price worth paying for privatisation?

Will the member explain how it is that, south of the border, Charlie Kennedy is a left winger who opposes privatisation, yet the Liberal Democrats in the Scottish Parliament are the champions of the privatisation of the Prison Service—in spite of the opposition of their partners in coalition? The only members of the Scottish Parliament who are in favour of the privatisation of the Prison Service are the Liberal Democrats and their right-wing allies, the Conservatives.

Does the member agree that it would be sensible for the Justice 1 Committee or the Minister for Justice to ask the Auditor General to make an independent assessment of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report, in order to find out whether that report is based on fact or fiction?

I will concentrate my remarks on the experience at Kilmarnock prison but, as a Central Scotland member, I wish to associate myself with the campaign to save Peterhead prison. If Peterhead prison is closed, Jim Wallace will not be the Minister for Justice, but the minister for injustice. There is no case whatever for closing Peterhead prison.  The minister gave away much in his speech. The real question about the PricewaterhouseCoopers report—and all the kidology around it and the subsequent estates review—is, as Alasdair Morgan suggested: how can we be living in a fairytale land where we can save £700 million over the next 25 years? Two points about the PwC report are striking. First, PwC is to the Scottish Prison Service what Arthur Andersen is to Enron. PwC took the figures that it was given, with no audit and no independent assessment of those figures. The whole thing is fairytale nonsense. Secondly, PwC's recommendations are without foundation. When it compared the public costs with the private costs, it did not consider the experience of Kilmarnock prison. Its auditors created out of thin air a virtual prison in the clouds, which nobody has ever seen. If they were my auditors, I would sack them.

Phil Gallie should look at yesterday's budget statement. The Chancellor of the Exchequer announced a budget surplus next year of £7 billion and, I think, £9 billion the year after that. Our national debt is now the lowest in Europe. Speaking as an economist rather than as a politician, the idea that the public sector cannot afford to invest in the prison service is absurd. The money exists and public safety, as has rightly been said, should be the number one concern of every Government. If the money is available, the Government should invest it in public safety.

Phil, Phil. [MEMBERS: "Mike."] Sorry: Mike, Mike. Mike Rumbles has so many faces, it is difficult to remember which one he is wearing. The idea that services can be obtained quicker, safer and cheaper by spending a fortune on the private sector is absurd. I have just mentioned the budget surplus—money exists in the budget that can be invested in the prison service. The idea that we need to rely on private profiteering is nonsense. Let me tell members not about a virtual private prison, but about Kilmarnock, and about how the minister will make £700 million of savings. The minister went on about prison workers' pensions being funded at a cost of 16 per cent to the SPS. He did not mention the fact that he gets 16 per  cent—why should not he be privatised and sacked for the same reason? He did not say that Kilmarnock prison has the lowest-paid prison warders in Scotland and the best-paid prisoners. The chief inspector of prisons, in evidence to the Justice 1 Committee, pointed out that prisoners there are so well paid that they use the money to buy drugs in the prison. The minister did not tell us about the suicide level at Kilmarnock, either. A month ago, I was in a Kilmarnock prison metalwork shop, in which there were 27 prisoners, some of whom were in prison for murder and attempted murder. There was only one warder in the workshop, and a camera that could not see into 20 per cent of the workshop. A week later one prisoner coshed another nearly to death. That is the price of privatisation. It is quite obvious from the four back-bench new Labour speeches that we have heard that Jack McConnell has led Jim Wallace up the garden path. There is nae chance of privatisation going further.

rose—

I should point out that I am not yet a minister. Does Mr Gallie think that it is right that in Kilmarnock one officer looks after up to 60 prisoners at a time? Is that not where the savings lie?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister explain why the prison population in Sweden, which has a population of 9 million, is less than the prison population of Scotland, which has a population of 5 million? Does not that suggest that we are putting people in prison unnecessarily?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister accept an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer has received an assurance that the statement will be brief. Even if it is brief by ministerial statement standards, it will take 10 or 15 minutes.

I am sorry, but the subject of the statement is the budget. It is an absolute absurdity to give only half and hour to the statement. Back benchers, as is usual in this place, will have no opportunity to participate in the questions. This  place is supposed to be run on the consultative steering group principles, but it is being run more like the Kremlin.

Will the Presiding Officer limit front-bench speakers to 10 minutes in total in order to give back benchers 20 minutes to ask questions? Back benchers are being treated like second-class citizens.

With all due respect—

With all due respect, Presiding Officer, the minister may take 10 minutes—

Can the Presiding Officer define brief?

How brief will contributions from the front bench be before back benchers get a chance?

As the FSB represents many unincorporated businesses, will the minister tell us when he hopes to complete his review of the personal insolvency laws?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that I will not need all of them. I want to put the importance of the Enterprise Bill into perspective. About 75 per cent of the businesses operating in Scotland are not incorporated, which means that the bill's provisions, although extremely important, apply only to about a quarter of all businesses in Scotland. I hope that, when he winds up, the minister will give us a timetable for the review of individual insolvency laws in Scotland. I am sure that he is aware of the representations made to the Executive by the Entrepreneurial Exchange and many others about the need for a comprehensive reform of the personal insolvency laws in Scotland. It is always very difficult to achieve a balance between the needs and rights of the businessperson and the business and those of the creditors. Certainly the regime in the United States does not make being unsuccessful in business such a great personal humiliation, whereas the laws in this country are based on classing people whose businesses become bankrupt or insolvent almost as criminals. We must take a different approach in Scotland, not because we do not want to protect creditors but because we need to redress the balance which has perhaps gone too much the other way. We welcome the fact that the Enterprise Bill will do so.  The other major provision that we should welcome is the removal of the Crown's preferential right. It has always been a source of great animosity in the business community that whenever a problem arises with a business, the VAT man and the Inland Revenue have first call on its resources. That has had two effects. First, many in the business community feel that some businesses have been brought to the point of bankruptcy by the harsh regime of the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise at a very premature and sometimes unnecessary stage. I hope that one of the bill's major impacts will be to address that situation. Secondly, the fact that such large organisations have first call on the resources of a failed business causes great resentment among all its other creditors. Indeed, we have often seen the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise receiving cheques while small businesses go to the wall because another business has gone to the wall.

Actually, one of the measures that the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced in the budget this afternoon is extended bad debt relief for VAT payments. I hope that that measure will be part and parcel of a similar strategy here. I also hope that the additional 10 per cent in North sea oil revenues will be spent in Scotland this time instead of wasted south of the border. I have finished my speech, Presiding Officer.

Is the minister aware that any further delay in the project will result in a real danger that Scotland might lose the project to Ireland? Will he and the Executive do everything that they can to ensure that that does not happen?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Throughout the debate, Jamie Stone has moved around the chamber, talking over the member who is speaking. If he wants to act like the licensed clown, let him, but surely he should give respect to all the speakers in the debate.

With all due respect, we cannot hear what is being said.

I cannot.

Will the member tell the chamber whether none of that would have happened without the Liberal Democrats?

I feel as though I am intervening in a family feud between two right-wing unionist parties. I could hardly split the difference between them in the eye of a needle. I want to make three points in the four minutes that are available. The first is that, irrespective of what the Parliament does at a microeconomic level, if that is not in tune with the macroeconomic policy that is decided in London, it will not have the desired effect in Scotland. I will give some examples of that, starting with taxation policy. No independent Scottish Government with power over fiscal policy would in its right mind have the current fuel tax regime. No Government whose priority interest lay in Scotland would tax its own national drink at the rate of 50 per cent. Would the French tax wine at 50 per cent? No way. That is another example of Scotland trying to promote an industry that is being taxed to the hilt by the chancellor in London. I will give members another example. One of the biggest economic problems that we face in Scotland is depopulation. According to one forecast, by 2065 Scotland's population will be down from more than 5 million to 3.8 million, which has major economic implications. We need to do two things. First, we need to keep many more of our young, talented people in Scotland—to encourage them to stay to build a career here. Secondly, we need to have a positive immigration policy—not one that chases people away, sometimes because of the colour of their skin, but one that welcomes all creeds and types to Scotland if they have something to contribute to economic revival. An independent Scotland would have an entirely different immigration policy from that of the UK.

No. Brian Fitzpatrick should sit down. Another issue is interest rates and their effect on exchange rates. No independent Scottish Government would pursue the interest rate and exchange rate policy—the lunacy—that is being pursued by Gordon Brown. Until we get control of macroeconomic policy—

Ben Wallace should sit down. Until we get control of macroeconomic policy, all the strategies—all the enterprise networks and the money that is spent on them—will not work. They will not work unless they are part and parcel of a real national strategy for Scotland. The second issue is that of scale. The minister's  comments on research and development, although factually accurate, betrayed complacency. The fact is that one company, Nokia, spends more on research and development than the whole of Scotland spends. Until we lift our eyes—until we get into the same league as the Nokias, the Finlands and Irelands of this world—we will be kidding ourselves about our ability to close the growth rate gap. The venture capital fund is a great idea, and I welcome the £20 million over three years that has been allocated, but that is peanuts compared to what is required. My final point relates to the enterprise network. Let us never forget that it was the Tories who destroyed the Scottish Development Agency and created Scottish Enterprise. I agree with much that Annabel Goldie said about the balkanisation of the enterprise network in Scotland. The figure of £100 million for business support has been cited, but how much of that ends up with businesses and how much ends up in the pockets of consultants? That issue needs to be addressed, but we will not be able to address such issues until we have full power. I declare an interest as someone who used to do consultancy work for Scottish Enterprise.

I welcome the additional money that is being invested in research. However, does the minister accept that the percentage of Scotland's GDP that is spent on research and development will still be only about half the UK rate, which itself is only half the European rate? If we are to catch up with our competitors, we should be talking not about raising science spending by 15 per cent but about almost quadrupling the investment in research and development from the public and private sectors.

In the context of what he has just said about the role of the various public agencies, could the minister outline the role of Scottish Development International, which is a joint venture between the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise? SDI now has a worldwide network of offices, notably in the United States. Will it too be given a role in promoting Scottish tourism?

I am too young to have been born in the same place as Margaret Jamieson and Adam Ingram, but I am sure that there is all-party consensus on the motion. I congratulate Adam Ingram on securing the debate. The Scottish Agricultural College has spread several myths about the rationale for its apparent decision to destroy Auchincruive. For example, we have heard that the students would like the facility to be moved to Aberdeen or Edinburgh. I find it absolutely amazing that, if the whole objective is to cut costs, the SAC should propose a move to either of the two most expensive places in Scotland to do business. In this day of e-commerce and e-learning, it is a nonsense to argue that the facility must be physically close to the University of Aberdeen, which is behind the UHI Millennium Institute that covers one third of Scotland's landmass. I do not see why it is necessary for the facility to be moved up to Aberdeen. The arguments that the Scottish Agricultural College has made do not add up. I support Fergus Ewing's proposal for an audit of the rationale that has been given. That audit should have two parts. First, it should examine what the SAC is really up to and evaluate its  decision on Auchincruive. Secondly, the audit should examine Auchincruive's future potential. Others have already mentioned the possibility that Auchincruive could be built up as a centre of bioscience, which would provide huge opportunities for taking in international students and for entering international markets. If any organisation should know about that, the Scottish Agricultural College should. There is no doubt in my mind that Auchincruive is a major asset not only to the economy of Ayrshire and the west of Scotland but to the Scottish economy and further afield. Will the minister tell us what is the estimated underspend in this year's rural development budget? Will he consider whether some of that underspend could be used to address the Scottish Agricultural College's present situation? Auchincruive must be our top priority, but there is a wider question about the relationship between it and its sponsoring organisation within the Scottish Executive. Speaking as the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I believe that the minister should consider the possibility of transferring responsibility for the SAC to either the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council or the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. Auchincruive is involved in both teaching and research. If the institution came under the aegis of one of those councils, I am sure that, in time, it would develop proper letters of guidance and proper budgeting. That would be to the benefit of everyone concerned. I hope that the minister will take those recommendations into account. Let us look on this all-party consensus not simply as an opportunity to save Auchincruive but to develop Auchincruive so that it can make an even greater contribution in the future than it does at present.

I ask the minister and his colleague the Minister for Justice to examine the specific circumstances of the spate of young male suicides in the private prison at Kilmarnock. I ask them to identify whether any aspect of that regime needs to be improved to avoid a repetition of those suicides in the future.

At the second attempt, may I raise a point of order, Presiding Officer? May I move a motion to extend the debate, to allow everybody to speak on an important subject?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. May I move a motion to—

Okay.

I draw the minister's attention to the excellent report that was published yesterday by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. That report contains a great deal of evidence and many recommendations that are relevant to her responsibilities, particularly in the section that deals with transitions from school. Susan Deacon referred to problems in terms of numeracy and literacy. Opinion is divided on the scale of those problems, about which I would like to make two specific points. First, some of the evidence that we received was very disturbing. The University of Strathclyde modern languages department said that it had to run remedial courses for school leavers because of their low standards of literacy and numeracy. That issue needs to be addressed. Secondly, under the previous First Minister the moneys that have been made available to deal with low standards of numeracy and literacy were to be channelled through the college sector, but they have since been channelled through local authorities. Will the minister ensure that those moneys end up in literacy and numeracy programmes, rather than being used for purposes that have nothing to do with literacy and numeracy?

I accept what the minister says. However, will he give serious consideration to the points that Irene McGugan made? It is important that a convener is appointed as convener of the advisory council, and then is appointed to the board, rather than the other way round.

The bill is a good example of the Executive taking up and implementing, almost word for word, the work of a committee. That gives the lie to those who say that the committees have no influence on the Executive or the Parliament. I commend the Executive for taking our work and putting it into legislation. I suspect that the problems that we found in the SQA are fairly common in agencies of its kind. I hope that the new structure will become an exemplar for the kind of constitution that future boards will adopt, with the management function divided from the stakeholder function. One of the central problems of the SQA board was that it did not see itself primarily as a management board that was there to run the organisation efficiently and effectively. The board saw itself primarily as a representative organisation—albeit that it met only once a quarter—with people round the table representing the interests of their organisations  rather than giving primacy to the interests of the SQA. Directors of boards of organisations in the private sector have a statutory obligation to put the interests of that organisation first when they are sitting round the table. I suspect that we are reaching the stage at which that statutory obligation might have to be extended to the public sector. I mention in passing that I think that Learning and Teaching Scotland, which was formed from a merger between the Scottish Council for Educational Technology and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum, falls into the same problem area as the SQA. I hope that the minister will consider the constitution of that body and make similar proposals to those that she has made for the SQA. I welcome the fact that the SQA will have a much smaller board. I hope that the board, unlike the last one, will meet regularly—at least monthly—and that the chair will hold management meetings between the board meetings to ensure that the decisions of the board are implemented properly. The role of the chair is critical and it needs to be made clear that, although the chair might be part-time, he or she has an executive responsibility to the board and to the minister. The key issue is the management expertise and experience of the members of the board. It is not necessary for the members to have come from the education sector. Indeed, I argue that a substantial share of the board members should come from other sectors and bring the best of management experience and expertise to the SQA. There are three issues about the advisory council that I would like the minister and the committee to consider at stage 2. First, too much detail about the advisory council will be dealt with in secondary legislation. There is a need for more detail in the bill, particularly on the constitution and membership of the advisory council. Secondly, I question the wisdom of the convener of the advisory council being a member of the board. The danger is that he or she will go to the board to represent the advisory council rather than remaining totally independent. That issue needs to be explored at stage 2. Thirdly, the advisory council should have an independent secretariat and should not rely on the board for its secretariat. That should be built into the bill. I raised that point with the minister earlier. I hope that my suggestions are useful and that they will be taken on board.

In the light of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report, will the minister seek to ensure that, if the convener of the advisory council is to be a member of the SQA board, that person has no other axe to grind and is not there as a stakeholder from another organisation? If that were the case, we would be back at square one.

Will the minister give way?

I have a quick question for clarification. Will the council's secretariat be employed by the council and be independent of the SQA board? If not, will the secretariat be provided by the board? I hope that the answer is the former and not the latter.

It is interesting to see the usual unity in the new Labour party when one ex-minister is anti-nuclear and the other ex-minister is pro-nuclear. Maybe that explains why they are ex-ministers. Because the debate is on energy, I will take a minute to comment on this morning's news about BP and the salary increases awarded to senior executives. The chief executive receives £7 million a year while he makes 700 people redundant at Grangemouth. It is an utter disgrace. The top six directors pay themselves a total of £20 million a year and I do not think that that is a defensible position.

I am going to speak to the motion now. The critical issue relates to the Scotland Act 1998. That is where the powers of the Parliament and the relationship between Westminster and Holyrood are defined. It does not matter what Brian Wilson or George Foulkes says on a particular day. The reality is that the powers are defined in statute, not in a press release from Government ministers.  The Scotland Act 1998 is absolutely clear. Schedule 5 to the act lists all the reserved matters, which include energy. Under section D1 of schedule 5, the "Generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity" including "The subject-matter of Part II of the Electricity Act 1989" are matters reserved to Westminster. Only "The subject-matter of Part I of the Environmental Protection Act 1990" is a devolved matter.

No, I am sorry. Rhona Brankin would not take an intervention so I am not taking hers—fair is fair.

I will take an intervention from Lewis Macdonald.

They are indeed, but I refer the minister to sections 28 and 30 of the Scotland Act 1998, which totally negate the point that he has just made. Section 28 of the Scotland Act 1998, which defines the legislative powers of the Scottish Parliament, has a sting in the tail. Section 28(7) states: "This section does not affect the power of the Parliament ... to make laws for Scotland." That underlines my earlier points. No matter what Westminster says, it can override the decisions and powers of the Scottish Parliament at any time, and it is easily done. Section 30 of the Scotland Act 1998 shows that it is not a speech from Brian Wilson or George Foulkes that is needed; it is an order in council. A simple order in council does not require primary legislation or a vote in the House of Commons; it requires only that four privy councillors see the Queen and then they can sweep away the powers of the Parliament in one go. New Labour has come to the Parliament and promised that we will make the decision. I remember new Labour's pledge that there would be no referendum before the legislation on the  Parliament, but we did have not just one referendum; in effect, we had two. We cannot believe a word that new Labour says. The reality is that if the interests of England are primary, new Labour will do what is necessary and, in one swipe, take away the power of the Parliament to stop the proliferation of civil nuclear power in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I want to ask a simple question. Do the Liberal Democrats think that energy policy in Scotland should be determined by Scotland's needs or do they think that it should be determined by the needs of the UK? In other words, should we continue to be the fall guy in terms of our share of nuclear power? Should we not start to base our energy decisions on what is good for Scotland,  rather than on what is needed by England?

Although I accept that, at face value, giving consent is within the powers of the Scotland Act 1998, that act also allows Westminster to overrule, even on devolved matters. Will the minister give a guarantee that no such override will be exercised by Westminster ministers?

Has the minister made any representations to the UK Treasury about its proposal to introduce strip stamps as a counter-bootlegging measure? From the look on his face, perhaps I should ask him whether he knows what strip stamps are. If he does not, will he find out and do something about the situation? According to the Scotch Whisky Association, the introduction of strip stamps in  their present format will devastate the whisky industry in Scotland.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to change the rules and procedures governing public-private partnerships. (S1F-1697)

That is an interesting answer. Does the First Minister agree that one of the rules for public sector projects is that they should be financed at the lowest possible rate of interest, at the lowest possible cost to the public purse over the lifetime of the project and in an effective way,  which delivers the service, with the asset remaining in public hands? Does he agree that the time has come to change the rules and end the immorality whereby this generation is loading the next generation with a huge burden? Does he realise that, when Scotland becomes independent, we will get rid of profiteering on the back of public sector workers?

I am sure that my intervention is a relief to everybody—I am talking about the timing. I refer to the specific point that Des McNulty raised about not having anonymous complainants. The quid pro quo for not having anonymous complainants—and I agree with that—is that where someone puts their name to a complaint, their rights are protected as well. They cannot be scapegoated by the member whom they have named.

As  someone who is not a member of the Standards Committee, I congratulate the committee on the excellent work that it has done on the bill. No doubt it has many more hours of work to do. Kay Ullrich was right to say that lawyers and journalists have an even worse reputation than politicians have. I exempt my trade of economist from that kind of reputation. All of us recognise that there is an opinion abroad among the electorate that all politicians are the same. Many people automatically regard politicians as sleazebags who cannot be trusted. The onus is on politicians from all parties to prove that that is not the case. I welcome the fact that the bill is a committee bill, which indicates that there is broad consensus on this matter in the committee. I also welcome the fact that in this debate there has been broad cross-party consensus. It is absolutely essential that every member of the Parliament signs up not only to the letter but to the spirit of what is intended under the bill. Susan Deacon made a very valid point when she said that we should not automatically reject what Westminster or other Parliaments do, simply because they are other Parliaments. Similarly, we should learn from where they have made mistakes, so that we do not repeat those. The bill contains provisions that indicate that we have learned the lessons of what has happened at Westminster. I welcome in particular the strenuous efforts that the bill makes to ensure that the commissioner is as independent as possible. However, I ask the Standards Committee at stage 2 to consider a couple of ways in which that independence could be reinforced. First, it should be clear and unambiguous that the public appointments code that will be updated in the forthcoming public bodies bill should govern the appointment procedure for the new standards commissioner, from the interview process through to the appointment itself. That would reassure people that in relation to parliamentary appointments there was no cronyism of the sort that we have witnessed in relation to Executive or governmental appointments. Such a provision would be a useful addition to the bill. My second point relates to the Standards Committee. I welcome the fact that statutory powers will be given to the commissioner, who will report to the Standards Committee. It will be up to the Standards Committee to decide whether to recommend to the full Parliament sanctions against a member or members. One problem that arose at Westminster was that the committee that decided whether to recommend sanctions was politically loaded one way. Allegedly, it took a  political decision about whether to recommend sanctions. My point may relate not so much to the bill as to the standing orders and procedures of the Parliament, but as a matter of principle we should ensure that the Standards Committee always has an independently minded convener. There is no doubt that we have one at present—sometimes much to the chagrin of the party to which he belongs. Ideally, the convener of the Standards Committee should be a member of a non-Executive party—certainly, they should belong to a non-majority party. It is also important that we consider the composition of the Standards Committee, to ensure that no one party can dominate the committee. In that way, I hope that we will be able to avoid a repetition of what has happened at Westminster.

I recognise that as a fact and I welcome it as such. However, today we are discussing rules and procedures that will govern the issue of standards not just during this session of Parliament, but for a much longer period. I accept that the current Standards Committee has met the high standards to which members have referred. However, we want as far as possible to ensure that the rules make it very difficult—if not impossible—for us to repeat the mistakes of Westminster, where politicised decisions were taken by the Standards and Privileges Committee. Another issue that I would like to raise is the issue of directions, in relation to which the Standards Committee has major powers. That fact underlines the need to reinforce the independence of the Standards Committee. The main purpose of the bill is to catch those who have breached the code of conduct or who have brought Parliament into disrepute in some other way. However, we should not use the provisions of the bill to witch-hunt any member of the Parliament or to pursue petty complaints by one member against another. As the bill makes clear, its provisions should be restricted to serious allegations of misconduct. The bill should not be used to settle personal political scores, either within the Parliament or between individual citizens and members of the Parliament. I hope that at stage 2 the Standards Committee  will consider in detail some of the issues that I have raised. I reiterate my congratulations to the committee and repeat what Kay Ullrich has made clear—the SNP's whole-hearted support for the bill. I thank the Presiding Officer for giving me eight extra minutes.

I note the survey to which the minister referred. Will she also read the messages  that have been pouring into the Parliament's website on the matter and, where appropriate, pass on the comments to health boards so that they become fully aware of the intensity of public feeling on the issue?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In light of the number of members still to speak and the great interest in the public gallery, I would like to move a motion to extend the business.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The financial memorandum states that the bill will not involve costs to local authorities. It has not been made clear whether the £150,000 that Karen Gillon mentioned will come from a local authority budget—in which case the financial memorandum is rubbish—or from the Scottish Executive. Will the minister make that clear?

I thank Tavish Scott for making the only honest contribution to the debate from the Executive benches. He recognised that the proposals that the Executive made two weeks ago would never have been made if my bill had not been introduced. The Executive brought those proposals to the Local Government Committee at the very last minute because of the potential threat that some Liberal Democrats might vote for my bill. It is well known that a number of Liberal Democrat members—Mike Rumbles, Donald Gorrie, Robert Brown, Nora Radcliffe and Margaret Smith—support my bill—

—so anyone who says that there is no support for it is speaking absolute nonsense. I point out to the committee's convener, Trish Godman, that the committees have a responsibility and a duty to consider the evidence objectively and independently. Nine of the 13 witnesses who were called to give evidence to the Local Government Committee supported the bill.

I hear "quality" and "quantity" from behind me. I thought that quantity counted in a democracy. After all, who has the majority? As for quality, the organisations that supported my bill include the likes of the Scottish Civic Forum and the Commission for Racial Equality.

No. Trish Godman would not take an intervention from me. Irrespective of whether one judges the evidence to the Local Government Committee on the basis of any definition of quantity or quality, members of the committee would have come out in favour of my bill if they had not been dragooned by the whips. That is the central point.

I will not take an intervention. Members would not take one from me. Sit, sit, sit. I recognise that the Executive has moved some way towards what we are trying to achieve, but I must make two points on its proposals, which were cobbled together over that weekend. First, they are still skeletal. I will return to that in a minute. Secondly, they will deal with only 80 per cent of the issue—the crucial 20 per cent is  missing. The crucial 20 per cent is the need—in the words of the Liberal Democrat manifesto—for "open nomination and confirmation." By any reasonable definition, the Executive's proposals do not propose "open nomination and confirmation."

Sit doon. The whole process will continue to be carried out behind closed doors. That is why a recent survey by the commissioner for public appointments made it clear that two thirds of the electorate have no confidence in the present system because they think it stinks of cronyism. The events of last week help to prove that the system still stinks of cronyism. The Executive proposals, which were enough to buy off the Liberal Democrats, would not be enough to buy off any decent-thinking true democrat. Let us consider the example of the proposal for a public appointments committee in the Scottish Parliament. When the Local Government Committee dealt with my bill, the Executive whips dragooned committee members into one particular way of doing things. If the public appointments committee was to be run in that way—

To prove that the public appointments committee will be independent, will the Executive give us a commitment that the chair of the committee will be a non-Executive member? Will the Executive give us a commitment that the Executive will not have a built-in majority on the public appointments committee? Of course it will not give us such a commitment.

The Executive will not give us a commitment because it will stuff that committee with all the usual yes-men, placemen and party hacks, to perpetuate the system. The Liberal Democrats will no doubt go along with it.

I agree absolutely with Mrs Ewing. I am surprised at Mr Rumbles, who usually rumbles such things much more quickly than he has done on this occasion.

The other substantive point that has been made is that the creation of a Scottish commissioner will in itself put an end to cronyism. The fact of life is that that is not a new position in the sense that we have had a commissioner for the past five years. Her name is Dame Rennie Fritchie. She has been responsible for public appointments that have been made by the Parliament and the Executive, as well as for those that have been made from London. Despite her five years of effort, Dame Rennie Fritchie—who is a very able lady indeed—has not been able to put an end to cronyism in Scotland because it is so in-built. That suggests to me that the Parliament needs to intervene. There is an argument about the mechanism that the Parliament should use, but the fundamental and important principle is that the final part of the appointment process for senior positions should be in front of the Parliament's committees. It should be done in the open, not behind closed doors. To conclude, far from reaching an objective decision, the Local Government Committee has on this occasion shown itself to be at the behest of the Executive whips, which is unusual for that committee.

I say to members of the Local Government Committee that the bill would not deter, but encourage, people. It would lead not to politicisation but to democratisation. The bill would put an end to Labour cronyism in this country once and for all.

Will Mike Rumbles give way?

Is not it true that nine of the 13 witnesses who gave evidence to the Local Government Committee recommended that the bill be passed? Perhaps the committee's recommendation is a case of the committee's not listening to the people. Is not it the case that, only four days ago, Mr Rumbles told me that he was in favour of the bill?

Yes, you did.

You did.

rose—

I want to put it firmly on record that we were approached when Mr McConnell was the relevant minister and that Mr Salmond agreed to make nominations on behalf of the SNP, on condition that that was the last time that they were done that way and that in future the process would be open and democratic. We were given an undertaking, but as usual the promise was broken.

I will pay tribute to and thank four sets of people: first, those who drafted the bill; secondly, the Parliament's non-Executive bills unit, which is one of the Parliament's biggest assets; thirdly, the clerk to the Local Government Committee; and fourthly, the clerk to the Equal Opportunities Committee. I will not offer gratitude to the majority members of each committee, who I think fell down at the last hurdle. The aims of my bill are twofold. The first aim is to increase democratic accountability and transparency for public appointments in Scotland. The second aim is to put an end, once and for all, to the practice and culture of cronyism, which has pervaded public appointments in Scotland for far too long. My bill seeks to give the Parliament the power to vet and, in extreme cases, to veto public appointments. If enacted, it would give the Parliament a duty to scrutinise the nominations for the chairs of quangos and would give the Parliament the power to scrutinise other nominations without necessarily going to confirmation. Experience elsewhere shows that only 0.1 per cent of the other nominees would ever come in front of a committee for scrutiny, but the very existence of the power will mean that ministers will think twice before they put their pals forward for the cushy and lucrative numbers in the quangos. We are talking about ensuring parliamentary control of a set of people who have enormous power in Scotland. There are 114 quangos and more than 900 people are involved. Next year, those people will spend about £9 billion of public money in Scotland. That is a huge sum of money. One quango spends nearly £700 million of public money, so the Parliament has a duty to ensure that the person who is in charge of that organisation has the ability, expertise and experience to do the job.  There have been many red herrings and I have no doubt that we are about to hear more of them this afternoon. The first red herring is that the bill will politicise the process. After last week, who in their right mind—unless they have been living on Mars or in East Kilbride—could believe that the process is not already political? Is not every appointment made by a minister? Is not every minister a politician? Does not that make the process political? Despite the fact that the number of Labour party activists—currently falling quickly throughout the country—represents about 2.2 per cent of the population, Labour party representation among the chairmanships of the water boards is not 0.2 per cent but 100 per cent. If we examine all the public appointments for which a political affiliation has been declared, the proportion of Labour party members is not 0.2 per cent but 66 per cent. If we consider the independent assessors—the word "independent" must be used fairly liberally and certainly not accurately—we find that 50 per cent of those who were nominated last week were Labour party supporters. I would say that there is already a touch of politicisation in the process.

I did not nominate anyone because I do not believe in the process. I, too, have the list of organisations that were invited to make nominations. Of the 32 local authorities in Scotland, only three were invited to make nominations. Angus Council was not one of those three. To be fair, Clackmannanshire Council was invited. Dundee City Council was also invited. No Liberal council was invited to make a nomination. The other council that was invited to nominate was Glasgow City Council, which supports my bill.

Sit down.

Okay, I will take it.

Not only was he a poor minister, he is a poor Liberal Democrat. He is neither Liberal nor Democrat. Unbelievable. Iain Smith seems not to know the wording of his own 1999 manifesto, which stated that the Liberal Democrats were committed to—as always, I quote accurately and precisely— "a system of open nomination and confirmation". That was the Liberal promise, but look at them on the Liberal benches now. The price of a Liberal principle is four Mondeos. If I looked across and saw a shiver, it would not find a spine to run up. One of the other red herrings is that the bill will discourage people from applying to be quango members. Where is the evidence? Last week, we had a raging success for the applications for the positions of independent assessor, when we received 27 applications for 12 jobs. That is an amazing rate of application. I will tell members why people will not apply for the jobs. They will not apply for the jobs because many of them think, rightly or wrongly, that without a Labour party card, they have no chance of getting them. They will not apply for the jobs because, under the present system, there is trial by media. There is no proper system of parliamentary scrutiny, so the scrutiny occurs on the front pages of the newspapers and on radio and television. Those nominated have no right of reply. Under my system, their rights would be protected because they would come to a confirmation hearing and would get a proper hearing that focused on their ability to do the job. Another red herring is that, during the confirmation hearing, we would go down the road of questioning people about their personal life. To those who say that, I say, "Read the bill." The bill is carefully crafted. There are only four areas on which people can be interviewed—including the code of practice, the statutory requirements and their ability to do the job. The idea that people would be disinclined—

Sit doon the noo. Iain Smith will get a chance to speak later. I am sure that we will all be on tenterhooks. What surprises me about the Liberal Democrats is—

I was going to say what surprised me, not what their intelligence quotient is. I am surprised that the Liberal Democrats are  allowing themselves to be tarred with the brush of Labour cronyism, which is what they are doing. Lanarkshire Labour's practices have been imported into Scotland's Parliament—cronyism, and the culture of cronyism. There are some exceptions. The former First Minister said in Scotland on Sunday : "This Parliament should have the power to vet and veto appointments to the quangos." Henry McLeish was absolutely right; and to be fair to him, had he still been First Minister, the bill would have had a fairer hearing from the Executive than it has had. Let us look at the Liberal Democrats. Speaking on their behalf down south, Shirley Williams has said that they want a system of parliamentary scrutiny and confirmation hearings. Mark Oaten, one of their famous speakers in the House of Commons, has said that they want a system of open confirmation and nomination. Let us face it: unfortunately, the Liberal Democrats have been bought off. They shame the name of liberalism and the philosophy of liberalism. This bill implements not only a Liberal manifesto commitment but a Liberal philosophy. The late John Bannerman and the late Jo Grimond must be turning in their graves when they consider this shower of modern-day Liberals. I ask the Liberals, and I ask decent Labour folk, to think about the bill. It is about the new politics; it is about democratic representation; it is about the new Scotland; it is about getting rid of cronyism; and it is about making this a Parliament that we can start to be proud of. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill.

Does the minister think that our heads button up the back?

The minister's head certainly does. Is it not incredible that Labour party membership is equivalent to less than 0.2 per cent of the population, yet 50 per cent of the assessors are Labour cronies? Is it not the case that, because of the way in which the most recent 12 assessors were appointed, the public have no confidence in them? They should be sacked and the whole process—

I remind the minister that we are living in Scotland, not Sicily.

rose—

On a point of order. The minister misled—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to today's announcement by the Scottish Executive of the new appointees to the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, to which Mrs Christine Davis CBE has been reappointed as chairperson. The Scottish Executive stated in its announcement that neither she nor any other board member holds any other post by public appointment. However, Mrs Christine Davis is, in fact, a member of the independent assessors' panel for public appointments. Do you think that you could use the powers of your office to get the Scottish Executive to tell us the truth for a change, Presiding Officer?

I remind the minister that, on pages  2, 3 and 4, the GERS report states that none of the figures that it contains are reliable.

On a point of order. Once again, speeches from back-bench members have been  curtailed, when we have heard well over an hour of speeches from front-bench members—we have more yet to hear from them. It seems that, again, the balance between the front and the back benches is way out of kilter. I suggest that, when a debate is curtailed because of events such as an emergency statement, standing orders should allow back benchers more time. That would give front benchers less time, but back benchers are not getting a fair deal in the Scottish Parliament.

I am always reluctant to interrupt one of Des McNulty's perorations. Yesterday a report was published on child poverty in Scotland. It showed that, after five years of a Labour Government, one third of the children in Scotland are still living in poverty. The Executive's objective is to reduce the number of children living in poverty by 50 per cent by 2010. Where does the budget make provision for ensuring that that happens?

I thank Donald Gorrie for letting me intervene. Does he agree that while we are governed under the existing regime, it would make much more sense for the consolidated fund allocation for Scotland to come to the Scottish Parliament? That would mean that we could allocate the funds that we think the unnecessary Scotland Office needs, rather than the Scotland Office taking the top slice off our budget and putting it into its bureaucracy instead of into our health service.

Will the minister commission an independent assessment of the economic impact of euro membership on Scottish business? Does she agree that, if we go into the euro at anything like the current exchange rate, it would be a disaster for the Scottish economy?

I will mention two or three issues that have not been mentioned in the debate so far, but which present major long-term strategic challenges for the  Scottish economy. The first is the problem of long-term depopulation. We have all seen the recent forecast from the registrar general for Scotland, which shows that in the next few years, for the first time in a long time, the population will go back down below 5 million. Indeed, one long-term forecast shows that, by 2065, the population of Scotland could fall to as little as 3.8 million. That presents a number of major problems.

That is indicative of the problem. We have to face up to the problems that depopulation presents. I will provide a couple of examples of the implications of depopulation. At present, we have a dependency ratio in Scotland of just more than 2:1. In other words, for every two or two and a half workers we have one dependant—a child, a pensioner or whoever. If we go down to a population of about 3.8 million by about 2065, the dependency ratio is likely to go into reverse and change from 2:1 to 1:2. In other words, for every one worker there will be two dependants. That has major implications for taxation and expenditure on social services, and will also bring other problems. The second issue is the attraction of new industry from outside Scotland and the growth of indigenous industry. If we do not have a young population with the appropriate skill levels coming through to fill the jobs that will be available, our economy will continue to have a comparative growth rate that is well below that of the UK, and even more substantially below that of Europe. In other words, a key part of any long-term economic development strategy for Scotland must be a deliberate proactive policy to tackle depopulation. If there is one country that needs an immigration policy, it is Scotland. We need to bring people to Scotland—not just people who have left Scotland, but others who would like to live and work, set up new businesses and do research and development here. That leads me to my third major point, which deals with a word that I have not heard much of in the debate—investment. Whether we are talking about the railway infrastructure, the roads infrastructure, manufacturing industry, research and development or whatever, the fundamental problem in Scotland is that for not only one year, two years, 20 years or 30 years, but since the turn of the last century, we have grossly underinvested in the private and public sectors. We now need a scale of investment that no one has started to contemplate. Unless we get that level and scale of  investment in the private and public sectors, we will continue with relative decline in Scotland no matter what happens in any trade cycle. Irrespective of our party and views on the constitution, let us in the Parliament be big enough to take on the key challenges of depopulation and massively increasing investment.

To ask the First Minister what the current position is regarding the closure of individual learning accounts. (S1F-1525)

I thank the First Minister for that reply. First, can he clarify the reasons for closing the ILAs? Was it done primarily because of fraud, because the money ran out or for some other reason that we do not know about? Secondly, can he tell us when the new system will be put in place, what criteria will be used and whether there will be carryover to a new ILA for those who have an existing ILA?

I would like to move a motion without notice that we hear from the First Minister this afternoon on the subject of the closure of the individual learning accounts. I move, That a motion on Individual Learning Accounts be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The First Minister is not making a point of order.

On a point of order—

I thank the minister for giving me notice of the closure of the individual learning accounts scheme as of this afternoon. Will the minister indicate the concerns about fraud and corruption that led to the closure of the scheme? Can she confirm whether the scheme has been closed or suspended? Will she indicate the number of companies and organisations that are affected?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The issue is well within the minister's responsibilities, and it is well within the remit of the question. Given that there has not been time for a ministerial statement, the chamber is entitled to know the facts.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given the importance of the closure of the individual learning accounts, will you under standing orders exercise your discretion to extend First Minister's question time by enough time to reach question 6? It is critical that the chamber receives the proper information on the closure of the accounts, because its cash effect could be very damaging to colleges and others over the holiday period.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have been informed by the former Minister for Parliament that you have already set a precedent of extending question time at your own discretion. Given that you have already set that precedent and that the clear will of the chamber is that we should have the chance to ask the First Minister questions on the matter, I really think that you are duty-bound to give the proposal more serious consideration.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would it be in order for me to move a motion that we do not conclude business at 3.40 pm, as has been agreed, but that we continue until well after 4 o'clock, if necessary, to give us the opportunity to find out what is going on with the ILAs?

Will NEC be asked to match the public sector funding of £6 million, as it should in order to meet its social responsibility? What action is being taken to save the 2,400 Motorola jobs that still exist in Scotland? Does not the latest investment prove that we have for far too long put too many eggs in the foreign investment and electronics basket and that it is high time that we grew indigenous companies in Scotland in a diversified market?

It was about the money from NEC.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, on the same issue. If the members are prospective, can we take it that they cannot be paid any salary or expenses that  are voted on by the Parliament until they become officially and legally members of the board?

Does that include me?

I begin with a word or two about the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, which I have the  pleasure to convene. We welcome the minister's response to the Finance Committee's recommendations. In particular, we are keen for an indication to be given of the estimated outturn for the previous financial year before we are asked to consider figures for the following and subsequent financial years. We realise that we are all learning from the process and that these are early days in the life of the Parliament. However, the quicker we get there, the better it will be for everyone. I will also say a word or two about the budgets of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Those organisations—particularly Scottish Enterprise—have suffered fairly significant real-terms cuts in their budgets in recent years. Given the crisis in the electronics industry and the fact that unemployment is rising again, I hope that whoever sums up the debate for the Executive—either the minister or the deputy minister—will reassure me that there will be no further raids on the budgets of SE or HIE. We need to spend every penny that we can get on job creation in Scotland in the period that lies ahead. I will concentrate on three areas this afternoon. I hope that the Finance Committee will consider doing some work on "Government Expenditure & Revenue in Scotland 1999-2000", which is commonly referred to as GERS. Personally, I do not attach a great deal of credibility to that document. On page 1, the first disclaimer says: "The calculations required to derive NB"— that is, net borrowing— "for Scotland are subject to imprecision due to the need to estimate a number of elements of both expenditure and revenue. The NB estimates presented in this report should therefore be regarded as indicative rather than precise." In other words, the estimates are rubbish. On page 2, the document says: "This work does, for example, need to draw on surveys that have been devised specifically to meet a particular UK policy requirement and do not necessarily, therefore, provide appropriately robust data at a Scottish level." GERS should be renamed "garbage"—garbage in, garbage out. I will also deal with figure 1 on page 11 of GERS, which gives the lie to the so-called argument against independence and alleged budget deficits. Figure 1 contains the UK figures for income and expenditure for the past 30 years and shows that more income went into the UK Treasury than came out of it in only four of those 30 years. If the UK was running a deficit for 26 of the past 30 years, does that mean that it should not have been an independent state or have had an independent Government or an independent Parliament? Where is the logic of the unionists,  who try to argue that it is okay for the UK to have a deficit and be independent but, on their fiddled figures, Scotland is not capable of independence because of Scotland's alleged deficit? I have never heard so much nonsense in all my life—or at least since the Minister for Finance and Public Services sat down.

Unfortunately, I do not have time. Normally I would give way, but such is the balance that the front benchers get 21 minutes whereas I only get five minutes. I draw to members' attention an article in The Scotsman— a worthwhile newspaper, which I would recommend to everybody—which had the headline "The all-hype economy that's going nowhere?" Can ministers, who boast about the impact of expenditure in Scotland, explain why the latest available figures up to June 2001 show: Scottish gross domestic product rose by 0.3 per cent when UK GDP rose by 2.5 per cent; production in Scotland was down by 5.3 per cent when it was up by 0.2 per cent for the UK; Scottish manufacturing was down by 4.8 per cent when it was up by 4.6 per cent for the UK; services were up by 2.4 per cent in Scotland but up 3.5 per cent in the UK; and tourism, hotels and catering were down by 1.5 per cent in Scotland but up 3.4 per cent in the UK? That is what the Minister for Finance and Public Services described as Gordon Brown's prudent running of the Scottish economy. By any standard, that is a disaster area. I hope that we will get some sort of explanation for the continuing failure of the economic union with the rest of the United Kingdom. Unfortunately, I do not have time to prescribe the answer because I have only five seconds left. Wait for my next speech.

Will the minister give way?

When the minister was examining his monitoring reports, did he realise that, as an Audit Scotland report has just pointed out, the deficits in NHS trusts in Scotland are £24 million higher this year than at the same time last year? Is that not a black hole?

rose—

Does the member agree that it should now be a top priority to make funds available to open the six closed waiting lists in the national health service?

Has the minister been consulted about the review of student finance that was instigated by the UK Government, including a review of means-tested allowances—

It does. Will that review cover Scotland or is it purely for south of the border?

To be fair to the Minister for Justice, I should say that he promised the estates review in the new year, although he has not said which new year.

I will concentrate my remarks on Scotland's first, and I hope last, private prison—Bowhouse in Kilmarnock. I have 10 points to make about Bowhouse and the problems surrounding it. I will do my best to make those points in the three minutes available to me.  The first point is about secrecy and confidentiality. I find it ironic that the minister who sets himself up as the champion of freedom of information presides over one of the most secretive and illiberal prison management regimes in western Europe. When one asks a question about HM Prison Kilmarnock, the answer from the minister is, "That is not my responsibility. Write to Tony Cameron, the chief executive." When one writes to Tony Cameron, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, he says, "That is not my responsibility; it is the responsibility of Premier Prison Services Ltd." When one writes to Premier Prison Services Ltd, it uses the excuse of commercial confidentiality. However, Premier Prison Services Ltd is spending taxpayer's money, albeit on a contractual basis in the private sector rather than on a spend basis in the public sector. If the minister wants to be remembered as someone who believes in freedom of information, let him do something about making sure that Parliament gets proper access to the information about the operation of the prison in Kilmarnock. I shall give the minister some facts about the operation of the prison in Kilmarnock. We heard a lot of ideological nonsense from Phil Gallie about the benefits of privatisation. However, Phil Gallie—I am glad that he is back in the chamber—did not tell us that, according to the chief inspector of prisons, a prisoner is four times more likely to be assaulted by another prisoner in Bowhouse than in any other prison in Scotland. Phil failed to mention another fact about that privatised prison—"Phil failed to mention" sounds quite well. That is that, under its contract, the prison undertakes a custodial role only, as the chief executive has confirmed. The prison has no remit for the rehabilitation or reform of prisoners.

I hoped that Mr Gallie's intervention would have got me another minute. My third or fourth point—or is it my fifth?—is on comments made by Clive Fairweather. He told the Justice 1 Committee that he could not deny that he was suspicious that the assault figures for Kilmarnock are being deliberately fiddled. We are not sure whether they are being fiddled by Premier Prison Services Ltd or by the management of the Scottish Prison Service, but we know that the chief inspector thinks that they are being fiddled. That is on top of the figures for assaults on other prisoners.  Mr Gallie did not tell us about the profits that will be made from the public purse at Kilmarnock over 25 years—

I have given several reasons—I will publish the others tomorrow—why privatisation is the worst thing that could happen to the Prison Service in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

That is a pity.

rose—

rose—

Is the minister aware of the new extension to the new deal, called set-up? Will she be making any representations to the Government down south concerning the regulation that anyone who does not take set-up will lose their benefit? Is this not a case of a stitch-up rather than a set-up?

I am sure that the First Minister will acknowledge the importance of individual learning accounts in post-school education. Why were payments under the ILA scheme suspended at the weekend? Was it because of the level of fraud? When will we hear a ministerial statement on the matter and when will the payments be restored?

As members might be aware, at the weekend there was a suspension of payments awarded in Scotland in respect of individual learning accounts, which has major implications for the college sector, for companies and for individual trainees. Would it be possible to have a ministerial statement tomorrow on the future of ILAs?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sorry, but the First Minister made an untrue statement.

My point of order is that contrary to what the First Minister said, Mr Swinney did offer me a job on his front bench.

Given the number of people who want to speak in the limited time, may I move a motion to extend the debate by 15 minutes?

The business bulletin has two similar or parallel motions. The first, which we are about to debate, is in my name; the second, on people management in our universities, is in the name of Richard Simpson. I hope that we will have the opportunity in the near future to discuss Richard's motion as well as mine, because it covers various issues that I would certainly like to support—in particular, the need for equal pay for female academic staff in our universities. My motion is specifically related to the plight of our contract research staff in the 14 universities in Scotland. There are 5,000 such staff and more than 94 per cent of them are employed on fixed-term contracts. Most contract research staff are in low-grade jobs: 57 per cent are on research grade 1A; 23 per cent are on research grade 1B; and only 10 per cent are on research grade 2. They face constant insecurity. Between 1998 and 2000, more than 80 per cent of contract research staff experienced a change in their contract, and more than 60 per cent experienced at least two changes. Contract research staff often have relatively poor working conditions and long hours are fairly standard. In 66 per cent of cases, working hours were not stipulated. Long hours are endemic: 29 per cent report working between 49 and 59 hours a week, and 7 per cent report working 60 or more hours a week. Career development opportunities are very limited. At any one time, around 40 per cent of  contract research staff are actively seeking their next post. The most important factors leading to an exit from the job are insecurity, poor promotion prospects and low pay. Around one in three of contract research staff in post in 1998—the most recent year for which figures are available—had left by 2000. Why is this such an important issue? We all acknowledge the importance of our universities and the research that they do. They are important to academic development and educational achievement, but they also make a wider contribution to Scottish society and the Scottish economy. A few weeks ago, during private members' business, we had a debate on the value of nurses. There was unanimous agreement on the need to give our nurses the status that they deserve in our society. After two decades of campaigning, the time has come for us to give contract researchers in our universities the status that they deserve. They are often the seedcorn for development that is then taken up by full-time professional researchers. Without the support of those 5,000 contract researchers, many projects that have come to fruition would not have done so. Many contracts that come to Scotland would not do so without the intellectual and academic input of those contract researchers. Scotland suffers because of the way in which we treat our contract researchers. Earlier this week, I received a letter from Germany, from Dr Jonathan Butler, who is a mathematician who tried to develop an academic career in Scotland. He was ready and willing to pass on his knowledge to future generations and to develop new theories and research. I will quote his letter: "Trying to develop a university career in such a hostile environment was difficult, uncertain and demoralising." After a series of poorly paid short-term contracts, he moved into industry where he was offered a permanent contract, twice his university salary and a lucrative bonus package into the bargain. Our best and brightest are leaving Scotland because they do not have the job prospects, the security and the pay that they deserve. Without a dedicated and highly motivated contract research staff, the Executive will not be able to implement its science and knowledge strategies. We must realise that in order for the Parliament and the Executive to achieve what is set out in "A Smart Successful Scotland" and all the other strategy documents that we have discussed over the past two and a half years, we have to give our contract researchers their place. They are the people at the coalface. Often, in some of the most prestigious publications, if the names of the contract researchers appear at all, it  is as a footnote. They are not given equality of esteem or status. They are not given the employment rights that they deserve. The Association of University Teachers and others have been campaigning on this issue for more than 20 years. Now that we have a Parliament in Scotland that is dedicated to making Scotland a knowledge economy and is dedicated to our universities we must live up to their aspirations. We must recognise the plight of contract research staff and, most important, we must do something about it.

As a Central Scotland MSP, I very much want to speak in this debate just to register the support of people from outside the north of Scotland for the  development of Inverness airport. I am quite glad that the two Central Scotland MSPs in the debate are Andy Kerr, who is the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee, and me, the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. It is extremely important for the rest of Scotland that the Highland economy reaches its full potential. Last night, I was reading the latest newsletter for Highlands and Islands Enterprise. It pointed out that, for the first time in many a long year, there is net immigration into the Highlands and Islands and that there is a skills shortage in many sectors in the area. Unless we address that shortage, the Highlands will not be able to realise its full potential. A key means of solving the shortage would be a hub-to-hub connection from Inverness to London, Schiphol and other hub airports, which would be essential to the expansion of the Highland economy and allow it to realise its full potential. I appreciate the arguments about whether we should concentrate only on the campaign for the PSO or whether we should be doing other things as well. As I fought for years to save and then to expand Prestwick airport, my advice is to move on all fronts at once. Although members should campaign on a united front for the PSO, they should not treat that issue and encouraging other carriers such as Ryanair and Go—if there is any chance that they will fly into Inverness as well—as mutually exclusive. The lesson that we learned from the Prestwick airport campaign was that putting all our eggs in one basket means running a very big risk if nothing comes off. If we move on a number of fronts and one or two of them come off, we are sailing. [ Laughter. ] I mean flying, not sailing. Prestwick is now the fastest growing airport in the whole of the UK, with passenger growth last year standing at about 30 per cent. If we can get Inverness into that position, that will be a huge bonus not just for Inverness airport and Inverness, but for the Highlands and Islands. Although I have a lot of sympathy for Mary Scanlon's arguments, they are not particularly the subject of today's debate. The change of ownership at Prestwick, from the British Airports Authority to a local company, initially, was an essential ingredient in turning Prestwick around and making it a successful airport. I hope that the minister will address those medium-to-longer-term issues as well. The development of the Highland economy is essential, and the development of Inverness airport is essential to make that happen. I hope that we will not see a united front just from the MSPs from the Highlands and Islands and the  north-east, but from all MSPs. All 129 of them should put their elbows and shoulders behind that development, as it will be an enormous benefit to the whole of Scotland.

Does the minister recognise that one week's lobbying in Brussels is no substitute for independent membership of the Council of Ministers? I am not girning, but standing up for Scotland. Does not he realise that the difference between devolution and independence is that, instead of being in Brussels for one week, we would be there for 52 weeks of  the year, fighting for Scotland?

I begin by saying thank you to all those who participated in the preparation of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report. My thanks go first to Simon Watkins and the committee's clerking team, who have done their usual excellent job. I thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for its support, and I thank all those who gave evidence to the committee during its inquiry. My special thanks go to Professor Sir John Arbuthnott, who acted as adviser to the committee in the preparation of its report and worked with the committee throughout the summer, as the report progressed through various drafts. I welcome him to the VIP gallery this morning. I also thank the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning for her co-operation in responding to the report within such a short time frame. Normally the time frame for responding to reports is about eight weeks. This report was published about 10 days ago and we expect a fairly detailed response from the minister later in the debate. I thank SHEFC for its co-operation. We have criticised aspects of SHEFC's work, particularly in relation to teaching funding, but we recognise that it had a difficult job and that it made an effort to bring the teaching funding system up to date, even though we believe that that needs further thought. I have been quite astounded by the reception that has been given to the report in the 10 days or so since it was published. I will offer members a  selection of quotes. The first is from Professor Sir Bernard King, the principal of the University of Abertay Dundee, whom I also welcome to the gallery this morning. The day after the report was published, he wrote in The Scotsman : "The enterprise and lifelong learning committee's report into SHEFC's recent funding reviews is to be warmly welcomed on many grounds, not least for its clear and far-sighted view of how university teaching and research should integrate with the wider economic, cultural and social life of the nation." I will quote also from an e-mail that I received from Gordon Millan, chair of the University Council of Modern Languages. He congratulated the committee on the profound way "in which you 'handled' your Enquiry". He said that he was "delighted that our message on modern languages was listened to", and that all the evidence that was given by the UCML was incorporated into the committee's report. My final quote is from a letter that I received from Universities Scotland, which states: "Universities Scotland warmly welcomes the Committee's report, and congratulates the Committee on the thoroughness of its analysis. It believes that the main findings are sound, and that the principal recommendations form a good basis for addressing a number of vital issues in connection with the funding of both teaching and research." However, the report has not been welcomed universally. At a meeting yesterday of the senate of the University of Strathclyde, a comment was made about "Alex Neil's committee rampaging" through the universities of Scotland. First, our purpose is not to rampage. Secondly, I do not think that other members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee would be happy with its being described as "Alex Neil's committee". Thirdly, the kind of stuffy attitude that the comment that I quoted reflects is for the days before devolution, when there was practically no scrutiny of these matters. The purpose, remit and responsibility of the Parliament is to bring the funding of public bodies under proper scrutiny and to ensure that taxpayers are getting a fair return on their investment in higher education. The debates that have taken place since the publication of the report have tended to focus on teaching funding, rather than on research funding. I want to rebalance the debate by highlighting the key issues that relate to research funding. I remind members that in Scotland's universities about £370 million a year is spent on basic and applied research. Roughly one third of the funding for that comes through the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. Research is absolutely vital to both the economic and the social and cultural life  of Scotland. Scotland has an excellent record in academic and scientific research. I could quote examples from many universities in Scotland: the work that is being done on cancer at the University of Dundee; the work that is being done at the University of Abertay Dundee; the work that is being done on lasers at Heriot-Watt University; and work that is being done at the University of St Andrews and other universities. However, traditionally we have been poor at translating research into commercial opportunities that can be of wider benefit to the Scottish economy. In this inquiry the committee—its remit is enterprise and lifelong learning—was naturally very interested in how we can improve commercialisation of Scotland's research for the benefit of the nation as a whole. This is the country that produced the telephone and the television, only for those products to be produced, by and large, furth of Scotland, with minimal direct economic benefit to Scotland. Our report makes three fundamental points. First, we say that the current formula that is used to determine research funding requires to be refined and improved to make it more relevant to the need for the development of research into downstream economic activity. Although over the past 10 years the research assessment exercise has improved markedly, it still has some way to go toward serving the nation's needs. When an academic has a paper published in a prestigious magazine, he or she is given a substantial number of brownie points in the research assessment exercise. Somebody who patents a new product is given substantially fewer points in the research assessment exercise and somebody who sets up a spin-off company that is of benefit to the wider community by creating jobs gets no points at all. We need to change that, so that somebody who sets up a spin-off company is regarded as a national hero, rather than as somebody who is undeserving of reward. The irony of that situation, which was pointed out by a number of witnesses in the inquiry, is that the publication of papers in prestigious journals sometimes results in people in other countries taking out patents for the products of which we have revealed the secrets in those papers. That is an absurd position that needs to be rectified. The second major point that the committee made about the research assessment exercise concerned the recommendation by SHEFC—which the committee rejects totally—that funding for level 3-rated departments should not be included in research assessment exercise funding. If that recommendation were implemented, it would have a number of detrimental effects. First, it would be particularly detrimental to our new universities. Secondly, much level-3 rated  research will become the level 4 and level 5-rated research of tomorrow. If we cut off funding to the seedcorn research, which is often level 3-rated research, we will not be able to enhance our excellence in future years. We also found in evidence that level 3-rated departments are often the most innovative in terms of subject areas. Examples of that are in music and—if I may refer again to the University of Abertay Dundee, given that Bernard King is in the gallery—games technology. Abertay started from virtually nothing and people laughed at the idea of a university undertaking games technology as a serious subject. Now, however, Abertay is a world-renowned centre of excellence in games technology, which is one of the fastest-growing industries in the global economy. Technology Ventures Scotland, which was set up to promote commercialisation in Scotland, told the committee that "three star research departments are currently better aligned to the needs of business", particularly to small and medium-sized enterprises. The committee's members therefore believe—unanimously, I think—that funding for such departments should be included in the research assessment exercise funding. That presents a problem, however. Our excellence is growing at an almost exponential pace while the available funding is growing at an arithmetic pace. I am not criticising the Executive—as the committee convener, I would never do that—but there is a fundamental policy issue that needs to be addressed. If we are fully to realise our potential and ensure that the nursing of research at levels 3 and above on the research assessment exercise scale is properly funded, in order to ensure that those ratings are improved, there will have to be substantial new funding from the private and public sectors in the years ahead. The three key issues that the committee identified in relation to the research assessment exercise are: the need to fund level 3 research; the need to ensure that spin-offs and patents are rewarded at least to the same extent as academic papers; and the need to ensure that the seedcorn funding exists to provide for the excellence of tomorrow. On research, the committee addressed the scale of funding. I believe that the committee and the minister agree that there must be exponential growth in funding for research. If I were asked to summarise what the national economic development strategy for Scotland should be in the 21 st century, I would say that we should make ourselves the scientific research capital of Europe. That is the area in which we have outstanding ability and can compete on a more than equal  footing, and from where we will generate the wealth of tomorrow. In order to do that, we need the private and public sectors to invest significantly more in long-term research in our universities and in our industrial base. Often, the debate concerns only public funding; however, my message to the private sector is that it, too, has failed. The percentage of funding that is spent in the private sector in Scotland on research and development is about one third of the European average for the private sector. One company in Finland—Nokia—spends more on research and development than does the whole of Scotland. That is not a healthy situation for us and we need to address it seriously.

There are two issues. One is about attracting companies of the calibre of BP to do more research in Scotland and the other—which we cannot dodge—is about the poor record of our indigenous companies in research and development. If our key strategy is to build up indigenous research, we need to get those companies to spend three or four times as much as they spend now on research and development. The committee's recommendations concentrate on the need for additional investment, the need for more money for patenting—we are losing a significant number of commercial opportunities through lack of funding in that regard—and the need to improve the commercialisation process between business and universities and within the university sector. An example of the best model for the future is the Institute for System Level Integration in Livingston, which brings together business and academia and exploits research to full commercial advantage. Scottish Enterprise and other organisations are planning the establishment of another three such institutes and the committee is wholly supportive of those plans. Another key recommendation is that the science strategy should be fully developed into a research and development strategy that brings together science, technology, research and development and the commercialisation of that scientific work. Substantial amounts of public money are also involved in teaching funding. We should send a memorandum to the University of Strathclyde's senate to remind it of that fact. Some 60 per cent of all university funding comes from taxpayers,  who are therefore entitled to examine how that money is being spent. Rightly, £440 million a year of public money is spent on the higher education sector in Scotland. I remind members that we are talking not only about the 14 universities, but about the future of the other institutes of higher education, such as the art colleges. The committee decided to hold the inquiry because of members' concerns about the SHEFC proposals. We are concerned about the reduction in the number of subject areas from 22 to six. We are also concerned about the changes to subject funding that led to an 8.3 per cent increase in funding for clinical and veterinary subjects and an average 1 per cent reduction in funding for all other subjects. What impact will that have on the new universities, the art colleges and on particular subject areas, such as modern languages? We urge SHEFC to go ahead with the important measures to widen access for people from lower income families and to help disabled students and part-time students more. We were also concerned about the process that was employed by SHEFC as it went about the review of teaching funding. It seemed to get off to a good start, but it went downhill from there. It brought in consultants then, in effect, sacked them. It set out to try to obtain evidence to justify the future funding formula: it then abandoned that effort. No assessment was made of the impact of the proposals on individual institutions. There was a lack of clear guidelines on implementation. There was no proper justification for the favourable treatment of the medical subjects or the perceived adverse effects on other subjects. Our main conclusion was that SHEFC mishandled the review of teaching funding. We acknowledge the difficulties that were involved and the fact that SHEFC set itself an ambitious target—it is right that we encourage quangos to do that. Unfortunately, the review was mishandled to the extent that SHEFC's credibility was damaged. That is why the committee believes that the way forward is to set up an independent inquiry to consider the long-term funding formula for teaching in our higher education institutions. The inquiry will carry no baggage and will base its evidence on the facts; it will examine the proposals of Universities Scotland and SHEFC and the wider picture of what the people of Scotland need from teaching in our universities. The inquiry will not be a cosy arrangement between SHEFC and the teaching institutions. The report makes a number of recommendations on the inquiry and suggests that in the meantime there is no reason for delay on the consensually accepted aspects of SHEFC's proposals on helping the socially excluded, the  disabled and part-time students. We should proceed with implementing those proposals. All in all, we believe that the committee has come up with a fair assessment of the problem and a reasonable set of recommendations. We hope that the minister will agree with the bulk of the recommendations when she makes her statement later in the debate. Scotland's university sector and its other higher education institutions are essential elements of our national life. They are essential not only to the economic life of the nation, but to its social life and cultural development. The simple objective of the committee, the minister and the Parliament is to ensure that we have one of the best higher education sectors, not only in the United Kingdom or Europe, but in the world. If the committee's recommendations are implemented—on top of what the minister has announced—we will travel a long distance toward achieving that objective. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the 12th Report 2001 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the inquiry into the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council reviews of teaching and research funding (SP Paper 423).

I assure the First Minister and Mr McConnell that we will be watching this space closely. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive intends to take to address any allegations of institutional racism within its departments or any of the agencies for which it is responsible. (S1F-1305)

I thank the First Minister for his response. I totally agree with his comments in reply to Mr McLetchie. I draw the First Minister's attention to the contents of Dr Jandoo's report on the Chhokar case. It states: "The Crown Office cannot be cleared of the charge of institutional racism. That however is a charge which can probably be levelled at almost any organisation in the country." On the basis that prevention is better than cure, is not there a case for an anti-racist unit within the Executive to ensure that the recommendations are properly and adequately implemented?

To John Home Robertson and to Ben Wallace, I say that "man's inhumanity to man" is not a reserved matter—it is something that the Parliament is entitled to discuss. We live in a global society, not a kailyard called Scotland. It is the right of the Parliament, of every individual in Scotland and of every parliament throughout the world to discuss this global affair. I have three points to emphasise. The first relates to the geopolitics of the situation and has been referred to already. If we are seeking peace in the world and an end to terrorism once and for all, a key ingredient of that will be to deal with the situation in the middle east and to bring to an end the willy-nilly breach of international law by the state of Israel. Nothing does more to spread terrorism and the kind of problems that we have had than the present activities of the Israeli state. My second point relates to geo-economics. Naturally, we are concerned by the impact of terrorism on Scotland, the UK, Europe and north America. However, according to the World Bank, the most negative impact of the recent events will not be on Scotland, the UK, Canada or America, but on Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa, 46 per cent  of the billion people to whom George Reid referred live on less than US$1 a day. Half their aid has been cut off in recent years and the big worry in Africa—especially in countries such as Somalia, Eritrea, Ethiopia and the Sudan—is that international attention is now, understandably, focused on the middle east and Asia. The worry in Africa is that the people there will now be ignored completely and that, in trying to solve one crisis, we will create another deeper crisis in Africa. We must take an internationalist position. That is why John Swinney's initiative to help to boost aid from Scotland and to encourage political leaders to put their hands deep into their pockets for the international community is to be commended. I hope that it will be taken up as an exemplar by other parts of the UK and Europe. My third point is that we should recognise the dire humanitarian situation in Afghanistan—a country with a population of about 21 million people, 25 per cent of whom are already refugees in Pakistan, Iran and the other three "stans" that surround Afghanistan. Many Afghans are also in effect refugees in their own country. We owe it to them and to the humanitarian principles on which the UN was founded to put our hands in our pockets and do everything that we can to save them from the annihilation and starvation that they are facing. We heard last night that Oxfam needs $50 million to address the problem, but that it has been able to raise only $31 million. Let the nation of Scotland fill that gap of $19 million to the best of our ability, along with others in Europe. We are a rich country; it is high time that we put our hands in our pockets to demonstrate our humanity and our belief that those people be given the kind of treatment that they deserve.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have not yet seen the First Minister's amendment. Will you read it out before the First Minister speaks?

Will the member give way?

I am very pleased with the comments that Karen Gillon has made as convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee: it is important to bring in Scottish Borders Council officials and councillors and hold them to account. Will the committee also interview the relevant ministers? It seems a bit daft that two weeks ago an underspend of £718 million was announced, yet the tragic stories that we have heard about from Christine Grahame could be solved by a few pounds in relative terms. It seems incomprehensible that we have such an underspend and yet allow this to go on in the Borders.

Will the member give way?

I too congratulate Margaret Smith on securing this debate, and on making an excellent opening speech. In no way do I want to be partisan, but I think that this is one debate the Minister for Health and Community Care should have attended, to demonstrate beyond doubt that the Executive values our nurses. Let us go back to first principles. What are we all trying to achieve? We are trying to achieve shorter waiting times for operations, shorter waiting lists, national targets on cancer, heart disease and stroke, and a range of other objectives. We cannot  do those things unless we not only value our nurses, but put our money where our mouth is. It is not enough for us to stand here and give lip service to the nurses; the Parliament must be committed to action. A lot is said about nurses' care of patients—quite rightly—but from recent personal experience I can tell members that the care given to relatives is often as important as the care that is given to patients: the kind word, the cup of tea at 3 o'clock in the morning given to someone waiting for an elderly relative to die or the wee pat on the back for comfort. That is the role of the nurse, as well as looking after the patient. Where would our health service be without the professionalism and dedication of the nursing profession? Nurses' dedication is as important as their professionalism—the two are essential features of the profession. Specific issues have been raised. For example, Fergus Ewing and Janis Hughes mentioned the special plight of returning nurses. I will mention one particular issue: student nurses. It is a question of numbers. If the current prospect is that about a quarter of nurses will retire in the next 10 years, if about a quarter of nurses in training do not finish their training course, if there is a further reduction in the number of nurses because more are leaving the profession than are coming into it, we will face a crisis, particularly given the fact that the average age of the population is to increase substantially over the next 10 to 15 years. It is not just a question of having to attend to the problems of returning nurses and serving nurses; we also have to turn our attention to student nurses. In particular, as well as increasing the bursary, as the RCN is calling for, let us ensure that every nurse in training, not just some, receives a bursary. The Parliament needs to be prepared to raise tax if that is what it takes to look after and really value our nurses. Without our nurses, there is no national health service.

Is it not the case that at present the Scottish Prison Service is being not just underspent, but undermined by the shambolic state of its senior management? Is it not the case that staff morale throughout the Prison Service is lower than it has ever been and that the estates department in particular is a total shambles? Is it not time for the minister to take urgent action and to consider the position of the service's chief executive, who surrounds himself with secrecy and refuses to answer basic questions from members of the Parliament, particularly about the condition of the private prison at Bowhouse in Kilmarnock?

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to make public Andrew Goudie's report. Will the First Minister give serious consideration to the proposal by Bill Speirs of the Scottish Trades Union Congress that Parliament should convene a meeting that involves key sectors of business, the trade unions and others, to look at the economic consequences of the events of the past three weeks and to agree what urgent action, if any, is required? Furthermore, if Andrew Goudie's report identifies particular problems in key sectors, such as the airline industry, tourism and insurance, will the Executive be prepared to take the necessary action—for example, by pressing for the suspension of the airport tax, which would help tourism and the airline industry?

I follow on from what Cathy Peattie said—I agree with almost all of it—by making the point that we should recognise that we sometimes play on the voluntary sector. In particular, in the area of drugs, many people do voluntary work who, in an ideal world, would be backed by professional people or have such people involved in their work. Many a time we have to say, "Thank God people are prepared to volunteer to do the work," because if they were not there, many local issues would not be addressed properly. We have heard some excellent speeches and some poor ones, but I will not say who comes into which category. It is fair to say that the best speech—from all the parties—came from George Reid. I will add a word or two to what he said. When international events and the impact of those events at home are uppermost in everyone's minds, the international dimension to volunteering and to the voluntary sector must have top priority from the minister. That is not a constitutional point. I know that international development is a reserved issue—although I wish that it were not—but that does not prevent us from encouraging the voluntary sector to play an international role. That humanitarian—not constitutional—point must be uppermost in our minds. I will give two examples of situations in which we should be encouraging urgent action by the international voluntary sector. The first is what will  be a substantive refugee problem on the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The second is the most urgent situation in Palestine and that area of the world. Through the voluntary sector, we have a major contribution to make and, although I recognise that the matter is reserved, I encourage the minister to do what she can to encourage, co-ordinate and facilitate voluntary working. She can make a significant contribution. One of the great points about international affairs is that small nations that are not big power players are often trusted to do voluntary work. It is no accident that most of the secretaries-general of the United Nations come from small nations—the secretary-general could not come from America or Russia. We have a lot to contribute and we have done so down the years.

Unfortunately, I do not have time. My other point is a more domestic one about what the minister said on the social economy review that Stephen Maxwell is carrying out. The social economy has not been mentioned much in this debate, but it has an enormous role to play, particularly in areas of multiple deprivation. In this country we think of entrepreneurship as being about profiteers or someone looking for a fast buck. However, there are many honest entrepreneurs. There are many entrepreneurs in the public sector—in education, health, transport and other areas. There is enormous scope for social entrepreneurship that is not about making a fast buck for oneself, but about serving the community. There are enterprising people who are capable of setting up and running businesses for the benefit of the whole community. I hope that the review will be positive and that action will be taken as a result of it. There has been broad consensus among members in this debate—more or less. I have some empathy with aspects of the Tory amendment. However, I was persuaded by Conservative members' speeches not to vote for it. That is a pity, because it is important in a democratic society to ensure that the voluntary sector is not dictated to by the Labour party, by its coalition partners in the Executive, by my party or by any other party. The voluntary sector is there and the key point is that it must be independent and remain independent.

I rise to support the general principles of the bill. In doing so, I would like to make several points. First, in all parties there are very strong feelings both for and against the bill. However, I hope that some of the features of the debate outside the Parliament will not be seen inside the Parliament. In some quarters, there has been an attempt to portray the debate as a fight between urban and rural Scotland. That is entirely the wrong thing to do. I know people who live in urban Scotland who are not in favour of this bill, and I know people who live in the countryside who are in favour of it. I speak as a country boy who was brought up in a village in south Ayrshire. [ Interruption. ] Frank McAvennie—I mean Frank McAveety—was in a different village. It was called Glasgow. It is extremely important for the tone of the debate in the Parliament that we speak on the rights and wrongs of the issue. In Scotland we must not try to divide and rule by differentiating between the countryside and the town. People are either in  favour of the principles of the bill or they are not. Secondly, I do not see the bill as creating a precedent for banning other sports such as fishing and angling, as some have claimed. The bill relates solely to the specific issue of hunting, which according to those who support the bill constitutes cruelty to animals. Thirdly, if I believed that the implementation of the bill would wreak havoc in or destroy the rural economy, I would not rise to support it. I do not believe that the implementation of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill will destroy the rural economy of Scotland. I have considered the matter thoroughly. The excellent paper that was produced by the Scottish Parliament information centre considers the impact of the bill on jobs. Table 3 on page 18 of the paper, headed "Direct employment associated with mounted fox hunts in Scotland", indicates that between 83 and 87 full-time equivalent jobs would be lost.

I am sorry, I have only four minutes. It's like being at hame—I cannae get a word in edgeways. The SPICe note referred to full-time equivalent jobs, which is an important qualification. If 83 individuals were made redundant, I would be even more wary of the bill. However, that is not the case, as those jobs are part-time. Although they are important to the jobholders, it is a gross exaggeration, to say the least, to attempt to paint the bill as one that will cause economic devastation in the countryside.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. My final points will address the amendments that have been lodged by the Rural Development Committee and Elaine Murray. I will not criticise the Rural Development Committee—it had a difficult job to do and members of the committee, whether they are for or against the bill, did that job with reasonable motivation. However, I strongly advocate that members vote for neither amendment, for two reasons.

It is important to establish the principle today, once and for all, and for the Parliament to make a loud and clear decision one way or the other. To support either amendment would kick the issue into touch and we would spend the next two or three years debating it when we should be getting on with many other important matters. For all those reasons, we should support the bill  today. By all means let us improve it during stage 2 and stage 3, but let us support its general principles. That would give out the loud and clear message that, at long last, we have been able to make a decision on the matter.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I believe that the Rural Development Committee has decided in private that if the bill passes stage 1, the committee will not be prepared to take it to stage 2. What implications does that decision have for the next stage of the bill?

Given the record of the Crown Estate in recent years in facilitating rural development, is it time to make representations to the Westminster Government to bring the Crown Estate, in Scotland at least, into public ownership and under proper democratic control?

As the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I welcome those of the minister's recommendations that are based on that committee's report. As a general rule, I recommend to the Executive that it should listen to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee as much as possible. I particularly welcome the creation of the new board and the advisory body. I have a number of questions. First, the committee recommended that consideration should be given to the SQA's management structure below board level. Will the minister ask the new board and the existing management to reconsider that issue and to ensure that the byzantine structure that was in place is made much more efficient and effective? Secondly, I ask the minister to examine the remuneration and terms and conditions that are being advertised for the position of chief executive. The SQA is now so important that, to attract the right person, the status and remuneration package for the chief executive should be brought into line with those for the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise or similar quangos. I worry that the right calibre of candidate might not be attracted by the advertised remuneration. My final two points relate to the proposed legislation. Last year, the statutory duties and responsibilities of the minister and his powers over the quango were a problem—he might recall that there was some controversy over those matters. I suggest that we build into the bill legal powers for the minister, so that he can give specific directions to the SQA if and when required. I also suggest that he should build into the bill a statutory requirement for board members, when acting as such, to give primacy to the interests and priorities of the SQA and not to any other interests that they might have. That would bring matters into line with the committee's recommendations and with normal practice in the private sector.

I join other members in congratulating Helen Eadie on securing this debate and on the way in which she delivered her speech. I also congratulate her on the excellent brochure that has been issued on the Donibristle mining disaster. It is first class and should in itself serve as a memorial to those who died. I will certainly not put it in the bin after this debate—I will hold on to it. A number of former miners have already been mentioned. To those we can add Abe Moffat in the trade union movement, Matt Busby in football and many others. However, as it was Helen Eadie who secured this debate, I take the opportunity to mention her father-in-law, Alex Eadie, who was a miner and an activist in the mining union as well as the minister responsible for coal in the Government headed by Harold Wilson. I remember being with him on the day that he was appointed to that post—there could not have been a prouder moment for any miner. Alex Eadie joins the long list of those who have done great service to the mining community in times gone by. Like many members who have spoken tonight, my background is in the mining community. I come from the village of Patna in South Ayrshire, which is well known to the minister. He must have had many a brawl on the fitba field in Patna, although I am sure that we get the better of him on every occasion. The Knockshinnock disaster has been mentioned. Knockshinnock is in New Cumnock; it is part of the Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley constituency in South Ayrshire, where I lived. I was only a young kid at the time of the Knockshinnock disaster, but its effect has lasted for decades. Particularly after the Knockshinnock disaster, people were always afraid of the knock on the door that said that it was their turn—that something had happened down the pit. Quite rightly, today we remember the big disasters such as Donibristle and Knockshinnock. However, many other people died in the pits, sometimes alone. It must be even worse for someone to die alone down a mineshaft than for them to die with their comrades. We should remember those people as well, because they  sacrificed their lives for the industry and their community. John McAllion spoke about the miners' contribution to the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. We should also remember the Welsh, English and many other miners who have sacrificed their lives. In eastern Europe—where I have worked for the World Bank and others—there are many mines that are as dangerous today as Donibristle was at the start of the previous century and as Knockshinnock and many other mines used to be. As a Parliament and as a people, we could examine ways in which we might contribute to improved mine safety in eastern Europe. In parts of Russia and Romania, almost on a regular basis, tragedies happen that are never reported—huge disasters in which hundreds of people are killed. As a member of the Scottish National Party, I say deliberately that what happens and happened to miners in Wales, England and further afield is critical, as is what happened to miners in Scotland. I am proud to have been brought up in a mining community and I am very proud to have taken part in this debate. I thank Helen Eadie once again for organising it.

To ask the First Minister what the timetable is for the completion of the Scottish Executive's review of devolved services for asylum seekers. (S1F-1198)

First, as part of the review, will the First Minister visit areas such as Sighthill to see at first hand what the problems are and what needs to be done? Secondly, the First Minister indicated in the chamber yesterday that he is making representations to Westminster on the voucher scheme. Will he give us details on those representations? Finally, will the resource at Dungavel be part of the review? Will the Scottish Executive ensure that the provisions of the European convention on human rights are fully adhered to in all that is going on at Dungavel?

From the small number of people leaving the chamber, I can tell that the debate will stimulate a lot of interest. On behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I ask the Parliament to take note of our sixth report in 2001, which is on the new economy. There is a high degree of consensus on a number of new economy issues. There is probably most consensus on the critical importance of the new economy and broadband in particular to the future of the Scottish economy and to Scottish society. Many people have rightly compared the importance of broadband in the 21 st century to the importance of the railways in the 19 th century and the road network in the 20 th century. In many respects, broadband acts as a railway, a road, a mail service and a canal all rolled into one. Rather than concentrate on the report, which has been in the public domain for over two months, I will comment on the Executive's response to the report and bring to the Parliament the feedback from the new economy seminar that was sponsored by the committee and Scottish Financial Enterprise in the Dome in Edinburgh two days ago. One of the key elements of the committee's work is to ensure that we listen to the views of the business community and of the wider community. The seminar on the report, the Executive's response and its broadband strategy was well attended. The response from the business community is simple and can be paraphrased as "broadband, broadband, broadband; now, now, now". Above everything else, broadband was the key issue that people raised on Tuesday—many said that it is more important than many road links in Scotland. The front page of business a.m. fairly summed up the main comments that were made: if we do not implement a substantial, dynamic broadband strategy, Scotland will be in danger of becoming a third-world economy. We all agree on that. Nick Kuenssberg, the new chairman of  ScotlandIS, which is the main industry body driving the business community on the issue, said: "Broadband is more important than the M8 and the M74. We are told the M8 and the M74 will be joined in 2009. If we have to wait that long for broadband, Scotland genuinely will be a third-world economy." The committee and, I hope, the Parliament are agreed that we will not need to wait until 2009 before broadband is available. Particularly given the fact that Annabel Goldie, the deputy convener of the committee, and I have been criticised in The Sunday Times for not taking into account some of the dissenting voices from the business community, we should listen to such people as Bill Allan, the chief executive of Thus, who do not necessarily agree with the consensus position. Such people are experienced in the industry and their voices, along with everyone else's, should be heard. We should all take heed of Bill Allan's point about monopolies. He also made a point about the T Soja & Associates report, which was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise. He highlighted the need to ensure that indigenous companies in Scotland—as either investors or consumers, or, in some cases, as both—get the benefit of the technology. That is a perfectly reasonable point. I will now turn to the Executive's response to the committee. One of the committee's key recommendations was that the Executive should appoint an e-envoy. We avoided the word "tsar" in case it had connotations that would perhaps not be entirely acceptable in the wider community. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning tells me that she has not just one e-envoy, but five. I am sure that the minister will tell us what each of those five e-envoys does. Perhaps there is a case for one of them being the super e-envoy, so that we have a driver or champion, as we do at UK level. It should be someone who knows the business inside out. Although we respect the contribution to the development of the strategy that has to be made by officials in the enterprise and lifelong learning department and by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, there is a general, cross-party feeling that there should be someone in day-to-day charge, driving the strategy through, as ministers may be too busy to concentrate entirely on its implementation. That is what lay behind that recommendation, and I hope that the minister will clarify the position on it. We made some recommendations about ministerial responsibility, which generated a heated response from the Minister for Finance and Local Government. The committee will not get too involved in deciding which minister is responsible for what; our substantive point was that we want to ensure that attention at ministerial level is paid to all aspects of the new economy and the  broadband strategy, and in particular to the need for an e-strategy. The one point on which the Executive did not agree with the committee was our recommendation for an overall e-strategy. I take the point that there are many strands to this policy area and it is clear from the Executive's statement that all those strands will have their own strategies, which will be published by the end of this calendar year. However, it is still very much the view of the committee that we should ensure joined-up government. To use the in phrase of the day, there needs to be an overarching strategy, bringing all the strands together. Despite what the Executive said in its document, I am still of the view that the committee was right to make that recommendation. The other key issue is timing. One of the most interesting facts to come out of the seminar, where it was emphasised heavily, was that, given the growth in the use of e-technology, a year in effect equals 28 days. In other words, the growth in e-technology is exponential. If we do not get ahead of the game, the game will leave us behind. If we consider our situation among our international competitors, it is generally agreed that we are middle ranking in our capacity and competitiveness. However, it will not be enough to be middle ranking; we have to ensure that we get into the premier division. Our recommendations and, I am sure, the Executive's responses, are all designed to ensure that we do. I particularly welcome the Executive's commitment to rural areas, specifically to the two pilot areas in the Highlands and Islands and the south of Scotland. Although access to broadband is generally available in the strap from Glasgow and Edinburgh up to Aberdeen, it is in the more outlying areas where it will prove most difficult to ensure that the investment takes place. I hear of many examples of rural businesses that will be dependent on access to broadband and I am sure that many members will emphasise the point that access to broadband will be a vital element in regenerating the rural community. That raises the question whether funding should come from the private or public sector. The Executive agreed with the committee that the power of procurement in the public sector could be used to generate and attract investment in the infrastructure from the private sector. Since the committee's report was published, the financial condition of many telecom companies has deteriorated significantly. It may be that a greater level of public investment will be required to pump-prime the investment than we may have envisaged, even at the end of June, because of the global developments in the sector. The Parliament should be prepared to face the  challenge that is presented. Of course, the size of the public purse is limited, and the investment must be made where it will be most effective. We cannot write a blank cheque to be drawn from the public purse, but it may be essential to increase the level of public involvement. There are a few other points, which my colleagues will no doubt raise; my final one is that time is of the essence. If we do not act now, the world will pass us by. As an economy, we are on the periphery of Europe and many of our own peripheral areas will depend on e-technology. The message from the Executive, the committee and the whole Parliament must be that we need action today. I hope that that will be the message that we send not just to the business community but to schools and hospitals and to the broad spectrum of society that will rely on this technology. I move, That the Parliament notes the 6 th Report, 2001 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, Inquiry into the Impact of the New Economy (SP Paper 355).

Does the member have a commitment, or even the hint of a commitment, from the Scottish Executive that, if he supports the motion today, it will review the Skye bridge policy soon?

I agree with John Farquhar Munro's comments about the Skye bridge. The SNP's amendment would present us with an opportunity to review policy on the Skye bridge and all the other toll bridges in Scotland. Is not that a good reason for him to support the SNP this morning?

Will the Minister for Parliament confirm whether the new debt recovery measures will be introduced after the summer recess? Will he guarantee that the appropriate Scottish statutory instruments to implement the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Act 2001 will also be introduced after the summer recess?

I repeat Alasdair Morgan's welcome of the statement, particularly the announcement on free personal care. I just wish that the Scottish Parliament had the power to realign the money wasted on nuclear weapons in the Clyde to front-line services in health and education. Will the minister give a straightforward yes or no answer to whether the planned investment in school equipment and buildings will remain intact or even be increased? If it is to be increased, by how much? The minister mentioned a realignment of £30 million from trunk roads. What are the implications of that realignment?

I will make some positive suggestions on the way forward for the Finance Committee. Before I do, I remind members that we should not kid ourselves on that the Parliament has supreme control over public finances in Scotland. First, the money that is allocated to the Parliament is less than 50 per cent  of the total spend in Scotland. More significantly, the bit of the budget over which we have control is the bit in which there is the least flexibility. Take the health and education budgets. Much of the money is already spoken for in salaries and existing commitments. Out of the £20 billion over which we will have control next year, I guess that we will be able to change less than £700 million or £800 million significantly. Let us not kid ourselves on. We were meant to have the financial powers of a parish council. We do not even have those powers: a parish council can at least borrow money, which the Parliament is not allowed to do. Let us not engage in kidology and create the idea that we can somehow make a major impact on what public money is spent on in Scotland. We are only operating at the margins. As long as we as a Parliament and a people are prepared to accept that, that will continue to be so.

Every local authority in Scotland has the power to borrow money. I would have thought that my good friend Miss Goldie would have known that. The parish councils south of the border have the same power.

Parish councils cannot be found in Scotland, but local authorities can. The substantive point remains the same. No doubt Miss Goldie, whom I congratulate on staying put as the enterprise spokesperson in the Conservative reshuffle, will tell us whether she is backing David Davis for the leadership of the Conservative party. If he wins, will she, as deputy leader of the Scottish Tories, tell us whether the Scottish Tories will back his call for full fiscal freedom? I come to the even more positive comments that I have to make about the Finance Committee's report. A number of issues need to be addressed in the year ahead. I congratulate Mike Watson and the Finance Committee for the work that they have done. Although it is boring work, it is substantive. They have no doubt made enormous progress. However, they should tackle a number of issues in the year ahead. First, we should question why the money that the Treasury allocates to the Parliament goes via the Scotland Office to allow the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Minister of State for Scotland—neither of whom have much to do of a day—to take their £5 million or £6 million slice before they pass it on to us. What is that money spent on? When I look at the figures, it seems to me that it is a total waste of money. The principle  should be that the money comes directly to the Parliament, not via the Secretary of State for Scotland, who basically holds down a redundant job. Having spoken to the Minister of State last night, I would say that he is doubly redundant, particularly this morning. My second point relates to funding.

I have four minutes. If I have another two minutes, I will give way.

I will give way.

My final point must be that the debate so far has concentrated on how we monitor the Executive departments. What comes out of every report to the Finance Committee from a committee—whether the Health and Community Care Committee, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee or the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee—that deals with third-party organisations, such as local enterprise companies, delivery organisations in the voluntary sector and the professional sector, is that everybody is crying out for the Parliament to give three-year commitments on budgets. We are asking people to carry out professional jobs in the delivery of community-based services, yet we have so far, in many cases, not given them a commitment beyond 12 months.

Such organisations cannot operate that way. A high priority for the next year must be to change to a system of three-year funding for all the appropriate organisations.

That teaches me the lesson not to take two interventions. My four minutes have been cut.

I hear what the member is saying. I presume that he also agrees that the 55 per cent or so of the public money that is spent in Scotland that is under the control of Westminster should come into the same category, and that its spending should be fully transparent? If Mr David Davis becomes the new leader of the Conservative party, will Conservative members support him in his call for full fiscal freedom for the Scottish Parliament?

I note the point that Mike Watson makes. Does he accept that, as the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee indicated in its submission, one of the reasons why the departments are not very effective in giving good performance targets is that so much is left to the relevant quangos? For example, 70 per cent of the budget that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee oversees is spent by five quangos. It was clear that the departments did not have a clue what was going on in the quangos.

I, too, welcome the minister's statement. I have three short, sharp questions.  First, I heard what the minister said about appeals, but there was a little hint of—and a wee bit of concern about—rigidity in how appeals are dealt with this year. Will the minister assure us that the guiding principle will be, "If in doubt, we'll hear it out," and will give people the benefit of the doubt, particularly in borderline cases? Secondly, on the data reconciliation exercise for colleges, can the minister tell us how many cases are still outstanding and when they will be resolved? Thirdly, what is the total spend on this year's diet likely to be? Will funding be guaranteed for next year's diet if necessary? The questions are easy.

rose—

Will Jamie Stone take an intervention?

I have a more specific question for the First Minister. Yesterday, the Daily Record— which, as you know, Presiding Officer, is a reliable and accurate paper—carried a front-page story about existing education budgets, alleging that there would be a £25 million cut. Can the First Minister give an absolute guarantee that there will be no cut in the education budget? Furthermore, will he give a guarantee about the pledge made by the chancellor, Gordon Brown, before the election, that £66 million would be spent on school buildings and equipment in Scotland? Is that money guaranteed—yes or no?

The member was present at a presentation by the chief executive of Lloyds TSB that I attended about a month ago, at which it was pointed out that eight out of 10 of the richest countries in the world have a population equal to or smaller than Scotland's. That is hardly pick-and-mix.

rose—

Given John McAllion's comments on the initiatives from the EU on this matter, will the minister raise the issue at the next meeting of EU health ministers? Will he be attending that meeting of health ministers, or will Susan Deacon be attending?

The First Minister will have seen that a policy reversal was announced down south yesterday, to abandon waiting list targets as a key indicator of success in the health service. Having failed to achieve the targets in Scotland, will the First Minister give us an assurance that he will not abandon waiting list targets?

I have a couple of points that I hope the Procedures Committee will examine, one of which is about question time. The current situation is that we question the Executive in its entirety, never knowing which minister or junior minister will answer, so we do not have the opportunity to grill the ministers from a particular department as is done at Westminster. Just because something happens at Westminster does not mean that it is automatically a bad idea. That may be news coming from an SNP member, but there are some things at Westminster that are better than here. The Procedures Committee should examine the possibility of grilling the ministers from a department, for example the health department, the education department or the enterprise and lifelong learning department, for 20 or 30 minutes on Wednesday every week. In that way we could get to the basis of departmental policy.

I am sure that another 20 minutes on Wednesday afternoon would not destroy the structure of debates or the ability of back-bench members to speak. One of the problems that we have in the Parliament is that we have not got the system of debates right. As we heard from Donald Gorrie and Margo MacDonald, not enough time was allocated to stage 3 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, and perhaps too much time is allocated to debates that are time fillers, as we have seen in recent weeks in the run-up to another event.

It is bad enough being heckled by other parties without being heckled by my own party. I have put my suggestion on the table. Perhaps the Procedures Committee can revisit the proposal. My second point is about the time that is allocated for First Minister's question time. I feel that 20 minutes is too short and perhaps we need about 30 minutes. For example, it is rare that members are able to ask supplementaries to the leader of the SNP's questions. Limited supplementaries are made to the questions from the leader of the Conservative party, and since January, despite the excellent way in which the Presiding Officer handles matters—

We have sometimes not reached question 4, seldom reached question 5 and even more rarely reached question 6. We need to revisit First Minister's questions. To be honest, part of the reason for the problem is that the First Minister is rather lengthy in some of his replies. Twenty minutes is fairly short. At Westminster, the Prime Minister is grilled for 30 minutes during question time. Frankly, that system seems better. I suggest that we revisit whether we can slot in the grilling of departmental ministers individually rather than as part of the wider corporate Executive. We should also reconsider First Minister's questions to decide whether that can be improved and made more effective.

This will, I hope, be a helpful intervention. Speaking as someone who makes modest use of the facility for asking questions, I think that there is no doubt at all that if the Executive were to give straighter answers to initial questions, a lot fewer supplementary questions—written questions and questions in the form of correspondence—would be generated. That would help also with regard to the time that it takes to get responses to correspondence to ministers, in particular to the Minister for Health and Community Care, who takes months to respond to the simplest of letters, which in turn generates more questions. It would help the Executive and the Parliament if ministers, when asked questions, gave straight answers. That might reduce the volume of written questions.

I have a question about inspirational questions and the need for transparency. There was an inspired question during the crisis in the tourism industry. In such circumstances, it would help if the ministerial reply were made available to members in advance, just as a ministerial statement is made available to the Opposition spokespeople before the statement is made.

In light of the still-low percentage of revenue that the private sector spends on research and development, will the minister outline the initiatives that she intends to take to increase research and development spend in the private sector and to bring that spend closer to the UK and European averages?

To ask the First Minister what the up-to-date position is on the progress of the Motorola task force. (S1F-01132)

Is the First Minister aware of the frustration, anger and disappointment that is being expressed by Motorola workers, with particular regard to their being unable to obtain assistance for training until they first secure a job? Does he accept that they are in a chicken-and-egg situation, in that money is not being made available for training until they get a job, but they cannot get a job until they get money for training? Will he and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning intervene as a matter of urgency? How much of the £10 million that was allocated to the task force has already been spent or allocated, and what has it been spent on? The Executive said that it would do its bit; this is an  opportunity for it to do so by sorting out this mess.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The motion refers to the "Clydebank MP". There is no such thing at the moment as a Clydebank MP. This is an election advert for the Labour party, not a members' business motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to make members of non-departmental public bodies accountable to parliamentary committees. (S1O-3422)

Does the minister agree with the view of the First Minister, who was reported by Scotland on Sunday on 7 January as saying:  "there is a strong case for potential appointees going before parliamentary committees before being confirmed in post"? In the light of that statement, will the minister lend his support to my forthcoming member's bill, which will implement the First Minister's policy?

Ten weeks ago, an additional £200 million was allocated to Scotland by Her Majesty's Government in the budget. Ten weeks later, why has no announcement been made on the allocation of that money? Is it because the Cabinet refuses to allow the First Minister to spend one more penny on free personal care, or because Cabinet ministers are at war with one another?

Will Mr Davidson give way?

Did David Davidson read the comments by the man who took us into Europe, Sir Edward Heath, who said yesterday that the existing Tory policy on Europe was so lunatic that it made the Tory party totally unelectable?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review its contractual arrangements with Premier Prison Service regarding Bowhouse private prison in Kilmarnock. (S1O-3289)

That is a disappointing reply. Is the minister aware that the chief inspector of prisons, Clive Fairweather, has described Bowhouse prison as an "expensive failure", that the Scottish Human Rights Centre has expressed concerns about prisoners' safety in Bowhouse and that, at the recent Scottish Trades Union Congress conference, a resolution was passed unanimously condemning Kilmarnock prison as "morally repugnant"? Is not it time that the minister addressed those concerns?

I ask specifically about the review of the Scottish Tourist Board. Will a separate and much earlier ministerial statement be made, in the light of the events of the past 10 days? If so, will that statement be made by the First Minister or by the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning? If the lunch-time reports that the Scottish Tourist Board has spent £200,000 on a worldwide competition, the first prize in which is a stay at a hotel in Perthshire that is apparently both closed down and up for sale, prove to be accurate, will there be a review of the  senior management of the Scottish Tourist Board?

I take on board what the minister said about EU consultation regulations and her view that the position will change. Does she recognise that, at EU level, much tighter rules governing the activities of multinational companies are needed so that those companies can no longer play one country off against another? Such rules are needed for current members of the EU and for potential members—recently, investments have moved from Scotland to Poland, the Czech Republic and elsewhere. I welcome the fact that, if necessary, £17 million of public money will be earmarked to deal with the aftermath of the closure. Does the minister accept that moral pressure should be put on Motorola to match that funding? Motorola has a moral responsibility to the workers and to society more generally in West Lothian and the rest of the central belt.

I too congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing this debate. I was getting worried that she might forget the surrounding villages in her speech, but I noticed that she managed to include them towards the end. I want also to pay tribute to my colleague Gil Paterson, who cannot be here tonight but who has been campaigning with Karen Whitefield for the railway line. As I am the last member to speak before the minister—who I hope is the minister who likes to say yes—I want to summarise the five major benefits of reopening the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link. First, there is a major benefit for Edinburgh itself. The city faces major developmental pressures in the years ahead; it is estimated that in the next five years something like 25,000 new jobs will be created in the Edinburgh area. That will put enormous pressure both on the labour market, with the prospect of skill shortages, and on the property market in the city. We must address the problem without ending up with an overheated Edinburgh and an underheated rest of the central belt, as far as economic performance is concerned. Secondly, the reopening of the line will have major economic benefits for West Lothian and Lanarkshire in particular. Lanarkshire faces the problem of continuing high levels of grinding unemployment in various pockets of deprivation. The line will help the unemployed people of Lanarkshire to reach job vacancies in Edinburgh, without the worry of having to find a house in Edinburgh that they cannot afford. There is a third benefit that has not yet been mentioned. Reopening the line will result in the connectivity—that is the in word these days—of Edinburgh, West Lothian, Lanarkshire and Glasgow, and south to Ayr and Stranraer. If people could travel from West Lothian or Lanarkshire down to Ayr, Bristow Muldoon could go to watch a team that is at the top of the league, at Somerset Park. I am sure that that would be of  benefit to everybody. The fourth major benefit that has been mentioned is access and the social inclusion aspect. As Mary Mulligan said, there are many family connections between the east and the west. The reinstatement of the line would facilitate such connections, improve social inclusion and provide people with access to jobs and other opportunities. The fifth and final major benefit is that which Michael McMahon and Robin Harper focused on—the environmental improvements. The line would help to get traffic on the railway that would otherwise be on the roads, which would be good news for everybody. The sum of £30 million—if it is as much as that—is a modest investment for a very high return in terms of job opportunities, social access, economic improvement and development. I hope that, as this is Lewis Macdonald's first speech as a minister, he will make it memorable, so that we can look back and say, "There he is—that is the man who was responsible for reinstating the Bathgate to Airdrie railway line."

I want to ask about the minister's statement that certain businesses in certain areas will get £2,000 of consultancy support, that workshops will be run by business advisers, and all the rest of it. Does he recognise that organisations such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Federation of Small Businesses have made it absolutely clear that what businesses need is not consultants but cash? They need an injection of cash help; they do not need people coming in to tell them that they have no business, because they already know that. Will he review spend? Will he consider interest-free loan capital with flexible repayment terms for businesses? It is cash that they need, not consultants.

I welcome much of what the minister has said, but I would like to ask him a couple of important questions. Going back to what the report of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee said about the importance of performance measurements, the minister said that he would be negotiating the performance targets on time and accuracy with the board of the SQA. When does he hope to announce those performance targets? It is only fair to parents, teachers, pupils and students that everybody knows what those targets are before the exams start, rather than halfway through the summer. When will he announce those targets for turnaround times and for accuracy? Although our concentration is on the short-term issue of this year's diet, will the minister give a commitment to review the longer-term issues about the governance of the SQA and other related matters immediately after the 2001 diet is completed?

Will additional resources be made available to increase the number of places in further education as a result of the FE estates review, which is now completed? When does the minister hope to publish the results of that review, and details of its relationship to the number of places?

Ben Wallace has missed the point. The point is that the economic record of an independent Scotland would be such that we would not rely on subsidies from anywhere. Since 1963, when figures were first kept, the long-term growth of the Scottish economy has averaged 2.1 per cent, which is 50 per cent below the UK average. That is an indication of the economic mismanagement under successive unionist Governments, whether they were Tory unionist or Labour unionist.

I will leave the kindergarten stuff to the Liberal Democrats. I will deal with some specific issues such as bureaucracy. Margaret Ewing articulately outlined the problems that are faced by the voluntary sector because of the bureaucracy of the programmes. This morning, I met the economic development committee of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and was told that the level of bureaucracy is far higher in the new programmes than it was in the old ones. Although it is now April 2001, we are talking about a programme that runs from 2000 to 2006. Fifteen months after the start of the programme, no  cheques have been written because of the bureaucracy—not at the European Union level, but at the Scottish Executive and UK Government levels. An example of the problems that are caused by bureaucracy is the LEADER + programme in Dumfries and Galloway. The LEADER programme is one of the best ever European Community programmes and it has done an enormous amount. I know from my experience that it has been of enormous benefit to local authority and local enterprise company activity in Dumfries and Galloway in particular. However, although LEADER + was supposed to have completed applications by the end of last month, the action groups are not even up and running, and although the deadline for submitting applications and receiving approvals is supposed to be the end of this month, no applications have been made. I would like the minister to say why not, particularly given that Dumfries and Galloway is the epicentre of the rural crisis in Scotland. I will widen the issues. The problems that we will face in 2006 and beyond as a result of the planned expansion of the European Union have been mentioned. I hope that the minister will listen to the points that I make and do something about them. We do not need to wait until 2006 to feel the effects of the planned expansion of the European Union. Politically, I am wholly in favour of the eastern European countries' entry to the EU. The bigger political questions demand that that takes place. However, we are starting to lose some of our industrial base to eastern European countries. The Vesuvius-Premier Refractories brickworks in Falkirk, Volvo in Irvine and Compaq in Erskine are going to Poland and the Czech Republic. Those moves are perfectly understandable from the companies' point of view, as they will get bigger grants, cheaper labour and access to the European market, but it is the Executive's responsibility to look at what is happening as a political issue that needs to be addressed. It is a challenge to the whole of Scotland. Hugh Aitken, the chairman of Electronics Scotland, has said that Compaq is the tip of the iceberg and that we could quickly lose another 4 per cent or 5 per cent of our electronics sector. I ask the minister, in summing up, to address that issue, tell us about LEADER + and say what he plans to do after 2006. At the current rate, it will take him until then to realise what is happening and write those plans.

rose—

I would like to get the picture straight. Scotland is not becoming relatively more prosperous; other areas are becoming relatively poorer, especially as the EU expands and brings in other Mediterranean and eastern European countries. The minister has not mentioned what will happen when the EU expands and the funding for all the programmes reduces dramatically in four, five or six years' time.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Just before Mr Gray rose to speak, Presiding Officer, you said that the purpose of the motion was to allow the House of Commons to debate the bill. However, the motion states: "This Parliament agrees the principles contained in ... the ... Bill". The point made by Mr Canavan and Mr Quinan was that, before we agree the principles of the bill, we should have the opportunity to debate it. We should not agree something of such import without debating it.

Will the minister consider setting aside some of the £5 million, which is being made available to Scottish  Enterprise, to provide for an emergency overseas marketing grants scheme for individual companies, so that they can be helped with marketing themselves on the web and elsewhere?

As convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, let me begin by repeating what Marilyn Livingstone said by way of thanks and  gratitude to everyone who came to give evidence to the committee during the course of the bill. I also thank the minister for her congratulations to the committee. Before I deal with the substantial points, as the Minister for Parliament is in the chamber, I want to make a parliamentary point about the legislative process through which this bill passed because it may affect other bills in future. At stage 1, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee unanimously concluded that there was the wrong balance between the primary and the secondary legislation and that some materials that were designated for the regulations should really have been in the bill. The committees did not push that point because of the tight timetable that was required to implement sections 3 and 4. I ask the Minister for Parliament to consider the issue for future legislation, because it would be bad news for Scotland if we continued to get the wrong balance. Everybody knows that to change primary legislation requires a three-stage consideration by the Parliament, whereas there is no ability to amend regulations—there is only the ability to say yes or no. The functioning of our legislative process would be helped if we took that lesson on board. I hope that the Minister for Parliament will consider that point. Dennis Canavan hit the nail on the head when he said that, when we are considering the bill and the Cubie report, the central issue is whether the bill will increase access to higher and further education in Scotland. Marilyn Livingstone pointed out a dogged statistic that has been with us for many a long year: the percentage of students from low-income families who have gone on to higher education, irrespective of the financial regime governing grants and loans, has remained pretty much static almost since the war, despite the Robbins reforms of the 1960s and other changes that have taken place since that time. Since the bill is likely to be passed, I hope that we do not accept that issues such as the payment threshold are carved in stone. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is about to undertake a substantial inquiry into lifelong learning. The inquiry remit includes all post-school education and training. I imagine that a key aspect of our inquiry will be to address the issue of access to further and higher education. The committee will want to look again at whether sufficient financial and other support mechanisms are in place to try to increase the number of young people in social classes 3 and 4 going into higher education. Kenny MacAskill mentioned the East Ayrshire educational maintenance allowance scheme initiative. I support the expansion of that scheme, and I hope to see its extension throughout the rest  of Scotland, at some time in the near future. Early indications as to the success of the pilot scheme are encouraging. It does seem to be getting people from lower-income backgrounds into higher and further education. The threshold issue will have to be addressed again. I think that even the Executive agrees that a threshold of £10,000 is ridiculously low. The threshold at which loan repayments start has not been altered since 1997-98, when the new income-contingent scheme was introduced. The repayments for the endowment will start in 2004, by which time seven financial years will have passed. The value of the threshold has eroded by about £1,000 a year. However, the threshold was set far too low to start with; we need a substantial hike. The threshold should be set in line with earnings. That brings us back to the principle behind the Cubie recommendation of a threshold of £25,000, which was to reflect the beneficial effect of a higher education on earnings. That is an important principle reflecting fairness and equity. Ministers have three years—or perhaps they have two years, after which we will have a year—to consider what will happen after 2003 before the scheme starts in 2004. Once the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has completed its inquiry into lifelong learning, we should take the opportunity to return to this issue and do what is necessary. Our ambition should not be that students from low-income families leave higher education with less debt; our ambition should be that they leave with no debt.

If Mike Watson had been a Labour MP in the 1940s, he would probably have told the Indians not to vote for independence because they were too poor. He would probably also have told the Irish not to vote for independence because they were too poor. Today, India and Ireland have two of the fastest-growing economies in the world. It would seem to us, from listening to all these unionist members, that control from Westminster has brought resounding success to the Scottish economy. However, we should consider the record, over the past 20 years, of the official Tory Government and then the Labour Tory Government. Economic growth in Scotland has been half what it has been in the rest of the UK. This year, the Irish economy is growing by 9 per cent, while the Scottish economy is struggling to grow by 1 per cent. There are 170,000 people unemployed and looking for work in Scotland. Is that a success story from unionist economic managers? Let us also consider research and development. One company in tiny Finland spends more on research and development than does the  entire Scottish economy.

Of course. Mr Davidson might care to remind us about the poll tax while he is on his feet.

There are several drivers for an enterprise economy, one of which is never to have a Tory Government—especially for 18 years. One of the ways in which the Tories drive is in permanent reverse.

The people who elected Margaret Thatcher were those who voted for her. If Labour had kept its promise to deliver a Scottish Parliament in the 1970s, we would have been here 25 years ago to protect Scotland against the ravages of Thatcherism. In levelling such criticisms, Bristow Muldoon should remember the role of Robin Cook, Tam Dalyell and every other Labour MP who sold Scotland down the river time after time. They are still selling us down the river, and that is why Scotland is in the mess that it is in. For Duncan McNeil's benefit, I should point out that I am not speaking as the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in this debate. The only answer is independence and financial autonomy for the Scottish people.

I am speaking as the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, which is responsible for tourism.

Okay.  I will deal with the substantive points, but I begin by saying, in a non-partisan way, that I think that the measures that were announced should have been the subject of a ministerial statement, with members having the opportunity to ask detailed questions. I hope that we will have that opportunity in the not-too-distant future. We are now facing a crisis in the tourism sector. In his evidence to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee yesterday, Alasdair Morrison suggested that, in Scotland alone, between £100 million and £300 million-worth of business could be lost this year. That is a substantial negative impact on the Scottish tourist industry. I ask that, in their negotiations with the Treasury, ministers give serious consideration to the suspension of air passenger duty as a clear message to the international community that we are open for business and can attract tourists into Scotland. I realise that that may involve a substantial cost, but that measure alone would give a clear indication to international tourists that we want to see them here in Scotland, and indeed in other parts of the UK. I have a number of specific points about Wendy Alexander's measures. Leaving aside whether the figures that Duncan Hamilton mentioned are absolutely right, which I believe they are, the minister told him that the aid is targeted at small businesses. We need to know what is meant by small businesses, because many of the businesses affected might, under certain definitions, be considered medium-sized businesses. All those businesses are absolutely vital to the economic lifeline of rural Scotland. If we define small businesses as businesses that employ fewer than 50 people, well over 90 per cent of the businesses in Scotland are small businesses. However, it seems as though less than 20 per cent of them will qualify for relief. That issue must be addressed seriously. We need to know about the knock-on effect on local authority expenditure of that hardship relief and whether local authorities will be reimbursed by the Executive on a pound-for-pound basis. The Executive has allocated £5 million to Scottish Enterprise. I do not believe that Scottish Enterprise's priority should be to send in more business counsellors and more advisers. People do not need a diagnosis of their problem; they need hard cash, now, as part of the solution. I would like a good chunk of that £5 million to be allocated to provide interest-free loans to businesses in crisis, with flexible repayment terms, as that is the kind of hard cash that businesses need now. Ministers should try to persuade the Treasury to offset tax losses this year and for at least another one or two years, so that people do not come  under pressure from the Inland Revenue in the months ahead. The emphasis of the debate has been on tourism businesses, but we must not forget the people who are employed in tourism and related sectors. This is not only about the proprietors of businesses; it is about people who work in the businesses and are adversely affected. I ask the minister to consider taking additional measures, on top of the changes to the jobseekers allowance that were announced at UK level.

I said that I was speaking as convener of the committee.

I am trying to make constructive suggestions on the way out of the crisis. I will finish with another constructive suggestion. The minister should consider using other measures to help, such as the partnership action for continuing employment programme, which is usually applied where there are large-scale redundancies. A small-scale version of that in rural areas is urgently required to ensure that we maximise job opportunities for those who are affected by the crisis.

I start by congratulating Cathy Jamieson on her announcement—it is an example to organisations throughout the country of what can be done. I associate myself with two points that Cathy Jamieson made that need to be underlined. First, credit unions should be part and parcel of a wider strategy for dealing with poverty and debt management and recovery in Scotland. I see them relating to the debt recovery working party and the legislation that will, I hope, flow from that and the many other initiatives that have been taken and must still be taken in the months and years ahead. Secondly, it is extremely important that credit unions are not seen as just a poor person's bank. There are a number of reasons for that. If we see credit unions as relating only to poor or deprived people, it stigmatises the people and the credit  unions and does no one any favours. From the point of view of the financial stability, growth and development of the credit unions, it is much better to have a diverse customer base than a narrow one. That is the case for any business. I hope that credit unions will grow to such an extent that they will, in some respects, act as competitors to the retail banks that have had it too much their own way for far too long, particularly in relation to personal finance and overdraft facilities for people in lower-income groups. We must walk before we can run, but I hope that we will see the initiative as the start of a long-term development of credit unions as a key player in the financial services sector in Scotland and in the rest of the UK. There are two or three developmental issues that we should start to think about, some of which need to be addressed sooner rather than later. Donald Gorrie mentioned the specific problems of rural communities, particularly those in remoter areas, where it is more difficult to get the critical mass of membership that is required. I do not believe that we should just write off those communities as potential development areas for credit unions simply because they are in remote areas. We should consider the potential for creating a Highlands and Islands credit union specifically targeted at the more remote areas, where a locally based organisation is difficult to establish. We must examine the rural position, because there is no doubt at all that rural poverty in many parts of Scotland is as bad as, and in some cases worse than, urban poverty and the problems that go with it. We must also consider the need for parallel organisation in relation to microbusinesses, small businesses and the self-employed. Very often, the communities that we are talking about could do with encouragement for indigenous small businesses that buy locally, employ locally—albeit only one or two people—and service the local market. Those are the very people who find it the most difficult to get assistance from the banking sector, not just as individuals but for their businesses. I hope that credit unions will develop so that they can act as an agency for local economic development and expansion in that way, rather than simply being a credit union for individuals dealing with individual debt. I stress the important role of public agencies, local authorities, trade unions and other such organisations. Many of those organisations have their bank accounts with large financial institutions that are doing nothing for the local community and, in many cases, nothing for Scotland. Unity Bank, however, provides a different model. When I was running the Cumnock and Doon Valley Enterprise Trust, I tried to put together a deal whereby the  local authority kept its account with Unity Bank and, in return, Unity Bank would use its funds to invest in local businesses and create local employment. It is that kind of attractive and innovative financial packaging that I would eventually like the credit unions to be capable of providing in partnership with those organisations. Finally, I underline the important role of a central organisation. We can learn from the experience of the United States, where the role of the central organisation has been absolutely vital in developing and, in some cases, saving individual credit unions. There are three roles for the central organisation: to share best practice, to provide services and products to individual credit unions and to provide, where required, a central financial facility. If we could put that in place, it would act as a great catalyst for the growth and development of credit unions. I will finish by doing something that I will perhaps never do again—congratulating the Executive on bringing the proposals forward.

In his discussions with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, will the First Minister mention the growing crisis in tourism and related industries arising from the spread of foot-and-mouth throughout the country? Will he make representations to the chancellor to make the necessary resources available to deal with any crisis in the tourism and tourism-related sector in Scotland, which is vital to our economy? Will he also accept that I would never be a member of any right-wing coalition, which is why I am not a member of new Labour?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will clarify the remit of the working group on a replacement for poindings and warrant sales. (S1O-3002)

First, will the minister clarify whether the group is examining an alternative to poindings and warrant sales only in relation to moveable assets or whether it will consider a replacement for a system of arresting movement of household goods? Secondly, will he clarify that the remit will extend to ending other injustices in the system of debt recovery?

Will the member give way?

As part of the reforms that the minister and her colleagues are considering introducing, will she consider the possibility of addressing the issue of summary warrants? She will remember the evidence from the DSS that, even when it is in the wrong, it sends a letter out of the blue demanding £500, £600 or £700 within a fortnight. That drives people into debt and causes a great deal of fear. Will the minister consider making it a statutory obligation that when utilities, banks and public sector agencies notify people of debt, they must notify them of the advice services available? Such agencies should have a statutory duty to reach a  repayment schedule.

I join other members in congratulating John Scott on securing this debate. I associate myself with the comments made by all the previous speakers. This debate is not about Red John Scott or Red Phil Gallie, but about human decency and people fighting for their rights. I welcome the fact that there is a united front right across the chamber on the issue. Many members have mentioned the key points in the case. First, this operation did not have to go out of business; it was a viable business that was deliberately closed down to make a fast buck on the speculative property market in Troon, which is wealthy. Secondly, in addition to the steps that were outlined in John Scott's motion, I hope that the local authority does not agree to any change of use of the site as long as Cathelco can benefit financially from the site. I am not making an ideological point, as the Tories did with Rolls-Royce. This is a case for public ownership of land, if ever there was one. We must also learn two legislative lessons from the situation, both of which unfortunately relate to reserved matters. The first refers to companies going into receivership, administration or liquidation. The workers who are owed money should be preferred creditors; they should not be standing at the end of the queue. I hope that we can take the matter up with the Westminster  Parliament, because it requires careful consideration. The second major legal issue relates to redundancy law. Clearly, the company had a moral obligation to fulfil the workers' rights. That obligation has not been met but, as John Scott said, the company is not in breach of any existing law. The law therefore needs to be reviewed in this kind of situation. I hope that, in his summing up, the minister will address the important point of the implications of this situation on the Ayr economy. Ailsa-Troon has a unique shipbuilding capacity in the west of Scotland, particularly in Ayrshire. That issue affects not just the relatively small town of Troon and the surrounding area, but the wider Ayrshire economy. As John Scott and Phil Gallie said, we hope to develop the Troon harbour area into a major growth point in Ayrshire, but Cathelco's activity has done enormous damage to those prospects. I hope that the minister will indicate what action will be taken by Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire, Scottish Enterprise and the Executive to attract alternative employment prospects to the area so that we can overcome the problems that Cathelco has created.

Is Des McNulty saying that Gordon Brown is the chancellor who likes to say yes? If so, why did he say no to Sutherland?

Adam Ingram mentioned last year's discrepancy in gross domestic product growth between Scotland and the rest of the UK. We grew at 50 per cent of the UK rate, which is important for the budget. If there were no such output gap—which is currently about 10 per cent in terms of GDP per head—the value of the Scottish economy would be about £7 billion a year higher. Furthermore, the public purse's share of that additional output would be £3 billion a year. If the output gap between Scotland and the rest of the UK can be closed, next year's budget could be £21.5 billion instead of £18.5 billion. Every member should be concerned about that gap between Scotland and the UK, which has existed for years— [Interruption.] No doubt that is Gordon Brown on the phone looking for advice. Every member should be concerned that the output gap is getting wider, not narrower. It is important that we try to spend as much as possible of that £18.5 billion on generating economic growth in Scotland. I will give one small  example, from the Scottish Enterprise budget, of where I believe our priorities are wrong. The gateway programme for start-up companies that was introduced by Scottish Enterprise last year gives each of those companies a computer worth £500, whether it needs or wants one. That is a complete and utter waste of money. In comparison, only 1 per cent of the Scottish Enterprise budget is spent on export promotion in Scotland. The £6 million or £7 million that we spend through Scottish Trade International on promoting all Scotland's exports is less than the Danes spend on promoting the export of their bacon. If we reviewed that expenditure, we could get a bigger bang for the buck and use some of it to close the output gap between Scotland and the rest of the UK. I repeat that we should not underestimate the importance of the output gap. As a nationalist I do not believe that we will close the gap until we get independence, which is another argument. However, if we can close it, Scotland will be better off to the tune of £7 billion every year. I will pick up a couple of points that were raised by the minister and by the First Minister in his speech on the programme for government last week. I hope that the minister will respond in his winding-up speech. These are genuine questions, not attempts to score political points—although once we get the answers, I will no doubt try to score political points. My first question is about access to the United Kingdom reserve. We know that we will have a reserve in Scotland as part of the Scottish budget, but how, when and under what circumstances do we get access to the UK reserve, which is a substantial chunk of money? The second question that I would like the minister to answer concerns the budget review group that was set up recently as a result—I think—of the First Minister's unilateral promises on the Sutherland report. Can the minister tell us the remit of the budget review group? When will it report? What is the scope of the reallocation of funding that the group is looking at? Who is on the group? Will the outcome of its deliberations affect the content of the bill, particularly schedule 1? Those are the key points that I would like the minister to address in his winding-up speech. I would love to go on to explain how, in an independent Scotland, we would use the oil and be much better off, but I will leave that for another day when I have a bigger audience.

Michael Portillo advocates cuts of £8 billion in his proposed UK budget. The Scottish consolidated fund's share of those cuts would be about £400 million a year. After David Davidson has spent the extra money to implement the recommendations of the Sutherland report as well as all the other things that he has promised, where will the £400 million-worth of net cuts come from?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will instruct the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council to reconsider its proposals to amend its distribution of funding in view of the impact on newer universities. (S1O-2909)

Will the minister investigate why the consultants who were employed by the SHEFC to collate the views of people in Scotland on the issue were sacked two thirds of the way through the exercise, at the cost of hundreds of thousands of pounds to taxpayers? Will she also investigate why those consultants—and the expert group that the council set up to oversee the operation, which also had its task terminated—have since dissociated themselves from the proposals?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Life gets more exciting by the moment. I welcome the Local Government Committee's inquiry into local government finance in Scotland and remind the Executive that the last such major inquiry was the Layfield committee inquiry, in the 1970s. I had the pleasure of presenting the Labour party's evidence to that committee, which supported a local income tax. I hope that the Executive reads again the evidence that the Labour party gave to that committee and reconsiders the benefits of a local income tax. There is broad consensus among members that council tax is not the best way in which to finance local government for two fundamental reasons. First, it is an inherently regressive tax and is not related to income or wealth other than in a very approximate way. Secondly, it makes up only a small percentage of the total income of councils. As long as we have a tax base for local authorities that makes up only about 20 per cent of their total income, local authorities will have to continue to operate totally at the behest of central Government, whether in Edinburgh or anywhere else. The Local Government Committee must consider certain fundamental principles in its inquiry. Tommy Sheridan has received a lot of criticism this morning. I have read the paper that he commissioned from the University of Paisley, which I recommend that the Local Government Committee read. There is a difference between considering a tax system in principle and agreeing what the rates should be. The argument about the rate of the tax could be left aside. What we are discussing—and what the Local Government Committee needs to focus on—is what system of local taxation we should introduce. In principle, the local service tax is similar to the local income tax. The following principles should be adopted in the objectives that are set for the Local Government Committee's inquiry. First, there should be a system of local taxation that is based on ability to pay, which would be much fairer and related to people's incomes and—if there is also to be a land value tax or property tax—to their wealth. Secondly, the tax base should be widened to increase the share of income that local authorities receive from it to much more than 20 per cent.  I would like the Local Government Committee to consider what happens in other European countries, particularly Sweden, where the taxes are raised locally and donated centrally. Unfortunately, I have already run out of time, having used nearly three minutes—

I say to the Local Government Committee that it should not discard the proposals in the paper from Paisley University, which was commissioned by Tommy Sheridan, and remind that committee that the proposals are similar to what was proposed by the Labour party 25 years ago.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Michael McMahon refers to quality public services. Is not it the case that North Lanarkshire Council has privatised many of its services and engaged in one of the biggest ever private finance initiatives, which in the long term will cost the council tax payer an enormous amount of money and will probably lead to a reduction in the quality of public services?

Will the member take an intervention? Is it not the case—

Is it not the case that if Mr Portillo's £8 billion of cuts were implemented, Scottish local authorities would suffer as much as anyone else? [Interruption.]

rose—

rose—

rose—

rose—

I am puzzled about something. I refer to William Hague's recent announcement about a cut in the Department of Trade and Industry's budget. What is the proportionate cut in the  Scottish Enterprise budget that would result from that cut in the DTI budget?

I will try to put into perspective what we are debating, which is—in the jargon—microeconomic policy in Scotland. However, the overall level of activity in the Scottish economy is determined to a large extent by macroeconomic policy. In the past 20 to 30 years—even when the rate of growth of the Scottish economy has been historically high—we have still not achieved the levels of growth in gross domestic product that have been reached elsewhere in the country. This year, it is estimated that the UK economy will grow by about 3 per cent, whereas the Scottish economy will grow by about 2.5 per cent. That output gap has been consistent. If it did not exist, the Scottish economy would be worth £78 billion more than it is. One of the micro and macro policy challenges that we must meet is closing the growth gap between Scotland and the rest of the UK. In recent speeches, I have concentrated on what is wrong with the Scottish economy—much has already been said about that today. As Kenny MacAskill rightly said, there is a broad consensus on the key challenges that face us. I want to address various issues that relate to the relationship between the enterprise network and our institutions of further and higher education, which are essential to achieving the objectives that are laid out in the Executive's document. I ask the minister to consider some specific points. She does not necessarily need to consider them today—tomorrow will do.  First, the new universities in Scotland are not getting a fair deal from the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, especially in relation to funds for research and development. Indeed, I am told that since SHEFC was formed, it has funded the old institutions to the tune of about £1,000 million for research, while the new universities have received something in the order of £50 million. I was at Abertay University last Friday; the potential in many of our new universities is as great, if not greater, than that in our older universities. They are a huge intellectual resource of which we must try to make greater use. There is a specific issue about the research development grant that has been used to create research capabilities, especially in our new universities. The grant is due to come to an end next year. I ask the minister to consider, in consultation with SHEFC, the possibility of extending that programme. It has been extremely helpful in creating additional research capacity, which will allow us to compete in the future. The next issue relates to research and development. To be fair, there have been a number of initiatives by Scottish Enterprise—some of them in budgets in the past couple of years—to encourage more research and development. However, we are still about 50 per cent short of where we need to be on research and development spending in order to compete effectively in the future. Indeed, Nokia in Finland—to which Kenny MacAskill referred—spends more on research and development than the whole Scottish economy. That is an indication of the scale of change that we require. Just before Christmas, Ireland announced a major package of funding for biotechnology and information technology over three years, involving investment of the order of £500 million, compared to Scotland's £40 million investment in biotechnology over four years. The scale of investment must be increased substantially. My final point is that one of the areas where we have major skill shortages—ironically, side by side with high unemployment—is graduate unemployment. Two matters need to be addressed. The first is the curricula in our universities—are we producing the right people to fill jobs in Scotland? The second issue relates to the careers service review. Will the minister consider the part that Duffner did not consider—the university careers services—which need to make a more substantial contribution?

I begin by welcoming members of the NUS who are in the gallery. They serve as a reminder to us all of the importance of getting the issue of student finance right. We are not just talking about the nitty-gritty of student support; we are talking about the future of Scotland and of the people who will lead Scottish industry, Scottish education and many other facets of our lives. The bill has four main sections, the first two of which deal with the graduate endowment. I make no bones about my position. I am opposed in principle to the concept of a graduate endowment, because I believe fundamentally and as a matter of first principle that access to primary, secondary, higher or further education should be free of charge at the point of use—like the health service—and funded through the system of general taxation. That is why I am a dissenter to the principle of a graduate endowment. I will return to a particular aspect of the endowment in a minute. The remaining two main sections of the bill deal with widening access and making welcome changes to council tax liability for students. I welcome the measures that will widen access for lone parents, mature students, disabled people, people from low-income families and the other groups that are covered by the bill. When we come to discuss the detail of the bill during stage 2, I hope that we will ensure that all those measures achieve what they set out to achieve, that is, wider access to higher and further education. I am limited for time, so I will confine my remarks to the threshold, which is the very nub of the issue. The Scottish Executive has set the threshold for the endowment at £10,000, because the threshold for the loan repayment is £10,000 and because it alleges that collecting the endowment will be cheaper and easier using the loan system. The points that I am about to make will be fundamental to the discussion at stage 2. As the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee said in its report—and this was the  unanimous view—the Executive has not yet presented evidence to convince us that the administration and collection of the endowment is best done through the loan system. Even if the Executive presents such evidence at stage 2, convincing us that that is the most effective way of collecting, the issue of the threshold of £10,000 will still remain. I would like the minister to consider the threshold again. The Cubie threshold of £25,000 was not just picked out of the air because it was a nice figure on the day. There was a rationale and a logic to the figure. The average non-manual wage in Scotland is about £24,000. The logic of the Cubie report was that, when someone's wage goes above that level, that is when he or she starts to benefit from higher education. That is why the £25,000 threshold was chosen. Clearly, there is not just a statistical difference between a threshold of £10,000 and a threshold of £25,000; there is actually a substantial conceptual difference in principle. Anyone working in McDonald's, or doing any other task that is not related to their degree, could well be earning—and normally will be earning—more than £10,000. The principle has been breached.

For many people it is a barrier. Two issues arise from the figure of £10,000. First, for the endowment, if there is to be one, £10,000 is too low a threshold at which to start repayments. Secondly, we must consider the figure of £10,000 in relation to the loan, which has been static since 1998. The committee has said that the threshold should rise at least in line with inflation. However, the connection with earnings is the important point that Cubie established. I am asking the minister to consider not just increasing the threshold for the loan and endowment in line with inflation, but re-establishing that vital connection between the threshold and earnings. Otherwise, we will be well out of kilter in four or five years' time, when the endowment comes into play. I am sorry that I do not have time to make my other substantial points. I will do that in the press tomorrow.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Twenty minutes ago, I raised a point of order about a statement by the Executive.

The Minister for Parliament is in the chamber. Can he tell us why the press knew about half an hour ago that there was to be an Executive statement, while members did not? Is it intended that that statement should be made before or after the votes at 5 o'clock?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point of order relates to how the press knew about this half an hour ago and yet Parliament has only just been told. Were the press informed by the Executive or by the office of the Presiding Officer? Is it not out of order that members are not told before the press that there is to be a statement?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Apparently, the press have been informed that there is to be an Executive statement after 5 o'clock, on the long-term care of the elderly. Why do the press know that there is to be such a statement, but members have not been informed? Is it in order for me to move that the Executive statement be made before rather than after decision time?

I welcome the minister's announcement of the review and urgent legislation. Will he confirm that such a review, and the legislation, will tackle internet trading in babies and that that practice will be outlawed in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for letting me in. I pay tribute to Andy Kerr's speech. It takes courage—particularly on some benches—to make that kind of speech, and I do not understand how the minister, who heard his devastating analysis, can continue to hold her position. Yesterday, we witnessed Labour's betrayal of old people with Alzheimer's and dementia. Today, we have its betrayal of council workers throughout Scotland. If the Executive is allowed to get away with that, tomorrow it will be the betrayal of the water workers and others. My first remarks are addressed not to the minister, but to the members of Unison and the other unions who are in the gallery today. I welcome them to the chamber. I point out, however, that it is not enough just to protest outside it. Many Unison members pay a political levy to the Labour party. Why should they pay a levy to an organisation that is destroying their jobs, their futures and their families? It is time that those workers had a weapon with which to give Labour a taste of its own medicine.

I do not have time to take interventions, even from someone as articulate as Murray Tosh. In answer to Kate MacLean's point on the SNP motion, I say that when we submitted the motion we did not know about the Transport and the Environment Committee's inquiry. No one can hide behind European Union rules on competition; nothing in those rules says that we need this shabby process—quite the opposite. Finally, how can a minister stand up and say that the proposal represents value for money  when she has not costed the redundancy payments, the unemployment benefits, the effects on local authority finance and all the rest of it? It is amateurish and pathetic to argue that a lower price means value for money. Value for money is not just about the price of contracts, but about the wider question of the impact of this shabby deal on Scotland. I beg the minister to put a stop to this nonsense and start the process all over again.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the deputy minister accept that a lot of the people who are vulnerable are unaware of the services that are available? I chaired the organisation that ran the national AIDS helpline, which was very important in making people aware of AIDS. Will the deputy minister consider introducing a similar helpline for potential victims of hepatitis C?

I welcome members of Capital C to the gallery. Capital C is an Edinburgh-based voluntary organisation that raises awareness about hepatitis C; it is looking for funding so that it can take its message to an even wider audience. It has asked me to point out that, last year, it had what it thought was a successful discussion with members of the Health and Community Care Committee. It looks forward to hearing the response from committee members who attended that meeting. I am sure that members from all parties will join me in recognising the work of Capital C and organisations such as C-Level in Glasgow. Capital C is organising the first national conference in Scotland on hepatitis C, which will take place on 28 March at the Festival Theatre in Edinburgh. I am sure that all members wish the organisation every success with that conference, which I encourage them all to attend. Hepatitis C is a sleeping giant in Scotland. It is a substantial problem—10,000 people in Scotland are diagnosed as having hepatitis C and there are an estimated 50,000 undiagnosed cases. HIV/AIDS, which has rightly been recognised for almost 20 years as a public health matter of major importance, currently affects 1,877 people in Scotland. That is substantially fewer than the diagnosed cases of hepatitis C in Scotland, let alone those cases that are still to be diagnosed. That puts the scale of the problem into perspective; hepatitis C affects about 25 times more people than HIV/AIDS does. Despite that, the Scottish public are unaware of the nature and scale of the problem. Hepatitis C is a silent disease. The virus has a long incubation period; it can take 10 to 15 years before the victim shows symptoms of the disease. That is one reason why it is easy to ignore the problem or to  sweep it under the carpet. By the time that the size of the problem becomes apparent in about 20 years' time, it may be too late to tackle it as effectively as we could if we took preventive measures now. What is Scotland doing to find the 50,000 undiagnosed cases? Unfortunately, it is not doing a lot.

No. The most recent estimates that I have seen take the figure of undiagnosed cases up to 50,000. The substantive point remains the same, irrespective of whether the figure is 40,000 or 50,000. We must take preventive action now rather than do what we have done in other situations, when we have waited until it is too late and have ended up with a huge bill in terms of suffering and of financing medical treatment. I am not here to greet about the Executive. I welcome the additional £1 million that the Executive has given to health boards in Scotland in the current financial year; it has increased their budget from £6.1 million to £7.1 million for prevention work, primarily on AIDS and hepatitis C. In its drugs inquiry, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee did some useful work in highlighting the risk of hepatitis C, especially to those who inject drugs intravenously. However, as the Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon, recently admitted in a parliamentary reply to me, there is still no national screening programme. In refusing to implement such a programme, the Executive has taken the advice of people such as the deputy chief medical officer, Dr Andrew Fraser. Dr Fraser is on record as saying: "There is little point in screening for the virus if there is little you can do for the patient". He has also said: "We must know more about the disease before we progress to some form of screening." Like, I suspect, many people outside the chamber, I do not agree with those arguments. The data collected by SCIEH, along with the information kept by the health boards, tell us a great deal about hepatitis C. We know that 87 per cent of people diagnosed with hepatitis C are between 15 and 44 and that 56 per cent of them  have injected drugs. However, a significant minority—44 per cent—have been infected in other ways. The only way of finding out how people have become infected is to run a national screening programme. We know something else about hepatitis C—it is spreading fast. The number of people diagnosed with the virus has doubled in the past four years alone. Even if we did not have all that information, not knowing about hepatitis C is no excuse for not doing enough. The whole point behind a national screening programme and raising public awareness is to tell people that hepatitis C can be prevented. Although there might not yet be a vaccine, if people know what the disease is and how they can avoid being put at risk, the number of cases will fall. Scotland can and should undertake a screening programme for the disease and implement a substantial public awareness and education programme about it. If we do not do both those things, we must be prepared to put up our hands in 15 to 20 years' time, when the extent of the problem can no longer be ignored, and accept our part of the blame. Countries such as the US and France are already taking effective action. It is estimated that the costs of treating those who are currently undiagnosed could be as high as £200 million, which is much more than the cost of implementing the Sutherland report. The message of this debate must be that it is time for Scotland to wake up to the problem of hepatitis C. It is time for action; it is time to introduce a national screening programme; and it is time for a substantial investment in public awareness and education. I hope that the minister will address those issues. This is not a party political issue; it is a human issue. It is a major issue about the health of the nation. It merits the Parliament's attention and deserves urgent action by the Executive and others.

My question is in relation to the development of the  centre. Is the minister aware of the report of the House of Commons Select Committee on Environment, Transport and Regional Affairs that was published yesterday and condemned the lengthy delays in starting building work on the new centre in Ayrshire and unreservedly condemned the waste of £15.7 million on an aborted private finance initiative for Prestwick? That money would have been far better used to develop Prestwick than to chase city slickers and fat cats in the City of London.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will undertake an assessment of the impact UK membership of the European single currency would have on the Scottish economy. (S1O-2790)

That is one of the most pathetic and complacent answers I have ever received in this chamber. The responsibility of the Scottish Executive is to look after the interests of Scotland and the Scottish economy. Is an independent and realistic assessment of the positive and negative impacts that membership would have on the Scottish economy not the role of the Scottish Executive? Does the Executive have responsibility for Scottish enterprise and business or not?

Clearly, every party is giving a general welcome to the proposals. As convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I say on its behalf that we agreed yesterday to respond positively to the minister's request for our input to the discussion paper. I will highlight two points. First, a welcome aspect of the proposals is that, for the first time in a long time, we will have a national adult guidance service covering the whole country. Will the minister consider focusing at least some of the additional funding on adult guidance, which is grossly under-resourced or even non-existent in many parts of the country? In talking about lifelong learning, we should recognise in particular that people aged over 45, who are the hard core of the long-term unemployed, need assistance to find new jobs and training and education. Secondly, one of the benefits and strengths of the careers service is that it provides advice, counselling, guidance and placement. Will the minister clarify her view on the need to maintain all four services? Will she consider the co-location of careers offices with one-stop shops for benefits and with jobcentres? One of the problems of the careers service, particularly in relation to adults, has been the divorce of the local careers service from the jobcentre and the Benefits Agency.

I want to concentrate on three points. What is happening in the Borders is happening in other parts of Scotland, but the Borders is a classic case: 20 or 30 years ago, it was a relatively prosperous economy. Since then, it has experienced a substantial decline relative to the rest of Scotland. First, and ironically, a skills shortage is emerging side by side with a fairly high level of unemployment. It would be naive to suggest that we can simply match the unemployed people to those areas and sectors where there are skills shortages. Life is not as simple as that. One area in which the minister, Scottish Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise Borders could take some initiatives is that of promoting the concept of a skills ladder, so that incentives are provided to companies and to local colleges to train people in the skills in which there are shortages. At the same time, they would be encouraged to provide assistance for recruiting unemployed people into the workplace. Scottish Enterprise used to run a successful training and employment grant scheme, which was aimed at encouraging the long-term employment and training of unemployed people, in particular long-term unemployed people. The re-creation of a similar scheme in the Borders, perhaps as a pilot, might be a useful exercise and an idea for the minister to take up. The second issue is depopulation, whose importance we should not underestimate. When the population of an area is lost, that reinforces unemployment, because, as people leave the area, they take with them purchasing power. Less purchasing power in the area means fewer jobs and employment opportunities, which in turn feeds the depopulation. A cycle develops, where depopulation feeds unemployment, which in turn feeds depopulation. We need to recognise the importance of depopulation. Its other major effect is to increase the relative size of the dependent population. That has major implications for social services and other public services in the area.  Thirdly, there is a need to examine the local infrastructure. One of the problems in the Borders, as is also the case in Dumfries and Galloway, is that the labour market is relatively self-contained. One of the reasons for that is that the road and rail links—more relevantly the road links—with the rest of Scotland, notably to the Edinburgh area, require a substantial upgrade. If we had better road and rail links, it would effectively increase the size of the labour market, and would make jobs in Edinburgh and the surrounding area much more accessible to people living in the Borders. There is an overheated economy in Edinburgh side by side with high unemployment and depopulation in the Borders. Although I recognise that road and rail investment is outwith the remit of the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic, I hope that he will raise with his colleague the Minister for Transport the need to improve the road network in the Borders—we have already had a substantial discussion on railways in the Borders. There are initiatives that we can take on skill shortages, to encourage employers to take on unemployed people, and to create the skills ladder concept. We can improve the infrastructure to allow the people of the Borders to share in the general prosperity of the east of Scotland.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on raising the issue of home safety, which tends to fall off the agenda  and is never debated properly. Members' business debates such as this give us an opportunity to discuss such issues. Cathy Jamieson rightly highlighted the vulnerability of young people and older people to accidents in the home. Research shows that there is a link between levels of poverty and the incidence of accidents in the home and surrounding area. I want to address that issue. It is right that we deal with this subject at this time of year, as—to put matters into perspective—ROSPA, which does a great deal of work in this sphere, estimates that about 80,000 accidents in the home occur across the UK over the Christmas and new year period. Those accidents are caused by anything from people staggering around the house as a result of having had too much to drink to Christmas trees going on fire and accidents with toys and the like. ROSPA estimates that 33,000 children across the UK are affected by poisoning, mainly from medication, in any given year. It is ironic that children are most vulnerable because their grandparents do not lock up medication. According to ROSPA, 94 per cent of people who are aged over 60 do not lock up their medication. Accidents often arise as a result of children who are staying with or visiting grandparents gaining access to medication that can poison them or do a lot of damage. Something like 500 children a year also die as a result of accidents at school or at home, which costs the UK health service around £300 million a year. According to the Department of Trade and Industry and the Health Education Authority, around 2,000 older people die each year in the UK as a result of a fall in the home. It is estimated that one elderly person dies from a domestic accident every five hours. Members can see that, by any stretch of the imagination, the issue is serious. I endorse everything that Cathy Jamieson said—her analysis of the problem and the solutions that she suggested. I would like to keep this contribution short to allow as many members as possible to speak. According to Government figures, of the 500 youngsters who die annually because of an accident, most are from poor backgrounds. Children of poorer parents are five times more likely to die in accidents than children from better-off families. According to research undertaken by the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in December 1999, poorer children are more at risk because they are more likely to live in houses with old wiring and because their parents have little money to spend on stair gates, smoke detectors and things of that nature. Their environment may also be more hazardous than that of other children because there are more main roads where they  live, because they do not have a garden, and because of a lack of safe play areas. The number of children who died in fires between 1981 and 1991 fell by 28 per cent in social class I. In social class V, the number of deaths rose by 39 per cent—the figure did not fall; it rose. We should recognise that there is a link between poverty and the incidence of accidents in the home. We should press for the measures that Cathy Jamieson has outlined.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer by Mr Sam Galbraith on 24 November 2000 to question S1W-11158, who represented it as part of the UK delegation at November's United Nations climate change summit in The Hague. (S1O-2694)

I will not ask a question about the contribution of two Jaguars to climate change. That is a separate issue. Even in a devolved system of government, does not it make sense for the Scottish Executive, particularly in the light of the minister's reply, to have a representative on the UK delegation? Would not it also make sense to devolve energy policy, including on oil and gas, to the Scottish Parliament so that we can maximise our contribution to the Kyoto targets?

When the First Minister next meets the secretary of state, will he discuss with him the local government settlement? Will he draw to the secretary of state's attention the comment of the Labour leader in Glasgow, Charlie Gordon, who said: "The Scottish executive is good at talking about social justice but there's not much sign of it in this finance settlement"? Given that 60 per cent of Scotland's deprivation is in the city of Glasgow, will the First Minister tell the Minister for Finance and Local Government to think again and to give Glasgow the money it deserves and needs?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It has just gone 12 o'clock and the Cinderella minister Susan Deacon has arrived. On behalf of the Parliament, will you make it clear to her that the contemptuous way in which she has treated the chamber is totally unacceptable to most members?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The motion asks that the Parliament "notes the imminent publication of the Scottish Health Plan, and calls on the Scottish Executive to include in that plan practical and adequately funded proposals". Haemophilia is a legitimate issue in the terms of  the motion.

rose—

On a point of order. Everybody seems to have a copy of the ministerial statement except the MSPs who are debating the subject. Can you instruct the clerks to  circulate a copy of the statement to all members in the chamber?

Before I get to my substantive points, I want to point out—especially to the Parliamentary Bureau—that the debate could have been done and dusted in an hour or an hour and a half this afternoon. We did not need to eat into the SQA debate.

It is a fair point and I want it to be recorded. I will deal with the technical issues in respect of the Finance Committee's report, then I want to deal with what Mr MacKay said about constitutional architecture. It seems that, in all our debates, every Labour, Liberal and Tory spokesman goes on to talk about the constitutional architecture. The only difference is that we want independence and they want the status quo. Three or four technical points have been made about the committee's report. The minister cleared up some of them to an extent, but others remain open questions.

Keith Raffan is not going to talk about Oregon, is he?

As Keith Raffan said, he is slow on the uptake. I will leave aside his rather irrelevant intervention and carry on. My first technical point concerns the minister's seeming to say that the Finance Committee is right: committees should have access to figures on capital charges. If we do not deal with that problem, we will not have a proper picture of the real costs of service delivery.  Secondly, Andrew Wilson raised the important point that access to the Scottish reserve and to the UK reserve must be transparent. We must ensure that we get our fair share of the UK reserve, although I do not think that the committee is calling for detailed rules on access to either the Scottish reserve or the UK reserve. We want the process to be transparent so that we can see where the reserve money is going. I will leave aside the fact that the reserve money in the Scottish budget peaks in the run-up to 2003. I am sure that the advent of an election in that year is purely coincidental. Thirdly, on performance targets, I reiterate Mike Watson's comments on outputs and outcomes. The subject committees in particular have a problem when measuring value for money. We must examine not only the inputs but what has happened as a result of changes to the performance targets in the budget. When we are given three sets of budget figures in the space of three months, it is only right that the performance targets should be reviewed in accordance with the changes to the budget figures. Otherwise, we cannot evaluate value for money properly. My final technical point is that while the budget process is all very welcome, the reality is that the flexibility in the Scottish block is limited, as previous secretaries of state have pointed out. So much of the money is already committed to salaries and associated costs that, taking the £18 billion that we will spend this financial year, it is probable that the flexibility to change budgets around is no higher than £400 million or £500 million a year. We should not consider completely rejigging £18 billion because, quite frankly, that is not a realistic proposition. I suggest to the minister that rather than highlighting the constitutional architecture, that approach makes financial sense. Certain principles that operate throughout the rest of Europe do not operate in Scotland. The Minister for Finance and Local Government is misnamed—he is not a minister for finance; he is a minister for spending the budget. He is not a minister for finance because he is the only finance minister in the whole of Europe who does not have responsibility for raising any revenues—

I will give way to Mike Rumbles later. The minister is the only minister for finance who cannot borrow money.

Of course.

Mike Rumbles was not in the chamber earlier when we were discussing parish councils.

We benefited from the practical expertise of Mr Davidson, who agreed with me that English parish councils have more power than the Scottish Parliament to borrow and raise finance. I repeat the point that Angus MacKay is the only minister of finance in the whole of Europe who can only spend money, and cannot raise it.

It is true. It is not an issue of constitutional architecture; it is an issue of financial sobriety that the Parliament responsible for spending the money should also have at least some responsibility—I would argue all the responsibility—for raising the money. Indeed, it should also have the power to borrow money. I do not see why this Parliament cannot have those powers. The reality is that the big financial decisions are taken in London, with the comprehensive spending review and similar decisions. The decisions that are delegated to this body are the marginal decisions arising from the real core decisions made in London.

It is a fact. All decisions about revenue and borrowing are taken in London. Whether or not we have a financial surplus, which I believe we have—

I would be delighted to.

What the Scottish people want is that their money should be spent in Scotland on essential services. As a percentage of gross domestic product, public sector investment in Scotland today is 10 per cent of the 1979 level. That represents a massive real cut in the level of public sector investment in transport, housing, education and all the rest of it. I do not believe that that is what the people of Scotland want. I think they want Scotland's money—not just the oil money, but including the oil money—spent in Scotland for the people of Scotland. That is the  fundamental flaw at the heart of the whole strategy.

Is it the case that the Oregon legislature is responsible for the revenue as well as the expenditure side of its budget?

Does not the member realise that where there is devolution in other parts of Europe, for example in Spain, the provincial governments have far greater fiscal powers—the power to borrow and the power to raise their own taxation—than we have? We have minimal financial devolution, but we could have much greater financial devolution. Would he support that? As a Conservative, does not he think that the Parliament that is responsible for spending the money should be the Parliament that is responsible for raising the money?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree with me, as I am sure he will— [Laughter.] We have even got time for a laugh this afternoon. Does the member agree that the financial powers of this Parliament are fewer than those of an English parish council? Unlike this Parliament, a parish council has the right to borrow. Furthermore, a parish council has no capping level on the tax that it can raise, whereas this Parliament does.

The debate is historic: it is the first time in the history of the Scottish Parliament that we have debated reports from two committees at once, although the committees' inquiries have slightly different remits. As convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I want to place on record my gratitude to the members of both committees for the sterling work that has been done in preparing the reports. I particularly want to express my gratitude to Annabel Goldie, who stood in for my predecessor, John Swinney, who was often otherwise engaged during the inquiry. Since this is Mary Mulligan's last appearance as the convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in a major education debate, I congratulate her on her appointment as parliamentary private secretary to the First Minister. Even though she has a new position, I am quite willing to continue to offer her free advice. I want to thank our support staff, particularly our clerk, Simon Watkins, and his team, without whom we would not have been able to produce such professional reports. I also thank the two rapporteurs. The committees worked so well not only because of co-operation at convener and clerk level, but because of the rapporteurs. Cathy Peattie was the rapporteur from the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Marilyn Livingstone was the rapporteur from the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. It is worth mentioning that, had the crisis occurred before the creation of the Scottish Parliament, it is almost certain that there would not have been the level of detailed scrutiny and debate that there has been. Westminster would never have got to the root of the problem. We would not have had two committee reports, we might not even have had a Deloitte & Touche report and we would not have had the kind of insight into the problems of the SQA that the Scottish Parliament has gained. As members have said, the time has come for us to move on. Members will have seen with  regret the headlines in The Herald today, forecasting a continuing three-year crisis in the exam system. However, there is cross-party determination at ministerial level, at committee level and at parliamentary level to ensure that that does not happen. We cannot afford for a crisis to happen again and we dare not accept the prophecy that it will. On behalf of both committees, I congratulate the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs on the action that he has taken. The message from the Parliament must be "action this day". I am glad that, on the appeal process and on the measures that must be taken to ensure success in 2001, there has been "action this day". There must be action for many more days to ensure that we live up to our moral responsibility to the young people of Scotland, to the further education sector students—who should not be forgotten in the debate—to parents and to Scottish society. My second point is that we must learn the lessons of what has happened in the SQA fiasco over the past 12 months or so. I believe that we have seven fundamental lessons to learn for the future. The first lesson is that, when we are merging organisations, be they quangos or any other type of organisation, that merger is not simply a legal process. It must be much more than that. The two cultures of the old organisations must be brought together. Both the old organisations cannot be allowed to remain located in their previous sites without any coming together and without the full integration required to obtain the benefits of the merger. When we consider the merger of other organisations, it is important to do so in the round, to ensure that the full benefits are reaped and that we do not end up effectively having two organisations running the show. I have already said privately to the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs that we should ensure that there is no repeat performance with the recent merger of the Scottish Council for Educational Technology and the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum. The second lesson relates to the make-up of the SQA board. There were several fundamental flaws built into it. First, it was far too big. There cannot be decisiveness or a proper level of governance when a board holds mass meetings. A board with a job of management to do must be limited in number, while representing the broad band of skills that are required. Those skills are primarily managerial. Secondly, one of the major problems in the whole fiasco is that members of the board were chosen because they were themselves stakeholders. Stakeholders can be another word for vested interest. The minister is correct to  accept the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's recommendation to split the role of the stakeholder from that of the management of the board. They are two decidedly different roles, with two decidedly different sets of skills. Thirdly, holding the board meeting once a quarter is totally ridiculous for an organisation with a budget of £27 million and employing more than 500 people full time. The third lesson relates to overload, which is primarily a ministerial responsibility. Let us not overload the organisations with too much to do. If we do so, objectives fall between two stools and are not achieved. The fourth lesson is on computer systems. The problems at the SQA represent the latest in a series of failures of organisations because of the introduction of new, expensive computer systems without proper risk assessment, without a proper trial period and without proper cognisance of the impact of the introduction of the new system on external organisations. Whether we take the example of the passport office or others, such introductions of new systems have been a major contributory factor to crises. The fifth lesson, on management information, is absolutely essential. It was not conveyed before; it is being conveyed now. I welcome the fact that the minister is demanding monthly reports from the SQA, and I am sure that he will ensure that those reports will be not just prose and text but hard fact. Let us examine the performance indicators and the performance targets and ask the hard questions about what is happening on the ground vis-à-vis those indicators and targets. The sixth lesson relates to communication, both the extremely poor communication within the SQA and that between it and the education department. There was almost a culture of trying to hide the problems instead of discussing them openly and seeking assistance where possible. The final, seventh, lesson applies across the board: the need for a proper system of ministerial scrutiny of quangos. I do not believe that we have ever had one. There are many accountability systems across the board in Government, but we found that, until the minister introduced his recent reforms, there was no proper system of performance monitoring of a quango. I have outlined the seven lessons that we must learn, in relation to other organisations as well to the SQA. Clearly, our top priority must be to deal with the aftermath of the 2000 exam diet crisis, and with the appeal process in particular. We must also deal with the 2001 diet to ensure that there is no repeat of the previous year. Once those immediate issues are tackled, let us have a medium-term  review of the SQA. In particular, let us ask whether one organisation can carry out the five big remits that are under the one umbrella that is the SQA, and ask what the future structure should be. My final point is one that all members have made. The debate and—given that it is the final speech of the debate—my speech should draw a line under the crisis of 2000. Let us move on to 2001 in unity—in a consensus for Christmas—to ensure that our pupils, our parents and our population can have full faith in the Scottish Qualifications Authority and the education system.

The First Minister has said that we are at the top table in Europe. How many representatives of the Scottish Executive will be at the top table at the intergovernmental conference in Nice, and who  will those representatives be?

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I congratulate  Tommy Sheridan for having brought the bill before the Scottish Parliament. Although it would not have been possible to achieve that without the list of organisations and individuals that he mentioned, he has put a great deal of energy and compassion into the bill. We unashamedly congratulate Tommy Sheridan for the courage and determination that he has shown. Let me set the record straight on why Christine Grahame and Tommy Sheridan walked out of the working party: it was a direct result of the Executive's double dealing. The purpose of the working party was to come up with an alternative to poindings and warrant sales, not to come up with a replacement that would be, in effect, all about poindings and warrant sales. If the Executive's proposals are, de facto, poindings and warrant sales, that will spell the end of the Lib-Lab Executive. Such proposals will be totally unacceptable to the people of Scotland and, I hope, to Parliament. Parliament has voted to get rid of poindings and warrant sales—it would be unacceptable to have poindings and warrant sales presented to us again in two years' time with a new name. The work that was done by our working party involved not only Tommy Sheridan, John McAllion and me, but the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland, Citizens Advice Scotland, Communities Against Poverty, Easterhouse citizens advice bureau, Glasgow Anti-poverty Project, the Govan Law Centre, the Scottish Human Rights Centre and so on. I am sure that those organisations will take great offence at some of the remarks about our report that were made by Angus Mackay and Iain Gray. Donald Gorrie hit the nail on the head—poindings and warrant sales do not achieve the objectives either of social justice or of effective debt recovery. As Donald said, we are penalising 98 per cent of the population to try to catch 2 per cent—those who can pay but will not pay. The current poindings and warrant sales system cannot even nail the 2 per cent who can pay but will not pay. As Tommy Sheridan said, this should have been a very proud day for the Scottish Parliament. If we pass the bill, we will be able to say that Parliament has done something for the people of Scotland. However, it would be far better then to come forward as quickly as possible with a humane, effective alternative system, with positive action to encourage and help those who are in debt today. I hope that Iain Gray will read our report in detail. It is not about spin, it is all about substance. It covers the inadequacy of the social security system, the problems with the social fund, the barriers to advice, the need for early intervention  methods and the inadequacy of legal services in dealing with the problem. The report suggests the need for disclosure orders to replace poindings and warrant sales. It discusses the system of local authority debt collection, debt enforcement, multiple debts, reforms of summary warrant procedure and bank arrestments. That is a series—

I need to finish. That is a series of substantial recommendations.

I urge the minister to take the report's recommendations on board. Let us stop the insults and get some action from the Executive.

I rise on behalf of the SNP to support amendment 2 and, if it falls, amendment 3. Today should be a proud day for the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people. The abolition of poindings and warrant sales has been on the agenda of every civilised person in Scotland for many years. We can make a proud day still prouder by refusing to allow any delay in the implementation of the bill. Delay means much more than that—it means worry and expense and it means a delay in lifting the sword of Damocles that hangs over the poor. I say to Phil Gallie and the Tories that they should listen to small businesses in Scotland. If they had watched "Newsnight Scotland" last night they would have seen John Downie of the Federation of Small Businesses backing Tommy Sheridan's argument for no delay in implementing the bill.

Miss Goldie should have watched "Newsnight Scotland" as well, as it is the victims of poindings and warrant sales who are pushed into the hands of the moneylenders, particularly the most unscrupulous moneylenders. To say that the bill would lead to a situation where there was no diligence is absolute nonsense. If someone is in work and gets into debt, their wages can be arrested; if someone is on benefit and gets into debt, benefit can be deducted; if someone who has a bank account gets into debt, their bank account can be arrested; if someone in business gets into debt, that business can be sequestrated. To say that there is a vacuum is total nonsense. The so-called official working party was announced by Jim Wallace on 27 April. He said that the Executive would treat the issue as a matter of urgency. Between May and October, that urgency meant exactly two meetings of the working party. The Executive has the audacity to come to the chamber to ask us to agree to a two-year delay in the implementation of the bill when, in the first six months after that announcement, it held only two meetings of the working party. At the same time, another working party was established, involving many of the same organisations, with cross-party representation—it involved two political parties—and support from across the board in Scotland. Without the resources of the Executive, the improving debt recovery working party produced a 47-page document that maps out—as Annabel Goldie should note—all the alternatives required to achieve the proper objectives of debt recovery in Scotland. I recommend that every member of the Executive and all the Tories read it. I bet my bottom dollar that the official working party will not be able to come up with better alternative proposals than we did. Our report contains a set of recommendations that, if implemented, would allow full implementation of the bill from April 2001 along with the implementation of a comprehensive debt recovery programme to ensure that there is proper, civilised diligence in Scotland.

Because that was a different working party. The remit of the official working party was changed to suit the objectives of the Executive; the remit of the working party on improving debt recovery, which produced this report, was not only to get rid of poindings and warrant sales, but to introduce a civilised programme of reform for debt recovery and debt management.

They can have it; that is not a problem. I will even give Phil Gallie a copy for nothing—provided that he reads it, of course. The view that there needs to be further delay is only an excuse. There is no justification whatever for the Executive to ask us to delay. As Tommy Sheridan said, 80 per cent of poindings and warrant sales are initiated by local authorities. Two local authorities, a Labour local authority in West Dunbartonshire and an SNP local authority in Clackmannanshire—there are no Tory local authorities involved in this, obviously—have both, in effect, abolished poindings and warrant sales. If two of the 32 local authorities can do that, and if they can say that there has been no adverse impact on debt collection, why can the other 30 local authorities not be ordered to do the same forthwith?

Mr Sheridan?

Andy White, the Labour leader of West Dunbartonshire Council, has pointed out that the council tax collection rate has absolutely nothing to do with the abolition of poindings and warrant sales. Today is a test for the Parliament. Are we a people's Parliament for the poor, or a Parliament for sheriff officers, bureaucrats, lawyers and the wealthy? If we delay the bill's implementation, the reputation of the Parliament among the populace will suffer further. If we implement the bill from next year, we will send out a clear message that this is indeed a people's Parliament.

Will Phil Gallie tell us how many Jaguar XJ6s have been poinded in the past year?

There is broad consensus about the need for a national economic development strategy for Scotland and about many of the issues that we face. There are a number of strategic issues and challenges that we need to face up to and by which any economic development strategy or framework will be judged.  The Scottish economy today is not just the result of what has happened in the past few years; in many aspects, it is the result of trends over a century that we still need to deal with. One such trend is population change, which is an issue that has not usually been highlighted in economic discussion but which might have a fundamental effect on the future of the Scottish economy. We are the only country other than Italy in western Europe that will suffer from a net reduction in population in the foreseeable future. One long-term forecast for the population in Scotland shows that our population could decline over the next 70 years to about 3.8 million people. Such depopulation would have a number of effects. That forecast is due very largely to the fact that we are losing young people, whom we need to rebuild our industry and build the society of tomorrow. There are some years when 60 or 70 per cent of computer graduates from Scotland leave Scotland to get work. Last year, 45 per cent of all graduates left Scotland to get their first job. That is a very substantial bleeding of population—in terms of numbers and of the quality of the people and skills we need. The more general issue is that when there is depopulation, it can in itself become a major contributory factor to unemployment. As more people leave the country, they take with them the purchasing power needed to generate new jobs in the economy. If fewer jobs are generated, more depopulation follows. The danger arises of a spiral of depopulation feeding on unemployment and vice versa. In the latest available figures, from the second quarter of this year, the percentage increase in gross domestic product in Scotland was around 2.1 per cent, whereas the UK figure was 3.2 per cent. In that quarter, the Scottish economy was growing, and that is welcome. However, the gap between Scotland and the rest of the UK in long-term output growth is such that, had we enjoyed the same rate of growth over the past 10 or 15 years as the rest of the UK has enjoyed, the Scottish economy would now be £7 billion or £8 billion a year bigger than it is. That would represent public sector investment of an extra £3 billion or £4 billion, with the balance in the rest of the economy. Closing that gap must be one of the measures of success of the framework for economic development. The narrowness of our commercial and industrial base—in terms both of the sectors and of the companies—is an important issue. We rely on three or four sectors for about 75 per cent of all our exports from Scotland. That is too few eggs in one big basket. One company, Motorola, accounts for about 20 per cent of all our exports. That makes us vulnerable, and we need to address that  by diversifying the base of the economy. We need to boost research and development as a percentage of GDP. Our spend on research and development in industry as a percentage of GDP is about half the European average. If we are to compete in an expanding European market, we need to double our figure. The final challenge that I want to talk about is investment. In the late 1970s, public sector investment represented about 7.5 per cent of GDP; it now represents about 0.2 per cent. Although the planned increase in investment over the next few years is welcome, it goes nowhere near meeting the challenge. We must not underestimate the challenge of the expansion of the European Union. We have already lost investment to countries such as Poland. That trend will increase if we do not address the issue.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to establish a national screening programme for hepatitis C. (S1F-685)

Is the First Minister aware that, although in Scotland there are only 10,000 diagnosed cases of hepatitis C, a recent survey has shown that as many as 50,000 people may be infected? Will he overrule the advice of the deputy chief medical officer, Dr Andrew Fraser, that there should not be a screening programme, on the spurious grounds that we do not have a cure for hepatitis C? The purpose of a screening programme would be to prevent the spread of the disease, so that in Scotland we do not have an epidemic similar to the AIDS epidemic in Africa. Will the First Minister follow the example of France, Canada and the United States, where, according to a report by Dr Graham Fisher of London, such programmes have been introduced?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has made any representations to Her Majesty's Government  regarding any proposed extensions to qualified majority voting in devolved policy areas to be considered at the Nice intergovernmental conference. (S1O-2591)

As the minister will know, three devolved areas could potentially be affected by the extension of qualified majority voting. What aspects of industrial policy in Scotland will be affected by those measures? What potential impact will there be on the responsibilities of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning?

Mr McConnell anticipated the wrong question.

Will the First Minister indicate when he hopes to conclude the review of the quangos and when the parallel review of the system of public appointments will be completed and announced? Does he have a target number in mind for the reduction of quangos? Will the Executive support my member's bill to democratise public appointments in Scotland?

Will the First Minister discuss with the Secretary of State for Scotland tomorrow ministerial responsibility for the Scottish Qualifications Authority? Is the report in today's Daily Record  that Mr McConnell will take over ministerial responsibility for the SQA correct, or will that responsibility continue to be shared by two ministers? Would it not have been better to await the outcome of the inquiry by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee into the governance of the SQA before making that announcement? Should not that announcement be made to Parliament instead of in the Daily Record ?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This afternoon we heard a very dignified speech from Mr John Home Robertson, in which he pointed out that, as a result of an application of the ministerial code, he had in effect been debarred from a substantial part of his portfolio. As the Parliament approves the appointment of ministers, is it not the case that when such restrictions are applied—albeit as a result of the ministerial code—Parliament should be informed as to what those restrictions are? If nothing else, that should be done as a matter of courtesy, but I would have thought that it should be done as a matter of form.

In view of the fact that I was out of the chamber when the First Minister took my name in vain, will the Deputy First Minister clarify whether the role of committee conveners is to represent their committees and whether they should run to their party leader with confidential information? In the case of my discussions with Mr Galbraith on the Scottish Qualifications Authority, I received representations from the leading Labour member on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee not to discuss the outcome of that meeting with my party. There appears to be a contradiction between Mr McLeish's comments and those of his back benchers—or rather, the comments of a member who was a back bencher at that time. I make it absolutely clear that both Mr Swinney and I operated on the basis of propriety—we gave the committee and its members their proper place. I deny totally any improper consultation, discussion or disclosure involving Mr Swinney. I hope that every other committee convener will represent their committee, rather than act in a purely party political manner.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

So that there is no dubiety, let me say first that I have no vested interest other than making sure that Mr Swinney wins the vote. My point of order is this: while the Parliament has agreed the procedures for the vote, the Parliament has not had the opportunity to debate, let alone agree, the procedures for the pre-vote hustings. Is it therefore in order for me to propose that, after each candidate's seven-minute oration, they should then have a 15-minute question-and-answer session, so that the rest of us can ask the candidates what they intend to do with the job of First Minister?

We are calling for two things in this debate. First, we are calling for an immediate resolution to the problem of the STG pension fund. Secondly, a call should go out to the House of Commons for a major change in pensions legislation, because it is becoming a national scandal. Whether it is private companies putting the surpluses in their pension funds back into the companies themselves to ensure bigger profits or the public sector or former public sector organisations using their pension surpluses to top up the funds of the Treasury, in either case it is morally wrong. It is also a financial scandal for pensioners. Let us go back to first principles. Who built up the fund? Who contributed to the fund? It was the pensioners themselves—the people who were working for the Scottish Transport Group and the Scottish Bus Group—as well as their employer. The employer puts money in on behalf of the employee: employers and trustees have no moral right to take it upon themselves to refuse to distribute the surplus to the people it was intended to benefit. As Fergus Ewing said, if the surplus was used to give a cheque to each of the 12,000 pensioners, each would receive about £10,000. Even if that money were invested and pensioners received only the interest, they would receive an increase in  their pension of around £15 a week. To an average pensioner in Scotland, that is a substantial increase by any standards. As long as this situation continues, we are cheating pensioners out of their entitlement and we are standing by as their standard of living is reduced well below what it could and should be. The pensioners are getting older—some have already died during the past seven to 10 years. Tonight, I hope that we will get answers from the minister, instead of further delays. I hope that we will get a commitment to some degree of backdating for those who have been cheated out of their entitlement. My final message to the minister is this: if the Treasury says that this matter is its responsibility, and the minister says that it is her responsibility, and the Treasury refuses to do anything, let the minister stand up for the pensioners and tell the Treasury to get stuffed. It is more important that our pensioners get their entitlement than that we play footsie with the UK Treasury in London.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made in reducing poverty among pensioners in Scotland since July 1999. (S1F-519) Will the First Minister join me in welcoming the Scottish confederation of the elderly to the gallery?

Does not the First Minister find it shameful that now that we have two Labour Governments—one in Edinburgh and one in London—our pensioners are the third poorest in Europe? Will he guarantee today that, after 20 months of waiting, the Scottish Executive will implement the Sutherland report in full? Will he also guarantee to make representations to and use his influence with Tony Blair and Gordon Brown to ensure that we never have a repeat of the obscenity of a 75p increase for pensioners, and that pensioners receive a decent increase this year, as they deserve?

No they are not.

I am amazed that the First Minister does not know what the protesters are looking for. I have just come from—

I have just come from Grangemouth, where I spoke to the senior police officer in charge, who confirmed that there have been no threats or intimidation. Is the First Minister aware of that? Is the First Minister also aware that the protesters, to whom I also spoke, have no intention of engaging in any form of intimidation whatever? They are seething with anger at the Government's spin against them.

I agree with Irene Oldfather when she points out that if we are to tackle health problems in this country, we have to take a broad, strategic approach and consider poor housing and poverty, and the related problems of deprivation and unemployment. Today's debate focuses on the role of the national health service in tackling poor health in Scotland. I wish to make three points. First, everyone in the chamber should understand the level of frustration and anger in Scotland about the state of our health service. For the past 20 years, we have seen the health service get a lot of lip service but not the level of resources required to deal with the problems in our society. We had 18 years under the Tories. For the first two or three years under new Labour, the health service was denied the level of resources required while big tax cuts were handed out to people throughout the country who did not need them. People do not understand why, on the one hand, politicians say that the health service is a top priority while, on the other hand, it has been starved of the resources required to do the job properly.

No, I do not have enough time. We must put the debate in the context of 20 years of starvation of the resources required to deal with the problems of the health service. That brings me to the latest crisis of the past seven to 10 days. I do not care if there is a big battle between Jack McConnell—now known in Edinburgh's financial circles as the fiddler on the hoof—and Maiden Deacon on the leadership of the Labour party in Scotland and who succeeds Donald. That, quite frankly, does not matter. What matters is that, throughout last year, there was £135 million in the kitty, while the Minister for Health and Community Care was telling people over 65 that they could not get a free flu jag because the money was not there. There was £135 million in the kitty, yet we are told that we are so short of radiotherapy units that people are dying of cancer unnecessarily in our country. That was the report from the oncology unit—

I do not have time to accept interventions. There was £135 million, yet we are short of—

Very well, I shall give way to Mary Scanlon.

I will never condone Jack McConnell's economics. In fact, as the Finance Committee pointed out after reading his budget, he makes Houdini look positively arthritic. None of us would agree with Jack. The fact is that £135 million was ready to be spent, yet all these crises were going on and people were being denied the treatment they required. The money was in the kitty all the time. That was bad enough, but handing over £34 million of it for trees was absolutely ridiculous. It is no wonder that people in Scotland are angry—angry at new Labour, angry at the Executive and angry at the Minister for Health and Community Care and the Minister for Finance. Even the First Minister is angry with them and ready to sack them. Unfortunately, he said that he would sack Susan Deacon only for disloyalty. I would have thought that the incompetence that she has demonstrated would already have justified her sacking. Ministers keep telling us that we are getting lots of extra money for the health service in Scotland. If that is the case, how is it that the ratio of staff to  patients is getting worse and our cancer survival rates and waiting times for heart surgery are among the worst in Europe? If all that extra money is going in and the performance of the health service is so poor, there can be only one explanation—that the person in charge of the health service in Scotland is mismanaging the resources and letting down the people of Scotland. I urge the Minister for Health and Community Care to use the recess to get on top of the job and ensure that the people of Scotland are never again denied expenditure on their health while she sits on £135 million.

Will Nick Johnston take an intervention?

Will Nick Johnston give way?

Nick Johnston is boasting about the PFI, another Tory policy adopted by new Labour. Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust has pointed out, with regard to the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, that the additional cost of such funding, over traditional funding, is equivalent to the cost of 19 consultants. Is that something to boast about?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you control Labour and Liberal Democrat members?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I ask the minister to set realistic expectations of what the enterprise network can do. He says that it will be charged with closing the productivity gap, the skills gap, the e-commerce gap, the business start-up gap—everything but the Watford gap. We must bear in mind the fact that the total budget for the enterprise network is less that 1 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product. We should focus on the things the enterprise network can do best and not give it so wide a remit that it is unable to achieve anything. Regarding the strategy, where will the jobs come from? That is the key question. Scotland relies on three or four sectors for around three quarters of its exports. We need to diversify the Scottish economy and move into growth areas. Will the minister give a guarantee that the strategy will seriously address that? Will the minister clarify the new status of LECs? I applaud his decision to remove their current status, but I ask him to clarify what the relationship will now be between local enterprise companies—which are no longer to be companies—and Scottish Enterprise.

I take Annabel Goldie's point about the need for monitoring, but monitoring takes place after the event. What we need is a proactive initiative to ensure that the objectives in  amendment 2 are met. Will the minister therefore make some positive proposals to ensure that those who are on low incomes, or who do not have existing accreditation, will be given priority and will be targeted in the promotion and organisation of the programme?

I support amendment 2, in the name of Fiona McLeod. I  wish to declare an interest: in a previous life, as a consultant, I undertook a number of reviews of individual learning account programmes. One of the key conclusions of nearly all the studies of the pilot programmes that I have seen so far is that neither the benefits to new learners and to socially excluded people nor the penetration level have been as great as for other people. I am disappointed in the minister's response. If he had said that he did not want the text of the amendment in the bill, but made some positive proposals to achieve its objectives, it would have been most acceptable. However, the minister has not come up with anything that in any way guarantees that the people from low-income groups and new learners will be targeted under the programme in the way that is required. I can give some practical illustrations of why such targeting is required. The minister has mentioned a target of 100,000 people taking up individual learning accounts over the next two years, which is about 50,000 people a year. Achieving the numerical target will not be that difficult. One of the current problems in many training programmes, particularly as the end of the financial year is approached, is that, in every local enterprise company the length and breadth of Scotland, it is a case of getting bums on seats to achieve the numerical targets. If the programme concentrates purely on the throughput target, it will not achieve its other, equally important, objectives, in particular that of encouraging a high proportion of new learners and people from low-income groups. The other reason why amendment 2 is required is that the type of people who tend not to be volunteered by companies on a proactive basis are those in their middle age of working, particularly males over the age of 45. There is a special problem with the percentage of males over 45 who are becoming economically inactive, and who are finding it difficult to get retraining or to find alternative employment. That needs to be tackled. The individual learning account programme is one way to try to expand opportunity and to ensure that males over the age of 45 in particular, one of the highest unemployment groups in Scotland, can gain greater access to learning and training and, through that, greater access to employment or alternative employment opportunities. The minister says that the individual learning account programme is to be demand led. If it is demand led, the usual suspects in every company will be the first to volunteer for the programme. They are the people who benefit from nearly all the existing programmes, and who will benefit most from this one. The people who are least likely to volunteer for such a programme are on low incomes; they might have families to look after  or might be a bit worried about going through the process of learning for the first time in perhaps 20 or 30 years. If the programme is to be demand led, and if there is to be no proactive promotion of it among the target groups that I mentioned, the objectives that the Government has set itself will not be achieved. The chances are that we will not win the vote on the amendment, but I beg the minister to produce something more substantial and to give us proactive proposals as to how the targets are to be achieved.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on the recent report by the Carers National Association Scotland on "Caring on the Breadline". (S1O-1985)

Does the minister realise that carers in Scotland are fed up with lip service from Holyrood and London? They want action. Will the minister give a commitment that, in the one area where he has responsibility, he will implement the recommendation to abolish charging for essential, non-residential community care services? Will he make representation to the Secretary of State for Social Security to extend eligibility for the invalid care allowance to people aged over 65?

What about charging?

rose—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive when the next meeting of the British-Irish Council will take place. (S1O-1926)

First, may I ask the minister to join me and, I hope, other members in wishing Tommy Sheridan and Gail all the best for their wedding on Saturday?

People should not read too much into that. Will the council establish a joint ministerial committee on pensioners and pensioner poverty? If so, will the minister learn the lessons of the Government in Ireland, where pensioners receive 30 per cent more, in real terms, than do pensioners in Scotland? Will he press for Scottish pensioners to get the same standard of living as their Irish counterparts?

Mr Neil's.

The SNP is well qualified to speak about these subjects, as we have a strong connection with the world of espionage. If I am interrupted, I will be shaken but not stirred. [Laughter.] I see that the acting First Minister is not very quick on the uptake these days—perhaps he is too busy. I agree with the points that Gordon Jackson has made, because there is no doubt that the revelations of recent years about the misuse of powers of surveillance have led people—not only in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom—to be suspicious of the legality of some of the activities of organisations such as MI5 and MI6, and of some police forces. Rather than leaving the wording loose, which could lead to careless interpretation, we should, as Gordon suggested, revise the wording at stage 2 to improve it substantially. I do not say that because I believe in conspiracy theory. However, as a young man working for the Labour party—when it was a Labour party—

It was a long time ago. Duncan was in his 40s. [Laughter.]  I remember standing on the terrace with Ted Short—at that time deputy Prime Minister—who knew that he was the subject of a conspiracy by the security services, which were planting stories  in the press about bank accounts in Switzerland, among other things. We now know—following the revelations of Peter Wright and all the others—that some of Harold Wilson's suspicions during his second premiership were well founded. We are not talking only about people who operate at a fairly low level. People who operate at the most senior levels of Government in this country have been the subject of misuse of surveillance and other powers that the security services and others possess. It is extremely important, when we are framing legislation of this nature, which touches on our basic rights as citizens, that we get the wording right. We must ensure that our rights are fully protected. I would also like to draw attention to section 27(7)(b) of the bill and the reference to activity that "is conducted by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose." Again, the common purpose is open to interpretation, especially when we consider the definition of very extreme activities.

I did not use the words "fundamentally flawed". But to go back to "very extreme"—I have been called very extreme, even in this chamber. However, I am sure that nobody, on any side of the chamber, has me under surveillance. [MEMBERS: "Behind you."] I am now exceeding my four minutes. My final point is that the House of Commons has substantial procedures and support functions in place, through Tom King's Intelligence and Security Committee, to scrutinise the security services and to ensure that there is no misuse of the powers that they exercise. Now that Scottish ministers are in place, with substantial powers of surveillance, albeit within devolved matters, this Parliament should consider the establishment of a parallel procedure—a watchdog committee—to ensure that there is no abuse of those powers in Scotland. We should consider that sensible suggestion because part of our function as parliamentarians is to scrutinise the Executive and to ensure that there is no abuse of power in such areas. Before the acting First Minister falls asleep, I suggest that there is a strong case for the establishment of such a parallel committee in this Parliament, to ensure  that civil rights in Scotland are fully protected under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill.

Will the member give way?

Most people would agree with Gordon Jackson about the need for balance between surveillance, justice and controls. Does he agree that members of the Parliament might have much more confidence in the effectiveness of those controls if the Scottish Executive ministers were brought into the loop for approval and were informed about all types of surveillance in Scotland, rather than the bill being some sort of secret weapon from London?

On the same point, I believe that in recent months there  was a transfer of responsibility for the approval of phone tapping and other such activities from the First Minister to Whitehall ministers. If that is indeed the case, will Mr Wallace or the First Minister ever be aware that anyone is under surveillance for political reasons? Would they know if that were happening to anyone in Scotland? Are they part of the approval process for the surveillance of politically active people in Scotland?

Is the minister aware of the incident that was reported in The Herald on Tuesday of a 20-month-old child being left to leave Flowerbank nursery in Kilmarnock and who was later found on a busy road? Is she further aware that that was the latest of three such incidents in East Ayrshire? Will she and her colleagues institute an immediate inquiry into the operation of nursery and primary school education in East Ayrshire, to ensure that standards are put in place to avoid any repetition of such incidents?

One of the biggest problems of the past 20 years has been the balkanisation of economic development services in Scotland. We are getting to the point in this small country where almost every hamlet has its own tourism strategy, food strategy, technology strategy and so on. There is a need at area and at regional level to consider the needs of the economy, but let us not detract from the need for a national economic development strategy in Scotland. We cannot compete effectively in the key technologies of tomorrow—nanotechnology, optoelectronics, biotechnology and so on—on the basis of an Ayrshire strategy, a Fife strategy or a Highland strategy. There has to be a Scottish strategy with an element of local economic delivery. Let us distinguish between economic development and part of economic development: business development. Economic development covers business development, but it also covers transport, education, skills, housing, health and a range of other services. The local economic forums should include people from the transport and education sectors, as well as the business development, training and other sectors, so that everybody is talking the same language and is committed to the economic development strategy at local level. There is a need for a national economic development forum, bringing everybody together, so that they can agree on the national strategy, which should be bottom up, as well as having an element of top down. I welcome some of the changes that Bob Crawford has already made at national level to the structure of Scottish Enterprise. However, two or three other changes are required. First, there is a strong case for transferring responsibility for volume training and elements of area regeneration to other bodies; in particular, volume training could be transferred to the lifelong learning section of the enterprise and lifelong learning department and the responsible agencies therein. Secondly, there is a need to look at the external organisation furth of Scotland. I welcome Bob  Crawford's integration of the international operations of Scottish Enterprise. However, when we operate abroad, our tourism is still handled via the British Tourist Authority, which is actually the English tourist authority, and there is a separate operation for inward investment and a separate operation, Scottish Trade International, for exports. Surely the logical thing to do is to integrate our operations furth of Scotland so that there can be a one-door approach. When someone walks into the Scotland shop in Cologne, Boston or Chicago, they should be able to get information on trading with Scotland, visiting Scotland and investing in Scotland. That would help to raise the international image of Scotland. One of the problems that we face, in Europe and elsewhere, is that too many people still see us as being part of a heather-and-haggis culture, rather than a modern industrial nation. It is as important to get it right furth of Scotland as it is to get it right inside Scotland. Most of the companies, be they start-ups or indigenous companies, come to the enterprise network primarily for assistance with funding. However, services are wholly inadequate in the area of risk funding and venture capital for different sizes of business. We must address that urgently. My final point—in this ridiculous system of four-minute speeches—relates to the one small area in which I disagree with the committee. Local enterprise companies should not be made into membership-based organisations. That was one of the fatal flaws with the area tourist boards and one of the reasons why many of them fell apart. We must keep the local enterprise company as a funded organisation independent of any local vested interest.

I take it that George Lyon lost his bet.

I could not agree more about the need for strategy, but Scottish Enterprise produced three economic strategies during the 1990s, plus strategies on skills, tourism and a range of other matters. The problem has been that we have had strategies coming out of our ears, but they just gather dust on the shelf. Nothing ever happens—they are never implemented. If there is to be a strategy, there must also be a commitment to implement it.

A study that was carried out in Renfrewshire about three years ago showed that, over a period, the 80 per cent of start-ups that had not come through the enterprise network had survival and growth rates significantly higher than those of the 20 per cent of start-ups that had. The reasons for that need to be addressed. It seems that the enterprise network is missing a substantial proportion of start-ups. The rate of start-ups in Scotland is again in decline, and the enterprise network appears to be missing the boat with a lot of top-quality start-ups.

Mr Wallace said that my bill on arrestments has some flaws, but he has not yet seen it. I suggest that he examine the draft of the bill. He will realise that I deal with a number of the issues that he raises. Bank arrestments, as I am sure he is aware, total about 100,000 a year. This will be a useful measure—to say the least—pending the implementation of wholesale reform. I am willing to accept reasonable amendments from the Executive if it will give some backing to the bill. My second point is in relation to the remit of the working party. One issue that has not been mentioned by Mr Wallace is loan sharking. I hope that part of the remit of the working party will be to deal firmly with loan sharking, which is a major problem in Scotland. Thirdly, in addition to the secondary legislation to extend the exemptions, will the minister consider other immediate measures that could be taken, in particular to give a guarantee to local authorities that are not going to use poindings and  warrant sales that they will not be penalised? Will the minister issue guidance on the behaviour of sheriff officers, which is abominable in many parts of Scotland? Will he also issue guidance to all public sector agencies in Scotland that when they try to collect debt they should not send a one-off letter to people, threatening that if they do not pay the whole sum within 10 days they will be taken to court? A more humane way of communicating about debt should be established in the public sector as a matter of priority, given that 80 per cent of poindings and warrant sales are from public sector agencies.

What about loan sharks?

As I was born and brought up in Patna, I agree with John McAllion that Scotland is much more than the  Glasgow-Edinburgh axis. I will concentrate on the benefits of the Borders rail link to the wider Scottish economy. The current pressure on the Edinburgh economy, which is likely to be exacerbated over the next two decades or so, has not been mentioned. The City of Edinburgh Council produced a report a couple of months ago that predicted that up to 25,000 new jobs will be created in Edinburgh over the next few years. We all know about the pressures on the property market in Edinburgh, as young people in particular find it extremely difficult to find accommodation that is within their reach. We also know about the pressures on the labour market in Edinburgh. Businesses often find it difficult to recruit people, particularly those with the skills they require. We are in danger of recreating in Scotland the position of the south-east of England vis-à-vis the rest of the country—one small pocket becomes overheated while the rest of the country certainly does not overheat and, in some places, such as the Borders, is in a state of depression. The economic conditions in the Borders are the opposite of those prevailing in Edinburgh. The Borders has an average wage level that is 10 per cent below the Scottish average and a level of unemployment that is high and rising. It faces the prospect of major deindustrialisation and depopulation, particularly among the young people who are required to resuscitate the local economy. I hope that the rail link will help to regenerate the economy of the Borders and take some of the pressure off Edinburgh. It would give people who are unemployed in the Borders greater access to the wider labour market in Edinburgh and the surrounding area. It would also allow companies that can no longer expand in the Edinburgh area because of lack of accommodation or appropriate labour to examine the Borders as a realistic alternative location for investment. It would allow the property market in the Borders to develop while removing some of the inflationary pressures in the property market in Edinburgh. On this occasion, what is good for the Borders is also good for Edinburgh and the wider Lothian and Scottish economy. It is important to register that this is not a parochial issue about how we link up the Borders or tackle its economic problems; it is a national issue about how we maximise the resources and potential of the Scottish economy and the Scottish people. Neither is this only a transport or railway issue; it is a wider issue of economic and social development and ensuring access for people in the Borders to greater economic and social opportunities. Mike Russell touched on the key question of when the link will happen. There are two points.  First, when it happens is unfortunately not the decision of this Parliament, although it should be. The minister referred to the McLeish settlement, part of which was that the minister would be able to issue instructions to the rail authority. That has now been reneged upon. The minister should reinstate the word and spirit of the McLeish convention so that this Parliament controls the decision making. John McAllion has already covered my second point, which is about the money. There are two reports in the papers this morning, the first on the UK transport budget for the next 10 years. We are told that £140 billion will be made available. Scotland's share of that should be roughly £14 billion. Surely out of that £14 billion we can find the money for the Borders rail link.

I am winding up.

I am obviously winding the minister up. We are told that Scotland's share of the comprehensive spending review will be £12 billion over the next few years. The money is available—money should not be the argument. Today's debate is a litmus test of the Parliament. Are we an assembly that is able to debate the issue, full of motherhood and apple pie, or are we a Parliament that can deliver for the people of Scotland?

I put two concerns and one idea to Mr McConnell. First, will he give a commitment that we will not have a repeat, north of the border, of the sham consultation on the national health service south of the border, when 12 million people have been given five days to reply? That is an engagement in kidology, not consultation. Secondly, will Mr McConnell tell us what will happen in relation to funding after the period of pump priming for the Civic Forum? What are the potential sources of funding once the Executive's money dries up? Will he guarantee that the Civic Forum will not rely in future on vested interests to fund its activities? Thirdly, I will rekindle an old idea, from old Labour days, of an industrial parliament as part of the network of organisations to be consulted, which would bring together both sides of industry, perhaps twice a year, to examine the industrial and commercial future of Scotland. It would feed into this Parliament ideas from grass-roots trade unionists, managers and entrepreneurs about the way forward for the Scottish economy.

Will the member give way?

I will make two points instead of three. There is unanimity in the Parliament on the condemnation of racial prejudice in all its ugly formats. Phil Gallie asked about the cost of implementing the legislation. My answer to that question is very simple: this is one instance in which the price cannot be too high. The cost of not implementing the additional measures and not eradicating any aspect of racial prejudice and hatred from our society is the cost that would be too high—not the cost of implementing the proposals.

I am sorry, but I have only two minutes. We should not underestimate the problem in Scotland; it would be foolish of us to do so. About 45 per cent of all racially motivated incidents in Scotland relate to the Pakistani community. We need to take initiatives in a whole range of areas, to ensure that prejudice against the Pakistani community in particular is tackled as a matter of priority. Other forms of racial prejudice are equally deplorable, no matter how numerically insignificant such cases are. It is my party's policy that any racial prejudice against anyone from south of the border is as abhorrent as any other form of racial prejudice, as indeed is any so-called anti-Jock prejudice south of the border. The issue transcends borders, not just between Scotland and England, but between this country—the UK—and every other country. Racism in any form is deplorable. I have done a lot of work in Romania. The racism there against the 10 per cent of the population who are the real Romans—the gypsies—is as abhorrent as prejudice against the Pakistani community in Scotland. We should not just take initiatives in Scotland, the UK and Europe  but, because this is an international issue, adopt a global approach. As well as considering what the bill legislates against, I urge the Executive to produce a series of specific initiatives actively to promote racial harmony in Scotland and elsewhere.

rose—

Phil Gallie asks why we need additional legislation, particularly in relation to law enforcers. I remind him that this issue has arisen because of the failure of law enforcers in London to enforce the existing race relations legislation. It is the view of the chief constable of Strathclyde police that additional legislation is required for the police force and other law enforcement organisations.

Will Angus MacKay take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

The minister is feart.

rose—

As I listened to the minister's speech this morning, I was reminded of the motto of my old school: "Respice, Prospice" which means "Look backward, look forward". If I may say so, the minister was all respice and nae prospice. The minister presented what for once is, I hope, an additional £12 million for Glasgow's housing. However, with all due respect to her, £12 million is a drop in the ocean compared with the needs and problems facing Glasgow. It would have been far more exciting if the minister had told us this morning that she has reached an agreement with the Chancellor of the Exchequer that Glasgow is to get its share of the £22 billion of mobile phone money. It would have been an announcement worth making if she had said that she had earmarked, say, £500 million for investment in Glasgow.

The answer to Phil Gallie's question is no—I do not recognise that that £22 billion comes from privatisation. I agreed with the minister when she said that the root cause of the problem in Glasgow is the level of unemployment and worklessness. The challenge that faces us all is how to tackle that  problem of deep-rooted unemployment, which is the source of poverty, deprivation, food poverty, malnutrition, low educational achievement, poor health and all the rest. In her discussions with the chancellor, I hope that, when she addresses the problems of Glasgow, she will turn his attention to the research published yesterday by Nuffield College at the University of Oxford that demonstrated that cities such as Glasgow, Newcastle and Liverpool suffer most from the fact that the pound is over-valued by 25 per cent. The problems of Glasgow require national as well as local solutions. Worklessness and joblessness are at the core of the problem, as is depopulation. Where there is both unemployment and depopulation, the result is a vicious cycle of decline. As young people leave the city, they take with them purchasing power, which, in turn, results in more unemployment. More unemployment and fewer job opportunities then result in more depopulation. The problem of Glasgow's depopulation is not only the crude figure of a net loss of 200,000— [Interruption.]

I will give way in a minute, but to which minister—the good-looking one or the other one?

I know how to cause confusion on the Labour benches.

There is one thing about small minds—facts never confuse them. The fact of life is that the SNP has been in the vanguard of the campaign not just for a minimum wage but for a far better minimum wage than we now have. When we examine the problem of what to do about Glasgow, we should remember that the issue does not concern just Glasgow: what is good for Glasgow is also good for Scotland. Glasgow is the hub for the whole of the west of Scotland. I want to make some suggestions, particularly  about the level of investment. Glasgow is neither the first nor the only city to face these problems and the Executive should consider what other cities in similar situations have done. For example, Austin in Texas faced similar problems and adopted a strategy to make itself the brains capital of America. However, making Glasgow the brains capital of Scotland might be a difficult task for Glasgow Labour councillors. [Laughter.]  If Barcelona and Boston can resolve such problems, Glasgow can do it too—but that will happen only when the Executive is prepared to invest real money and not a pittance of £12 million.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will ask the appropriate joint ministerial committee to initiate a review of the new deal. (S1O-1679)

We all share the objective of getting people off welfare and into work. However, will the minister take cognisance of the report published last month by the House of Commons Select  Committee on Education and Employment, which concluded that the new deal was not operating effectively enough in areas of high unemployment? In view of the fact that less than a fifth of the new deal budget for Scotland has been spent in the past three years, does the minister think that now is the appropriate time to devolve all responsibility for the new deal in Scotland to the Scottish Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to make a policy statement on debt recovery law in Scotland. (S1O-1602)

Will the minister state that—contrary to press reports at the weekend allegedly coming from the Executive—the Executive has no intention of killing the Abolition of Poindings and  Warrant Sales Bill by stealth? Furthermore, will he give an assurance that he will set the objective of having that bill and the complementary measures ready for implementation no later than 2001?

Does the First Minister agree that one of the best ways in which to celebrate the anniversary of the Parliament would be to transfer substantially more of the reserved powers from Westminster to this Parliament, which would make a real difference to the people of Scotland and would give the Parliament, in particular, fiscal independence and guaranteed representation in Europe?

On a point of order. Surely—

It is point of order.

The minister should tell us now. Will the Executive withdraw the amendment? Yes or no?

That was one of the most disappointing and depressing speeches I have heard in this Parliament in the past year. There is very clearly a majority in the Parliament for getting rid of poindings and warrant sales, and for doing so as a matter of urgency. There are two big issues at stake in today's debate. The first is the common ground on getting rid of poindings and warrant sales. The second is whether we are engaging in the new politics of Scotland or whether we are just playing a waiting game—talking about but not implementing the spirit of the new democracy in Scotland. Jim Wallace talks about another working party. We have had three working parties of this Parliament—cross-party working parties called parliamentary committees. They have spent hour upon hour on a cross-party basis interviewing people. They have read reams of written evidence and listened to hours of oral evidence.

No, as I have only five minutes. Three cross-party working parties have come to the same conclusion independently. That conclusion is that poindings and warrant sales should be abolished—and as soon as possible. Furthermore, the lead committee—the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—has recommended that to give the Executive and others time to introduce other measures, a delay in implementation of the bill should be agreed. In none of the arguments that Jim Wallace advanced today do I see why he cannot vote for the principle of this bill, be prepared at stage 2 and afterwards to lodge amendments on timing and the safeguarding of the interests of small businesses, and use the time gap that is recommended by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee to introduce any additional legislation  that is required. I will tell members why the Executive is against this bill. It has nothing to do with high politics or principle. The Executive is against this bill for only one fundamental reason—because the name of its promoter is Tommy Sheridan and not the Executive. The reasons for abolishing poindings and warrant sales are well recorded by the committees. Tommy Sheridan referred to Karen Whitefield, a member of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee who said quite openly before evidence was taken that she was sceptical about abolition. She was sceptical for one of the reasons that the Deputy First Minister mentioned in his speech: that the abolition of poindings and warrants sales might mean that the poor people who are affected by them would no longer be entitled to credit. After evidence was taken—the minister will know this if he has read the committee's report—Karen Whitefield and others were persuaded, on the basis of the evidence that was received from the Council of Mortgage Lenders and others, that abolition poses no threat to the creditworthiness or credit rating of poor people. If the minister had read the evidence the committees have taken, he would know that that was the conclusion of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. Warrant sales and poindings are barbaric. They are outmoded and they are immoral. They are a direct attack on the poorer sections of our society. They are not designed to deal with those who can pay but will not. The people who are the victims of warrant sales and poindings are those who want to pay but do not have the means to pay. What happens when the bully boys—the sheriff officers—come to the door? Read today's edition of The Herald .

Thanks very much. [Laughter.]  On page 7 of The Herald , somebody called Alec—and it is not this Alec, and I do not think that it is that Alec, Alec Salmond—was the perfect fit for a profile of Mr Average until depression cost him his job a few years ago. He faces the prospect, on Monday, of sheriff officers arriving at his house and seizing the tumble dryer, the television and the hi-fi, which have already been valued at £80 for the lot. That is exactly what it will cost for the sheriff officers to come and poind those three items in the first place. Poindings do not recover debt. Jim Wallace should read the story. At the end there is a plea from Alec and his family to abolish poindings and warrant sales and, in doing so,  introduce what he calls "just a wee bit of humanity" into the system. The present system strips people of their dignity and it strips us as a community of our humanitarian principles. Not only that, it does not achieve its principal aim of recovering debt. Research findings from the Scottish Executive's own central research unit demonstrate that only 22 per cent of the debt is recovered, excluding the expenses of the sheriff officers, which are often not covered. In 82 per cent of cases of individual poindings and warrant sales, not enough money was recovered to pay the sheriff officers, never mind pay off the debt. Let us live up to the expectations of the Scottish people. Let us, in this Parliament, demonstrate that we do not care whose name is on the bill. This is not Tommy's bill, it is not Alec's bill, it is not John's bill—it is the people's bill. It is our responsibility to pass it.

There is a need to maintain the competitiveness of Scottish exports and industry. What is the minister's view on the existing value of sterling? Is it too high, too low, or just about right?

But what is the minister's view?

That is not a national debt—you have got it wrong, Jack.

rose—

I would like to remind Parliament of Mr Lyon's prediction during last year's election. He said that Scotland would be independent within 10 years. At least he has got something right in the past 12 months. I find the kail-yard mentality that has been demonstrated by the three right-wing unionist British parties utterly depressing. The SNP is not interested in cheap debating points about a penny here or a penny there—what is important is Scotland's potential. The other parties tell us that we are subsidy junkies. They say that if it was not for our attachment to London and the largesse that came from 18 years of Tory government and has continued to come from a right-wing Tory Labour Government for the past three years, Scotland would be bankrupt. Why, if Scotland is such a subsidy junkie, does not the Government privatise Scotland, which is what it has done to every other subsidy junkie in the past 20 years? I will tell members why—it is because Scotland is a net contributor to the UK Treasury. We must examine Scotland's potential vis-à-vis our current situation.

I will give way in a moment. We are in an ironic position. We are one of the wealthiest nations in Europe—and not only in terms of oil, although Scotland is western Europe's biggest producer of oil. We produce 30 per cent of Europe's natural gas. Scotland is one of the best food producers in Europe and one of the greatest centres of the electronics industry. Our universities are among the best in the world. By any measure, Scotland is potentially a very wealthy nation. Why is one of the potentially wealthiest nations in Europe one of the poorest nations in Europe? The Executive compares our education and health expenditure with that in England. Why not look at  what is happening in the rest of the European Union? Expenditure per head on health and education in Denmark, Norway and Austria—in every other small country in Europe—far exceeds that in Scotland. Consider the potential that we have as a small nation.

The SNP's ambition is to raise Scotland to the European average and then above the European average. We are not prepared to settle for second or third best.

I will let Jack McConnell intervene in a minute. I will take the oil revenue as one example. Over the next five years, we are going to have—

I will let Robert in first.

I do not accept that there is a structural deficit between Scotland and the UK Treasury. If I were a unionist, I would be ashamed to argue that there is such a deficit: if there is one, under unionist management, they have mismanaged Scotland's wealth. They are admitting that over the past 30 or 40 years, when we have had massive oil revenues—we now have massive revenues from gas and all the other things that I have mentioned—they have so mismanaged resources that we have a structural deficit.

Of course.

The official UK forecast for oil revenues over the next five years is £20 billion; I  am prepared to accept Gordon Brown's assumptions. If we had 85 per cent of that—as we would be entitled to—we could start to raise the levels of investment in education, housing and health in Scotland to European levels. This is a constitutional issue, because until we change the constitutional relationship between Scotland and England—and between Scotland and Europe—Scotland, which is potentially the wealthiest nation in Europe, will continue to be one of the poorest nations in Europe thanks to mismanagement by the three right-wing British unionist parties, which have been so miserable in their contributions to this debate.

Mr Davidson had more power.

Will Mr Davidson give way?

Is it not true that an English parish council has more fiscal power than this Parliament? Unlike this Parliament, an English parish council can borrow and has no cap on its taxation powers. Is it not a disgrace that the Scottish Parliament has less fiscal power than an English parish council?

I ask Mr McConnell to answer the question. Yes or no?

Will Mike Watson take an intervention?

As convener of the Finance Committee, does Mike Watson agree with Mr Spencely, who says, in paragraph 4.3.8: "the Project design is less settled than it was in March 1999 . . . the estimate for the basic construction cost is less reliable than it was in May 1999"? How can he say, on the basis of that statement, what kind of Parliament we will get for £195 million?

Will the member give way?

Will—

The SNP welcomes the publication of the consultation document, "Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland: Modernising the System", and the spirit in which the minister is presenting his proposals. We will not dispute his objectives, except perhaps on the role of Parliament in the confirmation of public appointments—I will address that point later. We urge the minister to produce radical and innovative proposals at the end of the consultation  process. The fact that Parliaments in other European countries do not have a huge role to play should not be an excuse for inaction on our part. There are differences between us and most of our European counterparts; the main one is that they do not rely on quangos to the same extent as we do. For example, in France, the cabinet system makes it unnecessary to have a large number of quangos. Although this is not part of the remit of the document, I urge the minister to undertake, in the not too distant future, a radical review of the number of quangos in Scotland, which has increased in recent years. Some of the legislation that is in the pipeline, such as that on national parks, will increase the number of non-departmental public bodies in Scotland. Excluding children's panels and tribunals, quangos account for £6.5 billion of expenditure—a figure that approaches 50 per cent of all the expenditure under parliamentary control—and for 1,223 appointments in 146 bodies, including national health service bodies. Those appointments represent a substantial spectrum of public administration in Scotland. I hope that, as well as considering appointments, we can examine how to make quangos much more directly accountable, either at Scottish level through ministers or at local level through elected representatives. I beg the minister to undertake such a radical review. Let me concentrate on the proposals in the consultation paper. The minister mentioned in passing one of the reasons why the public appointments system has become so discredited in Scotland—to be fair, not just over the past two or three years, but over the past 50 years. The issue is not so much the cronyism in relation to ethnic or women's representation and so on, important though those issues are—and I will come to that in a minute—but the political cronyism, actual and perceived. Dame Rennie Fritchie, the Commissioner for Public Appointments, produced a report last week on the health service south of the border, which showed that 83 per cent of all the councillors on national health service bodies were from one political party—the Labour party. I have tried to get the equivalent information in Scotland, where I suspect the ratio is not much different. The figures illustrate the need for a much greater spread of representation. There are good Liberals, good Tories and good SNP people who can serve on these bodies. I do not see why such public service posts should be confined to one political party. Although I will not name names or personalise the issue, I cite as an example the chairmanship of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. The chairman claims a salary of £38,000 a year for a three-day week. I remember the three-day week  under Ted Heath. I am sure that Duncan McNeil would have been glad to get £38,000 for a three-day week in the shipyards. Given the salaries in the Parliament for a seven-day week, I do not see any justification for the chairman of SEPA receiving almost the same amount of money for a three-day week. That kind of thing brings the system into disrepute. I want ministers to rid themselves of the power of patronage and, as the minister said, to make the system more accountable. I shall pick up on some specific issues in the consultation document, the first of which is the representation of women. From the total number of appointments, in annexe D, it appears that there is a reasonable balance: 53 per cent male and 47 per cent female. However, tribunals make up about 80 per cent of all appointments. When the representation in tribunals, where males make up 44 per cent and females 56 per cent, is taken out, the gender balance in the remaining public appointments is appalling. In the executive and advisory quangos, 72 per cent and 70 per cent of the appointees, respectively, are male. In the national health service bodies, 61 per cent of appointees are male and only 39 per cent are female. In the nationalised industries, 95 per cent of appointees are male and only 5 per cent are female. In the public corporations, 85 per cent of appointees are male and only 15 per cent are female. In the 21 st century, we cannot justify such gender imbalance on those bodies. Similarly, 0.5 per cent of all appointments involve someone from the ethnic community. Clearly, in a multiracial society such as ours, that is an unacceptable ratio. I welcome the minister's commitment to change that. I promised to keep my speech tight to allow other speakers in, so I shall be brief. The current incumbent of the UK post of Commissioner for Public Appointments is doing an excellent job. However, the policy issue is whether we should have our own commissioner in Scotland. There is no doubt in my mind that that makes sense, but I hope that our commissioner will be appointed by the Parliament and not by ministers. The independence of the commissioner is essential. We have been lucky with the current appointee, but the way in which the commissioner is appointed is extremely important. I would like the Parliament to appoint the commissioner, as well as the independent assessors to ensure that the commissioner is truly independent. I hope that every member will support my member's bill to introduce a system of public confirmation for the key public appointments in Scotland. Let us get rid of ministerial patronage. Let us open up Scotland and make the system  fair, representative, transparent and—above all—accountable.

Is the First Minister aware of the recent research undertaken by Dr Sunley of Edinburgh University and others that demonstrates that up to 75 per cent of the new dealers leave their job after six months and that up to two thirds of those jobs would have been created under other programmes, given the general level of activity in the economy? Is he aware that there is a growing opinion that the new deal is more about massaging figures than about creating real jobs? Will he take steps to improve the effectiveness of the new deal?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it made at the recent European Union  intergovernmental conference, at both ministerial and advisory levels. (S1O-1404)

I do not know what that means, as, this weekend, no minister from the Scottish Executive will be attending the e-commerce summit in Lisbon. Has the Scottish Executive had any input to the discussion document "The E-Commerce Initiative", which was published by the European Commission? Does the minister agree with the European Parliament's rapporteur, who reckons that the e-commerce document that was produced by the Commission does not focus sufficiently on the issues of social cohesion and employment?

Is the First Minister aware that one of the main reasons for depopulation rearing its ugly head again is the increase in net emigration from Scotland? Last year, the net civilian migration was -5.4 per cent. Many of those who leave the country are young people, whom we need for the future of Scotland—the people whom Miss Jean Brodie would call la crème de la crème. Will the First Minister take measures to encourage young people to stay in Scotland?

Will the member give way? The Labour Government increased unemployment in Scotland to over 100,000.

The Labour Government increased unemployment in Scotland to over 100,000.

rose—

First, I am the only member of the Institution of Economic Development in the chamber. As such, I am more than happy to offer free economics lectures to Malcolm Chisholm, George Lyon and one or two other members who spoke this morning. Secondly, I intend to concentrate my remarks on what the Parliament can do in the short term, as Mike  Watson described it. We should not kid ourselves, however: this Parliament, with the limited powers and resources available to it, can only do so much. Let me provide two illustrations of that. The first is exchange rate and interest rate policy. The impact of any changes in exchange rates or interest rates, up or down, is far more important than this Parliament's available budget for economic development. Secondly, although the Scottish Enterprise budget, coupled with that of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, is well over £500 million a year, that represents less than 1 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product. Although we want the maximum value from that public sector money, there are limitations to what micro-intervention can achieve in relation to macro-economic policy. We need to get this into perspective: in this Parliament, we have very limited budgetary powers compared with the powers available to Westminster. I will turn to the issues over which we do have some control, and about which we can do something. Essential to a successful manufacturing sector is the availability of the skills required for the new technologies. A report by the National Audit Office about Scottish Enterprise's current skillseekers programme came out last week. That programme represents a fair chunk of Scottish Enterprise's budget. The NAO report showed that about half the people who engage in skillseekers leave the programme before gaining any vocational qualifications. The report also showed that around two thirds of participants would gain places anyway, even without the subsidy that is effectively available through skillseekers. I call on the minister to review urgently the skillseekers programme and consider its relevance to his manufacturing strategy. Individual learning accounts have been set up to address the development of skills. A lot of them have been piloted in various local enterprise companies. The most successful one has probably been the pilot run by Fife Enterprise. However, it is being overruled from Bothwell Street by Scottish Enterprise, which is trying to impose the model for individual learning accounts, which, in turn, has since been imposed from south of the border—from Sheffield. I ask the minister to intervene on that matter. Although it is not strictly in the manufacturing sector, the construction sector is suffering a major skills shortage. Vacancies are therefore not being filled because there are not the skilled people required to fill them. A major short-term boost could be given through Scottish Enterprise and the other agencies to the level of employment in the construction industry by taking urgent action to relieve that skills shortage immediately and to get  people into the construction sector, through apprenticeships, modern apprenticeships and other means. One of the problems with all the funding schemes for small and medium businesses is that the businesses are often tied up in bureaucracy. It takes so long to get funding applications through. I draw members' attention to the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust, which I was involved in setting up, and on whose board Annabel Goldie sits. That nationwide organisation effectively provides venture capital at very favourable, non-commercial rates to young entrepreneurs between the ages of 18 and 25. They can get their money quickly; they receive help with producing their business plan; they get training before they start, if required; for the 18 months to two years after they start, there is an intensive aftercare programme to ensure that their businesses succeed. PSYBT has one of the highest levels of survival and sustainability in Scotland for businesses that are starting up. I therefore ask the minister to consider that model and apply it elsewhere. In response to what Mike Watson said, there are four or five sensible suggestions, but, at the end of the day, we will never solve the manufacturing problem until we get independence.

The SNP agrees that the top priority must be exports. However, the total budget for  Scottish Trade International is around £7 million. The Danes spend more on promoting their bacon abroad than we do on promoting the whole of our industry abroad. Does George Lyon agree that the priorities in Scottish Enterprise's budget must be reordered to allocate proper resources to export promotion, specifically to Scottish Trade International?

I hope that my suggestion is helpful. On the one hand, we have a shortage of software engineers and programmers and, on the other hand, a high percentage of our graduates in those skills leave Scotland shortly after graduating. One of the successful programmes in matching need with supply has been the software graduate placement programme run by Glasgow Development Agency. Will the minister consider the possibility of expanding that programme into other local enterprise company areas, because it has undoubtedly been a major success?

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

I first declare an interest on behalf of Fiona Hyslop and me. We are both from Ayr. Members know what Rabbie said about Ayr: "Auld Ayr, whom ne'er a town surpasses, For honest men and bonie lassies". It seems from the debate that the Prime Minister, Tony Blair, is the only person who does not know where Ayr is. I will discuss the fundamental problem that is faced by post offices and by the people who use them throughout the country. This is not scaremongering—the people who work in post offices, the people who own them and the people who use them have genuine concerns about the future viability of post offices both in rural areas and in peripheral housing schemes in urban areas. There are two major threats to the future of sub-post offices. The first is the reduction in the income generated for post offices by their work on behalf of the Benefits Agency. As Euan Robson rightly said, between now and 2003 there will be a 90 per cent reduction—from 12p to 1p per transaction—in the money paid by the Benefits Agency to post offices for every transaction that they undertake on its behalf. Given that post offices in Scotland rely on Benefits Agency revenue for 40 per cent of their income, that is a substantial reduction in income for post offices and is a threat to their viability. As Euan Robson pointed out, many of those businesses are marginal. In rural areas, many of those businesses are not only post offices, but local village shops—both sides are required to make those businesses viable propositions. Loss of income is a major reason why people are worried.

It is not an inaccuracy, either.

Stephen Byers, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, said that the Benefits Agency, over the next three years, will make that scale of reduction in payments per transaction to the post offices. That is a major threat to the income of the Post Office. The second threat is the introduction of ACT. I take the point that has been made—that ACT will not be made compulsory at the moment. However, Labour's argument is, "Trust us, trust us; we will keep our word—we will never make it compulsory." Those are the same people who asked us to trust them on the privatisation of air traffic control. Before 1997, Labour said, "Trust us—we will never privatise air traffic control." One of the first things that Labour did when it got into government was break its word by privatising air traffic control. People are worried, because they know that this is a Government—in Edinburgh and in London—that they cannot trust. Members should consider the implications for post offices of the projected loss of income—the loss is projected not only by the SNP but by postmasters and other independent organisations. As Euan Robson pointed out, when a local post office suffers a substantial loss of income the results are job losses and closure. Members need only consider what happened when banks closed down. A report by Richard Willis, of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, analysed the effects of bank closures during the past six years. His main conclusions were that the significant closures were in deprived areas—the same will happen with post offices. Post offices in deprived areas rely on the work they do for the Benefits Agency for up to 80 per cent of their income.

I agree with Mr Monteith. The most needed post offices—those in deprived and rural areas—are most likely to close first because of their reliance on income from the Benefits Agency and the cost of running a marginal business in rural areas.

The facts speak for themselves. The minister should have sat through the whole debate and listened to every speech that was made by members of this party before making such accusations. The debate has focused on the worries of people who own, run and work for post offices, but we should consider the effect on people who use post offices. People who collect benefits from the post office include lone parents, unemployed people, pensioners, income support claimants and other low-income groups. We have had no guarantee that bank charges will not be levied on transactions in post offices—the issue is under discussion. Last week, banks south of the border announced that they were considering major new charges. Those charges would make a substantial dent in the income of a pensioner or an unemployed person. The proposals are bad news for post offices, for rural communities, for urban areas, for claimants and for Scotland.

As always.

How can Des McNulty say that Labour's priority is education, when, as Donald Gorrie pointed out, the increase in the education budget for next year is below the rate of inflation—in other words, it is a real cut in the education budget?

To ask the First Minister whether a progress report on the alleviation of child poverty in Scotland will be issued. (S1F-141)

I bring to the attention of the First Minister the report published today by Professor Weaver of the Royal Hospital for Sick Children in Glasgow. The report shows that nearly one fifth of all children coming into hospital in Glasgow suffer from malnutrition; indeed, they are described as dangerously malnourished, primarily as a result of child poverty in Glasgow. Does not that make a nonsense of the target set by the First Minister's Administration to relieve child poverty in 20 years' time? Surely today's children deserve better.

In the five minutes that I have, I hope to make three or four positive points. The modernisation of government is not just about information technology; it is about ensuring that government is open, accountable, transparent and honest. I want to raise a couple of specific points from my experience of dealing with quangos both in the health service and in the enterprise networks. I would like the minister to investigate these points and to come forward with proposals on them. The first relates to procurement and, in particular, to consultancy contracts—and I speak  as someone who has been in practice in economic consultancy for about 12 to 15 years. When there is a contract from a central Government department, it is advertised openly and people can declare their interest in it. A shortlist of consultants is drawn up so that they can be interviewed for the job. However, with the quangos—and, in particular, with the enterprise networks and the health boards—that is not the way that it works. The people who work there decide on a short leet of consultants who will be invited to tender. That system is wide open to favouritism and, in the worst cases, to corruption. I ask the minister to look—as part of the Government's modernising agenda—at the process of procurement and, in particular, at the process of procurement of consultancy contracts in the quangos. We are not talking about a small amount of money. Last year alone, the total consultancy budget of Scottish Enterprise was about £30 million. The minister should investigate that process and come back with some detailed proposals on how it can be cleaned up and made proper and accountable. My second point relates to discrimination. In this Parliament, we quite rightly outlaw any kind of discrimination in relation to race, sexual orientation, ethnicity and so on. I am not making a cheap party political point, but in Labour-controlled councils the length and breadth of Scotland, if people are known to be active in, or supportive of, another political party, it can very often rule them out of a job or out of an invitation to tender, for example. That happens not only in local authorities, but in the pyramid of other organisations in which local councillors are involved—organisations such as local enterprise companies. I know of examples of people being told that they did not get a particular job because of their political allegiance—not because they could not do the job, but simply because of their political allegiance. Such discrimination is as unacceptable as any other kind of discrimination in a modern society. I would like the minister to address that issue as part of the modernising agenda. On quangos, there are two points on which the minister does not need to wait for the consultation exercise to be completed—he can put better practice in place. First, in relation to the role of the existing Commissioner for Public Appointments, only about a third of public appointments in Scotland currently come under her ambit and the code of conduct and open, democratic, transparent process of appointment that she insists upon. I ask the minister to bring, at the stroke of a pen, every public appointment within the ambit of the Commissioner for Public Appointments. That would send a loud and clear signal to everybody in Scotland that we would  have an open and transparent system of appointment. Secondly, I draw the minister's attention to the criteria laid down in "Modernising Trust Ports—A Guide to Good Governance", which have been adopted by the Scottish Executive as well as by the Government in London. Three of those criteria should be applied to every public appointment henceforth. First, appointments by vested interest should be replaced by a system of open competition. The members of too many quangos, or their subsidiary organisations, are appointed by a self-sustaining old boy network rather than being appointed in an open, transparent and competitive way. Secondly, appointments should be for a limited period, so that people are not on a board for 12 or 15 years as if it were their private fiefdom. Thirdly, the performance of individual board members should be monitored and assessed before they are reappointed. In relation to the other interests of board members, members should consider the example of the current chairman of Lanarkshire Development Agency, who is also chairman of Lanarkshire Health Board and has about 12 other board directorships. That is unacceptable in a modern democracy. I say to the minister: modernise government, but clean up government. Send a loud and clear message by taking steps that would put an end to the old boy network, which has run—and in some parts, ruined—Scotland for the past 50 years.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its plans are for dealing with food poverty. (S1O-1153)

Is the minister aware that the current initiatives only cover a maximum of 20,000 people, a low proportion of those who live in poverty? Is he aware that a recent report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation proved that such initiatives have very little impact on inequality and poverty in Scotland? Will he substantially increase the size of the programme, eliminate any complacency from the Executive's approach and give top priority to abolishing food poverty in Scotland?

I will begin by disagreeing with a comment made by the Minister for Finance in his opening statement. He said that "the Scottish economy is in excellent shape." That is one of the most complacent statements that the Parliament has heard in the past 10 months. Let us examine the state of the Scottish economy. There are still about 130,000 people on the dole; that is not an excellent state for them to be in. Secondly, Scotland is suffering from depopulation and a brain drain.

I am sorry—I have only four minutes. Earlier this week, a forecast suggested that, if the depopulation in Scotland continues at its present rate, the country's population will be down to just over 3 million by the end of the next century. Scotland is the only country in western Europe that is suffering from such a level of depopulation. Depopulation and unemployment feed on each other. We should not underestimate the structural problems in the Scottish economy that result from depopulation, in particular the brain drain of the young and the bright—the very people whom we need to rebuild the Scottish economy. Our industrial base is one of the narrowest in western Europe. We rely on three or four industries, each of which faces particular difficulties. We rely on only three or four sectors for 75 to 80 per cent of all our exports. On priorities, the Minister for Finance should look at the budget of Scottish Enterprise, which spends £30 million a year on consultants and £7 million a year on export promotion. As a country, we spend less on the promotion of all our exports than the Danes spend on promoting their bacon abroad. Surely we should get our priorities right and turn those figures round—we should be spending £30 million on export promotion and perhaps £7 million on consultants. We are suffering because of the inflation—in particular, the 30 per cent hike in house prices in the south of England—that has forced the Bank of Scotland to jack up interest rates to twice their real level in mainland Europe. That means that our businesses—big, medium or small—pay twice as much to borrow money as do their competitors in euro-land. It is commonly accepted in the City of London that the exchange rate is overvalued to the tune of about 25 per cent. Look at the other structural problems in the  Scottish economy, such as the fact that we rely almost totally on inward investment for the growth of wealth and jobs in Scotland. Until three years ago, Labour members agreed that we had such problems, but now that they are in office everything has suddenly become rosy. We still face those structural problems. We do not have the indigenous growth that a modern economy requires from its small and medium businesses, and a high percentage of our businesses is owned by foreign companies. To say that the Scottish economy is in excellent shape is a statement of complacency that is beyond belief. We need a budget that will tackle Scotland's fundamental economic and social problems. Spending on health and education may be going up, but that is because spending on housing, transport and enterprise is going down. The Executive is robbing Peter to pay Paul.

The alternative is to have fiscal autonomy, so that instead of giving a 1p tax cut to those who do not need it, we invest the money in essential services in Scotland. Another part of the solution would be for us to get our share of the budget surplus of £7 billion to £12 billion this year, which would be well over £1 billion. From those two measures alone, we would have an extra £1.5 billion to spend on essential services. That would help to generate jobs, tackle poverty, solve the housing problem and all the rest of it. The answer is there; the problem is that we need fiscal autonomy to be able to implement it.

I also wish Hannah many happy returns. I thank the minister for the provision of an advance copy of the statement, which was helpful, and give a general welcome to the principles that it contains. In particular, I welcome the pledge to encourage more women, disabled people and people from ethnic minority communities to participate in the public sector and in public appointments. There are three issues that I would like the minister to address. First, will he consider conducting a parallel review of the number of quangos that exist in Scotland? The spending figure for those quangos is almost equivalent to what local authorities throughout Scotland spend  in a year—£6.5 billion. Although we welcome the review, we think that there is a need for a fundamental cull of quangos in Scotland. Secondly, will the minister address in detail the role of the Parliament? As he knows, we would welcome the introduction of US Senate-style powers to this Parliament, so that, when controversial nominations are made, the Parliament has a role to play and can ensure that those who are running the quangos and other public agencies are of the right calibre to do so. Thirdly, will the minister tell us which quangos will be covered in the report? Will nationalised industries such as Caledonian MacBrayne come under that regime? It is our opinion that they should. Will the judiciary come under that regime or a separate review? We are all agreed that we must put an end to the old boys' network that operates in the judiciary in Scotland. Finally, will he include the special advisers—regarding their appointments, although he will have no power over their dismissals or resignations? Finally—

Last week, we heard that one person who chairs two quangos holds 14 directorships. How can anyone run two major public organisations at the same time as being on 12 other boards?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the progress being made on the upgrade of the A77. (S1O-1034)

Is the minister aware that there is suspicion and concern in Ayrshire about possible delays and in particular about the timing of the Glasgow southern orbital route? Will she confirm and give a guarantee that the upgrade of the A77 will not be held back by any delay in the Glasgow southern orbital route?

Presiding Officer, I am standing in for Adam Ingram who has had a family bereavement. He has a special constituency interest in this debate. I would like to concentrate on the privatisation of the air traffic control service. Our position is clear—to sell off NATS is nuts. The minister talks about the Scottish Parliament being brought into disrepute. If anything were going to bring the Scottish Parliament into disrepute, it would be a failure of the Scottish Parliament to speak up on behalf of the vast majority of the Scottish people who are totally opposed to the privatisation and sell-off of the air traffic control service. If anything or anybody is being brought into disrepute, it is new Labour. When the Tories were in power, it was new Labour that led the fight against privatisation. Andrew Smith, its transport spokesman prior to 1997, said: "Our air is not for sale." That was before the election. After the election, new Labour is saying: "The air is for sale  to the highest bidder." George Robertson said that the privatisation, in part or in whole, of the air traffic control service would be outrageous and disgraceful. How can it be outrageous and disgraceful prior to 1997, but okay in 2000, and outrageous and disgraceful to criticise it? Privatising air traffic control would be nuts for two reasons. It would be dangerous and economically ridiculous.

Normally, I would love to let Murray Tosh intervene, but he had 10 minutes and I have only four. I intend to use them. Murray Tosh said that what matters in terms of safety is culture and investment. The culture of safety is the predominant reason why the only country in the world to privatise air traffic control has been Fiji. Every other country, including the United States, has its air traffic control in the public sector. They have it in the public sector for safety reasons.

We should not underestimate the importance of air traffic control as an industry for the future. Projections for the next 10 to 15 years show a doubling of air traffic worldwide. Over the past year alone at Prestwick and at the Oceanic centre, there has been an 8 per cent growth in the number of flights. Prestwick now handles more than 1,000 transatlantic flights every day of the year. That employs more than 650 people. Privatisation will lead to profit coming before safety. It would be madness from an economic point of view as well as madness from a safety point of view. If there is one organisation that more than pays its way in the public sector, it is National Air Traffic Services. If its external borrowing limit were raised to the necessary levels, it could fund any investment required. It can and does provide a return on capital to the public sector of around 8 per cent a year. The move to privatise, which will generate perhaps £350 million of one-off capital investment over a period of 10 to 15 years, will cost the public sector an enormous amount of money and will lead to asset stripping. A total of 60 per cent of the costs of NATS is on staff costs. The only way in which it can be made profitable to get a return for the private investor is to make it unsafe by cutting down staff and by making staff conditions worse. The policy is total madness.

In his dreams.

In the space of four minutes, I will be able to address three points. I would first like to mention something that has not come up in the debate—the lack of commitment to implementation of the other recommendations of the Cubie committee. I say that particularly in respect of benefit entitlement for students. When the minister began his statement yesterday, he made it clear that the Executive would consider such matters— [Interruption.]

When the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning made his statement, he said that he hoped to make a further statement in the spring on the other recommendations in the Cubie report. Yesterday, however, in the Edinburgh Evening News , the First Minister was quoted as saying that the Scottish Cabinet had no intention of referring the other recommendations on student benefits to the UK Government. I ask the minister to make it clear when he sums up that that is not the Executive's position and that the Executive's position is, as was stated yesterday, that it will take up the recommendations of the Cubie committee on benefit entitlement and other related issues. I hope that the Executive will, through the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and the joint ministerial committee of this and the other Parliaments of the UK, examine implementation of the other proposals in the Cubie report. I say that with particular reference to the restoration of benefit entitlement to students during the summer vacation if they cannot get work. The recommendation that there should be a £1,500 child care allowance for lone parents and the recommendations on benefit safeguards for full-time mature students should also be implemented. When we talk about the student population, we often think of it as consisting of young people only. A college principal told me the other day that the average age of a student in his college is 37 or 38. The position of mature students is extremely important. We must get a commitment from the Executive that the other recommendations will be examined seriously, and that their implementation will be pursued here and at Westminster.  I would also like to deal with the deferred tuition tax, which raises two poverty issues. One is student poverty, on which we rightly focused this morning. The second is graduate poverty. As Margo MacDonald pointed out, the kinds of work that graduates are landed with are low-paid, poverty-wage jobs in McDonald's and elsewhere. The deferred tuition tax is an attack on the living standards of graduates who have low incomes. Their total tax liability will be 25 per cent higher as a result of having to pay the deferred tuition tax than it would otherwise be. For somebody who earns between £10,000 and £15,000, that is substantial taxation. When members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee consider these proposals in detail, I ask them to address that issue and to examine ways of changing the approach. It is clear that the change in the threshold from £17,000 to £10,000 will condemn many more people to poverty after they have graduated. As Tommy Sheridan pointed out, £10,000 is well below the poverty income level that ministers have referred to more than once. My third point is that, if Scotland were independent, we would have to pay for the 20,000 English students who study at Scottish universities—the Lib Dems are making a big issue of that. As a nationalist and an internationalist, I say that we would be delighted to fund 20,000 English students at Scottish universities, at a cost of just under £10 million. However, that is not a cost—it is an investment. Unlike those of a kailyard mentality on the Lib-Lab benches, we want to see Scotland's universities welcome students from all over Europe, in the same way as the Irish, who have just abolished tuition fees, welcome Scots, English and other European students.

Unfortunately, I am summing up, although I am always keen to give way to Keith Raffan.

I have told Mr Raffan that I am summing up.

We have used good examples in our questions, but we have not received answers. This morning, Bruce Crawford cited the example of a student going to the University of St Andrews for the first three years of a course and then to Manchester for the next two or three years. Of course, we would have to pay for that student. If Scottish students have to go furth of Scotland or furth of the UK to get a proper education, they are entitled to do so. If education is free— [Interruption.] I do not know of any course that is available in California that is not available in Scotland or in other parts of the UK. Let me sum up with these three points, which are bad news for the Lib Dems. First, through the deferred tuition tax, the Executive is condemning graduates and students to poverty. Secondly, the Executive must make a commitment to implement the rest of the Cubie recommendations. Thirdly, let us be proud to be internationalists and to welcome students to Scotland from all over Europe.

I wish to ask the First Minister about the joint ministerial committee on poverty, which he says has already met once. Will he raise in that committee the issue of pensioner poverty in Scotland? In particular, will he make representations through the committee about the minimum income guarantee? It is a very minimum income, and given that 60,000 pensioners in Scotland who are entitled to get it do not get it, it is certainly no guarantee.

If next year's penny cut in income tax is frozen, exactly how much additional money will that raise for the national health service in Scotland?

I thank the minister for giving way; I always hate to interrupt his peroration. However, has not he ignored expenditure on housing, which will affect not just the housing situation of the Scottish people but  their health? Furthermore, does he agree that, at the end of this period of spend, capital spending on housing in Scotland will be substantially down on what it was in real terms five years ago?

I draw the minister's attention to the part of her statement that dealt with the impact of these charges on low-income households and to the fact that she has asked her officials to examine ways of improving the protection provided by the current charging arrangements. In terms of the minister's instructions to her officials, what is her definition of a low-income household? What options has she asked the officials to consider? What time scale have those officials been given to report back and make recommendations?

I want to deal with two or three specific points because it is difficult to do otherwise in four minutes. I will deal first with what is for many people the immediate issue of the warm deal. For punters and professionals alike, the warm deal has already become an ordeal and it has become an ordeal for three reasons. First, the implementation arrangements have been utterly shambolic. I call on the minister to do something about that and to do it urgently. Secondly, it is linked to another failed programme—the new deal. As Frank McAveety admitted on "Newsnight Scotland" last night, the new deal has failed to achieve its objectives in Scotland.

I watched the programme and I think that Frank McAveety did accept that point.

I have only four minutes and will  move on to the third reason why the warm deal is a failure: it is the poor cousin of the home energy efficiency scheme, which is a similar programme down south. Instead of a maximum grant of £700, people are entitled to up to £2,000, including provision for assistance with the installation of central heating. Given the different weather conditions in Scotland, something more akin to that scheme would be more appropriate than the ordeal of the warm deal. Housing benefit reform, which has not been mentioned at all during this debate, is the second major issue that I wish to highlight, although I cannot go into it in detail in four minutes. Unfortunately, it is a reserved matter. I would like it to be transferred to the Scottish Parliament as part of our responsibility for housing. I do not see how it is possible to have a comprehensive and effective national housing strategy without also having control over the housing benefit regime and the budget that goes with it. Housing benefit accounts for two thirds of all public spending on housing in Scotland and some of the reforms that are being proposed will do much to undermine the initiatives on homelessness, stock transfer and other aspects of the housing policy announced this morning. For example, in 1996, the Tory Government introduced new rules for under-25s living in single rooms, the effect of which was to force young people under 25 on to the streets of our towns and cities. As part of the homelessness initiative, I would like a reversal of that amendment to the housing benefit regime, as it would go a long way towards dealing with the problem of homelessness among certain categories of under-25s. Similarly, it is proposed that less than 100 per cent of rental costs will be met from housing benefit, which will have the effect of throwing more people on to the streets. The taper on housing benefit is a marginal tax rate of up to 65 per cent on the poorer sections of our community. Three or four months ago, when the Minister for Communities appeared before the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, she said that she had no policy on housing benefit reform and would not submit representations on behalf of the Executive or the Parliament to the Secretary of State for Social Security. If the minister really wants to tackle homelessness seriously and to achieve the policy objectives she announced in her statement this morning, she must submit a major piece of evidence to the secretary of state to ensure that housing benefit reform complements those objectives, rather than undermines them, and that this Parliament is given control over housing benefit budgets and legislation.

Will Robert Brown give way?

rose—

On behalf of my party, I take exception to some of the remarks that have just been made. I was brought up in the United Free Church of Scotland in a small mining village in south Ayrshire. My grandmother was a Catholic. Since I can remember, I have abhorred discrimination for or against Catholics throughout society, in Scotland or anywhere else. The first job that I had was as a 14-year-old schoolboy—a summer job as a cleaner in Butlin's holiday camp. The first question that I was asked was, "Whit fit dae ye kick wi?" I did not even know what the question meant. When I found out, I was disgusted. I say to Mary Mulligan that today's debate is not a party political question for the Tories, the SNP, the Labour party or the Lib Dems. Surely the Parliament can rise to the occasion. Surely we can lift our sights above petty party politics. This debate is about a fundamental principle. I agree with Tom McCabe that the Act of Settlement is not the talk of the steamie—if there are any steamies left in Scotland. I agree with what Tommy Sheridan said and with what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, and I agree with Mike Rumbles that Lord James's speech was probably the best that we have heard in this chamber. The debate is about the message that we want to send out as a new Parliament for a new Scotland in a new millennium. It is about the symbolism of the Act of Settlement and the symbolism of the continued existence of legislation on the statute book that embodies an element of sectarianism and of discrimination against Catholics.

The SNP's approach to dealing with such people is in its constitution.

It is in our every vessel and vein to deal with anyone, whether they are members of the SNP or the Labour party or anyone else, who is practising or preaching sectarianism, anti-Catholic or otherwise, or discrimination, anti-  English or otherwise. We want a modern Scotland, a modern Britain, a modern Europe and a modern world in which the human rights of every individual are safeguarded. I speak as someone with republican sympathies, like my friend Roseanna Cunningham. The fact that someone is a member or prospective member of the royal family does not mean that they should have their human rights undermined. This is about the human rights not just of a potential Catholic spouse of a monarch, but of the monarch himself or herself. If the monarch is a Protestant and is not allowed to marry a Catholic, that is a denial of his or her human rights as well.

My substantive point stands—the act is a denial of human rights on both sides. People have made a big issue of the fact that this Parliament does not have the legislative power to change the Act of Settlement. Of course it does not. We know that. This Parliament operates at three levels. We operate at the legislative level, although we do not have legislative power on this matter. We also operate on a political level and a moral level. Mary Mulligan used the word responsibility. The Parliament does not have legislative responsibility on this matter, but I argue that we have the moral and political responsibility to send a loud and clear message—not just to Westminster and not just to people south of the border, but to our own people here in Scotland—that the Parliament will not tolerate any form of discrimination or anti-Catholic behaviour. I agree with John McAllion that discrimination in Scotland will not end if the motion is carried or even if the act is repealed. However, this debate is about sending a loud and clear message that the Parliament is determined to end discrimination. The Act of Settlement is one part of that; it is only the beginning. We will take whatever measures necessary to convey to the people of Scotland, and of further afield, that this new Parliament and the new Scotland will not tolerate discrimination of any kind at any time, irrespective of political party.

Is it not the case that, to pass the Scotland Bill, the number of acts of Parliament that required amendment far exceeded eight? Does the minister agree that amending that multitude of acts to establish this Parliament was a worthwhile exercise?

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Raffan give way?

Will Mr Raffan point out where in Mr McConnell's budget the money has been set aside to pay for his party's policy of abolishing tuition fees?

Does Andrew Wilson think that Mr Lyon does not realise that the Irish have abolished tuition fees?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many times the First Minister has met the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry since May 1999. (S1O-791)

I suggest that the First Minister should arrange a meeting with the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and say to him that, over the past two years, an eighth of all quoted companies based in Scotland have disappeared, either through takeovers or mergers, which represents a major erosion of the economic base in many sectors of the Scottish economy. Will he press for powers over takeovers and mergers to be transferred to this Parliament so that we can protect the future of the Scottish economy?

First, I say to the minister that she is no John Wheatley. Is the minister aware that in the past 20 years rental income from local authority housing has increased from 44 per cent of total local authority  housing department income to 92 per cent, of which 56 per cent comes from housing benefit? In the light of the forthcoming review of the housing benefit system, is she putting all her eggs in one basket? What are the implications of the review of housing benefit for the policy that she announced this morning?

On a point of order. I have the manifesto here—

The minister may take a copy.

rose—

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

Is Malcolm Chisholm aware that the average life expectancy of the Scottish male is 74, but that a person does not qualify for the free television licence until they are 75?

There is no contradiction. We want action, not words or committees. The point about committees is that they take minutes and waste years. Our pensioners do not have years to waste.

I agree with Mr Harding about annuities. The value of annuities has fallen by about 50 per cent in the past two or three years. However, he has not mentioned any commitment on the basic state retirement pension. At the pensioners rally last week, his colleague Alex Fergusson made a tremendous speech demanding a substantial increase in the pension for senior citizens.

Does Mr Harding agree with his colleague?

He said that he was in favour.

Is it not the case that all the organisations that represent older people have made it clear to the Government that their two priorities are a decent pension and the re-establishment of the link with earnings? If Iain Gray is going to listen, why does he not listen to those calls and back them?

In speaking to the motion in the name of John Swinney, I extend a special welcome to the pensioners who are in the public gallery this morning and to those who are outside the chamber and will shortly be coming into the gallery. Pensioners have come from all parts of Scotland today to hear what the Scottish Parliament is going to do for them, and to ensure that this Parliament uses its powers to the maximum to improve their standard of living. They also want to hear the Scottish Parliament demand from the Westminster Parliament a better deal for our pensioners, especially on the level of pensions. For many pensioners in Scotland, the outcome of today's debate will be a litmus test of how worthwhile and worthy this Parliament is. If we fail to improve the standard and quality of pensioners' lives in Scotland, the Parliament will be seen as a damp squib. If we stand up and fight for the rights of our pensioners, the Parliament will be seen as a people's Parliament. We owe it to our pensioners to stand up and fight for them, to be counted on their behalf. We are not concerned only about the level of pensions. Age discrimination, poor health services, crime, the fear of crime, transport, employment and many other issues outlined in the "Better Government for Older People" action plan,  copies of which are being distributed outside the chamber this morning, all affect our senior citizens and will be addressed in this debate. Far too many pensioners in Scotland today live in poverty. The basic state pension is now worth only 15 per cent of average weekly income—a national disgrace. Because the state pension is so low, 48 per cent of pensioners in Scotland rely on income support or other benefits to top up their state pension to help make ends meet. According to Help the Aged, 70,000 pensioners in Scotland are currently living in severe poverty, one in three suffers from fuel poverty, and 103,000 households over 60 years of age have no central heating of any kind. According to the Registrar General for Scotland, there were 200,200 excess winter deaths among people over the age of 60 in 1997-98, the last year for which figures are available. By any standards, that is a damning indictment of how we treat our pensioners. The report that was released yesterday, "The Widening Gap: Health Inequalities and Policy in Britain", highlights the north-south divide in health and wealth in Britain. People who live in Scotland, including pensioners, come off worse. There are 2.8 times as many people with a limiting long-term illness in Govan than in Wokingham. Eight of the 15 poorest constituencies in Britain, including that of the Deputy Minister for Local Government, are in Glasgow. Glasgow is the sick city of Britain. That is an indictment of 70 years of local Labour rule—or misrule—in Glasgow. Despite the grinding level of pensioner poverty in Scotland, new Labour at Westminster and new Labour in the Scottish Executive have failed utterly to take the measures that are necessary to tackle the deep-rooted problem. More joint ministerial committees—more talking shops—between London and Edinburgh will not put money in the pockets of pensioners. We need action, not more committees and talking shops—especially not ones announced from London. I will deal first with the causes of poverty. It is noticeable that neither of the amendments lodged by the Tories and the Labour Executive mention the need for a decent basic state retirement pension. Gordon Brown's announced increase in the basic state pension of a miserly 73p a week from next April is an insult to our pensioners, especially when one considers that in the same speech he announced big tax cuts for big business and his fat-cat pals in the City of London. The 73p increase would not buy even half a pint of beer. Indeed, it is such a pathetic amount that many pensioners wonder aloud whether it is worth collecting. Every other Labour Government since the war has increased the state retirement pension significantly within weeks of coming to office,  despite dire financial situations. For example, in 1964 Harold Wilson increased the basic pension from 20.9 per cent to 22.1 per cent of average earnings within four weeks of coming to power. In 1974, when he was returned to power, the first thing he did was increase the pension by a whopping 17 per cent. New Labour has not done that.

That is right. I remind Mr Gallie that two years later the Tory Government broke the link between pensions and earnings. The single pension would be higher by £26 a week if the Tories had not broken that link—or if new Labour had restored it—so we will not be taking any lessons from the Tories on pensions.

I am trying to abide by the Presiding Officer's ruling that speeches must be brief, but I will let Phil intervene one more time.

That is twisting logic beyond belief. Phil has lost that point, so I will carry on. Both the Tories and new Labour have betrayed our pensioners, yet the money to give them a decent increase exists. For example, the 1p cut in the standard rate of income tax from next April that the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced will cost the Inland Revenue £3 billion. If that money had been spent on pensioners, it would have lifted the pension to £75 a week for a single pensioner and £119.50 for a pensioner couple. Surely that should have been a Labour Government's priority. It is bad enough that the Tories abolished the link with earnings, which cost single pensioners £26 a week and pensioner couples £41 a week, but it is a national disgrace that a Labour Government—a Labour Government—refuses to restore it, despite the fact that, according to Alistair Darling, the national insurance fund has a surplus of £5 billion. Labour cannot say that the money to give our pensioners a decent rise and to restore the link between pensions and earnings does not exist. That is what a real Labour Government would do.

I agree with Mr Ewing. Our pensioners are among the poorest in Europe. The average German male pensioner gets £181 a week. The national association of senior civil servants has announced a survey that shows that while our pensioners get 15 per cent of average national earnings, pensioners in Belgium—a small country—get 60 per cent, in small Denmark 40 per cent, in small Greece 80 per cent and in tinier Luxembourg 83 per cent of average earnings. Our pensioners are the poor cousins of their European counterparts. This is not just about the level of pensions and the failure to restore the link with earnings. If the £10 Christmas bonus, which was introduced by Ted Heath in 1972, was upgraded to reflect what could be bought with £10 then, our pensioners would not get a £10 Christmas bonus, they would get a £126 Christmas bonus. The Government has got its priorities upside down when hundreds of millions of pounds are spent on a useless dome in London. Why not use that money to give our pensioners a millennium bonus that they have long deserved? The flat rate winter fuel payment of £100 is only one fifth of an average pensioner fuel bill. Scotland's warm deal is a raw deal for our pensioners. It is the poor relation of the home energy efficiency scheme in England and Wales, which gives pensioners £700 instead of £500 in grant. Unlike in Scotland, pensioners there qualify for up to £1,800 to put in gas central heating. In damper, colder Scotland, pensioners are denied the £1,800 that they can get in sunny Surrey. Given the level of grinding poverty among pensioners, we would have thought the Minister for Communities would make more than a passing reference to the plight of our pensioners in last week's debate on social justice. I agreed with one statement she made. She talked about 20 years of broken promises—I take it that she meant 171/2 years of broken Tory promises and 21/2 years of broken Labour promises. The broken promises have resulted in our  pensioners becoming increasingly worse off. They include abolition of the link between pensions and earnings and Labour's failure to restore it and the 1,000 per cent reduction in value of the Christmas bonus. Nearly 40 per cent of Scotland's pensioners are now living on or near the poverty line. Ending pensioner poverty cannot wait for another 20 years, as the Minister for Communities suggested last week. For people aged 60 and over who are approaching retirement—I will not look at you when I am making this point, Presiding Officer, and I certainly will not look at Phil Gallie—waiting another 20 years would condemn our elderly people to living the rest of their lives in poverty. Our pensioners do not need platitudes about what might happen in 20 years' time. They need action today. They need action to increase their pension by much more than a miserable 73p a week.

I am winding up, Des; I have obviously wound you up, too. Our pensioners need action to restore the link between pensions and earnings; to end fuel poverty once and for all; to abolish means-testing for long-term residential care; and to abolish the inequitable standing charges imposed by the private utility companies for gas, electricity and telephones. We are prevented from doing the right thing for our pensioners not by lack of money, but by lack of political will on the part of new Labour. If Labour and Gordon Brown refuse to provide our pensioners with a decent standing of living, the Scottish Parliament must break with London. The time has long come for the Scottish Parliament to take an independent stance and demand justice for our pensioners. Let the word go out from the Scottish Parliament today to every pensioner in Scotland: we are on your side. We are determined that justice will be done for our pensioners. Let us prove to them that this is not a damp-squib Parliament. Let us show that it is a people's Parliament—a pensioners' Parliament. Let us do that for our senior citizens today. I move, That the Parliament recognises the plight of our pensioners, many of whom are living on or near the poverty line; condemns the lack of action by both the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to bring about a significant increase in the standard and quality of living of pensioners, and calls upon both the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to implement a comprehensive action plan to rectify this situation, the top priority of which should be a substantial increase in the basic state retirement pension and the re-establishment of the link with earnings for future pension increases.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order.

I believe that the minister's allocated time was 10 minutes. She is now more than three minutes over that. She has refused to take any interventions, but has been allowed more than three minutes over her allocation.

I congratulate Mr Matheson on bringing the issue to the Parliament's attention and to the minister's attention. One of the benefits of this Parliament is that issues such as this are now raised and aired, whereas at Westminster they are never dealt with. The Parliament will be judged by the extent to which action is taken as a result of the debate. Debate in itself is not good enough—we need action. I say to the minister that we need action from her now. I am reminded of Ibsen's play, "A Public Enemy", in which somebody cries foul and that person becomes the public enemy in the eyes of the authorities. Ibsen's play was about a swimming pool and its water supply. In this case, we are talking about the water supply for domestic purposes, which is even more important. I agree with three substantive points raised by Donald Gorrie. First, we must address long-term investment in the water supply, especially in situations such as this, where it may not be part of the mainstream investment programme but where something has gone wrong and is a potential if not an actual threat to public health. Secondly, we must make the water boards much more accountable to the people they are supposed to serve; to the clientele. I agree with Donald Gorrie that the present structure is not accountable enough. Thirdly, we must ensure that such problems receive a far faster response. As Michael Matheson pointed out, this is not a new problem. It has not arisen in the past six months since the Scottish Parliament was elected—it has existed for at least 10 years. When she addresses the issue, I hope that the minister will take this as a template for the way in which to deal with situations where a much faster response than 10 years is needed. While the matter raises much bigger issues and exemplifies many of the bigger policy issues in relation to the water boards, I would make two points to the minister. First, I ask her to take action now on the Bo'ness supply. Secondly, we should learn the lessons for the future from this matter so that no other community in Scotland has to undergo a 10-year wait before its domestic water supply gets back to normal.

Will the member give way?

He has nothing else to do.

Does the minister realise that Scotland's share of the benefits from the chancellor's pre-budget speech is outweighed by a factor of five as a result of the interest rates announced by the Bank of England? Any benefit to Scotland from the chancellor's measures has already been wiped out. Additionally, the increase in interest rates maintains a pound overvalued by about 20 per cent, with a devastating impact on our export industries.

Will the minister follow the practice that he adopted in the City of Glasgow Council, by ensuring political balance in the standards commission and by rotating the chairmanship? Furthermore, will local enterprise companies be included in the scope of the bill, and will the bill deal specifically with problems of lobbying and lobbyists?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many times the First Minister has met the Secretary of State for Social Security since May 1999. (S1O-565)

As this is armistice day, will the First Minister agree that we should use this opportunity to express our gratitude to our pensioners for everything that they have done for our country? As a way of expressing that gratitude, will he make  representations to the secretary of state on behalf of our pensioners and ask him to think again about the pittance of an increase—75p—that was announced on Tuesday? Will he point out to the secretary of state that our pensioners are paid far less than their German counterparts, whom they beat in the war, who get pensions of £181 a week?

This report is the most comprehensive evaluation of rooflessness and homelessness. As Fiona  McLeod said, one of the major causes of homelessness is welfare retrenchment, particularly as it affects young people. I am not making a party political point. I hope that the minister will take this up with the Secretary of State for Social Security, send him a copy of the report and make representations to him about the need to look again at welfare rights for young people.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the inclusion of the upgrading of the A77 in the list of projects. Can the minister clarify the time scale for the A77 10-mile dualling and whether that time scale will be adhered to the private finance initiative is not a viable financial option? Furthermore, will she confirm that this project will precede the Glasgow southern orbital project?

rose—

No, it is a related matter. Further to the point of order that was raised by my colleague Mr MacAskill and me yesterday about ministerial statements appearing in the press before they are announced to the Parliament, in the interests of openness and accountability, will you rule that ministers should first make their statements to Parliament and then to the press?

On a point of order.

At the beginning of this meeting, a colleague of mine raised a point of order about a press release that was issued at 9.30 am, announcing what the minister is now, hours later, announcing to the Parliament.

I also speak as someone who has been involved in the voluntary sector as a director of an enterprise trust. Such trusts were set up as companies limited by guarantee, to promote local economic development. Probably like everyone else who has been involved in the voluntary sector, I regard financial issues as being of prime importance. Like many other sectors in our society, the voluntary sector continually feels a financial squeeze. I should like to make six constructive suggestions to the Scottish Executive, asking it to consider ways of improving the financial base of the voluntary sector. Although some of the suggestions relate to reserved matters, I hope that the Executive will consider, in the spirit in which  the suggestions are offered, the possibility of making representations about them, to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in particular. An analysis of the £1.8 billion that the voluntary sector receives annually shows that by far the largest single contributor—making up nearly one third of the sector's income—is trading and commercial activity. The voluntary sector in Scotland has suffered in two areas as a result of taxation policy. Its value added tax burden accounts for about £46 million a year—not an insignificant amount. I suggest that, in the run-up to the budget, we ask the chancellor to look at the possibility of providing more financial relief on value added tax for voluntary organisations. The second area is corporation tax, which Phil Gallie mentioned briefly. Knock-on effects of the recent changes in corporation tax have been detrimental to the voluntary sector. That is not a party political point but a fact of life. Again, we should ask the chancellor whether he would be prepared to look again at those changes to see whether he can provide some relief for the voluntary sector.

There is no doubt that the cost side has to be looked at as well as the income side. Today, I am concentrating on the income side, but as Phil knows, from time to time we agree. The second major source of income is personal donations. The latest available figures, for the two-year period from 1996 to 1998, show a 22.4 per cent reduction in personal donations. I know that the chancellor has introduced some new incentives for personal donations to the voluntary sector, through gift aid and payroll giving. However, a major black hole has developed. At a time when disposable incomes are rising significantly, we need to examine why personal donations have gone down by nearly a quarter, and consider ways of reversing that trend. Phil made some practical points about the way in which funds from the national lottery are distributed. I do not want to get into that, but I want to make the point that there is a case for devolving the two national lottery distribution funds that are relevant to the voluntary sector. Devolving that responsibility to this Parliament, through the Executive, would be worth considering, because in the allocation of resources within the lottery system, Scottish priorities might well be different from English, Welsh, Northern Irish or UK priorities. That would be a worthwhile reform, which would be beneficial to the voluntary sector in Scotland.

I am sorry. I always love to give way, but I cannot do so on this occasion as I do not have time. The corporate sector accounts for 1 per cent—a miserable 1 per cent—of the voluntary sector's income. That is nowhere near good enough. In the past, we had the 1 per cent club, made up of companies that were prepared to give 1 per cent of their pre-tax profits to charity. We must consider ways of encouraging a much more substantial contribution from the corporate sector to the wider voluntary sector in Scotland. I did not have time for everything, but I have given four constructive suggestions.

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to use its own Scottish indicators to measure poverty in Scotland. (S1O-448)

In terms of measuring poverty in Scotland, will the Executive be forced by Alistair Darling and the Department of Social Security into using their indicators, rather than doing what the Minister for Communities previously promised to do—apply a more radical set of indicators here in Scotland? Would that not be in total defiance of the principle of devolution?

We have heard Jack McConnell boasting that 40 per cent of the Scottish population are so poor that they will be covered by the measures—Scotland has one of the highest coverages in Europe. Is it not a total indictment of successive UK Governments' management—or mismanagement—of the Scottish economy that 40 per cent of our people are so poor that they have to be covered by the measures?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Surely the key point is that legislation is usually initiated by the Administrations. Therefore, if the Administrations between them agree on a legislative priority, such as fishing rights, which results in legislation, the process starts with the Administrations.

Will Annabel recommend to her colleagues that, if they ever again form the Administration in London, they rewrite the concordats to ensure that we have that proper and fair representation the lack of which she is criticising?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I give notice that I shall move the amendment and the amendment to the amendment to take account of the Executive's amendment to its motion. [Laughter.] We might be here from 5 pm until 5.30 pm tonight to vote on all these amendments. I thank the First Minister for the very kind personal remarks that he made at the start of his speech.

I agree with the First Minister on one point only. A good-neighbour policy is the underlying principle that should govern the relationships between the peoples, the Parliaments and the Governments of the British isles. It is not in anyone's interest in Scotland, England, Ireland or Wales for there to be any rancour or resentment, acrimony or aggro between the peoples of these islands. We must treat one another with respect and dignity and co-operate where co-operation is essential and  beneficial. One of the reasons why I am in favour of independence is that I believe—and I disagree with the First Minister on this point—that, if Scotland had equal constitutional status with every other nation in Europe, that would enhance and improve our relationship both with London and with the other parts of the British isles. That debate is for another day, however.

We represent Scotland's interests all the time, as I will explain.

Absolutely. There are many instances of that, not least on international and European affairs. When Scotland becomes an independent member of the European Union, the United Nations and many other international bodies, there will be many times when we will not only vote with each other, but work together to provide a solution that is beneficial to Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland and every other nation in Europe. I am absolutely sure about that. Today's debate is not about independence or devolution. It is about establishing whether the memorandum of understanding and the concordats achieve the objectives that the First Minister set out in his speech. My first concern is how the Scottish Executive has treated—or to be more accurate, maltreated—the Parliament in the way in which the concordats have been drawn up. There is no doubt that the concordats have been drafted in London and in secrecy. At no time has the Parliament been given the opportunity to input its ideas on the agreements, nor have we been consulted on their content. Indeed, until last Friday, we had not even been informed about the subject areas that the concordats would cover. That flies in the face of the open-government policy that was supposed to be the foundation stone of the Parliament. As the Sunday Herald rightly said last week of the agreements: "Surely this is a constitutional issue and therefore ought to be debated by all parties to ensure that the rules will endure." I will not go into the spelling of "en-Dewar".  The concordats were drafted in London and amendments were then submitted by the Scottish Executive. The Scottish Parliament has seen neither the original drafts from London nor the Scottish Executive's proposed amendments. We do not know what those amendments were, or whether they were accepted or rejected; if they were rejected, we do not know why. This Parliament is entitled to know those things. Why has the Scottish Executive refused to answer even the most basic questions raised by members about the negotiations? I have tried to make my questions as simple as possible, but my question from, I think, 14 September—I asked for a list of the subject areas that the concordats would cover—met with what has become the Scottish Executive's usual reply, which is that the minister will reply as soon as possible. The minister has still not replied. A particular complaint, which is probably shared across the chamber, concerns the way in which the Scottish Executive refused to give any advance copies of the concordats to members of this Parliament before the press conference that the First Minister and his close friend the Secretary of State for Scotland held at 11.30 am last Friday. Such a practice would be totally alien to the spirit, if not the letter, of the Executive's code on access to information; it is certainly contrary to both the spirit and the letter of the all-party agreement on how the Parliament should work that was reached through the constitutional steering group.

We are quite happy that concordats have to exist, whether the situation is one of devolution or independence. We object to these particular concordats. I will discuss the detail of our criticisms in a moment. To rub salt into the wound, the Parliament has not been, and will not be, given access to the minutes of the joint ministerial committee and other committees that are to be set up under the terms of the agreements. Earlier, Murray Tosh raised a valid point about the need for this Parliament to scrutinise the work of those committees. How can the Parliament scrutinise that work effectively if we do not have access to it? It is beyond belief that the Bank of England's monetary policy committee can publish its minutes, which concern sensitive issues such as interest and exchange rates, but the Parliament cannot have access to the minutes of the  proposed joint ministerial committee. Parliament should insist on access to those minutes, other than where they deal with matters such as national security—if, indeed, they will deal with such matters. I will turn to some matters of substance in the agreements. The way in which the joint ministerial committee is to be set up and operated exposes a fundamental flaw at the core of the agreements. UK ministers are to be charged with representing the interests of England as well as those of the UK as a whole, as paragraph 1 of the memorandum of understanding spells out. In other words, the English UK ministers will be expected to wear two hats—an English hat and a UK hat. The clear implication is that the UK's interests will be synonymous with those of England. I suggest that any politician—even one as skilled as the First Minister—who can successfully wear English and UK hats at the same time, and satisfy the demands of each, would make Houdini look positively arthritic. I will give three examples of where this situation could and would create serious difficulties and unnecessary rancour and resentment, either north or south of the border. This is a two-way process; it is as easy for people in England to feel resentment over some aspects of the agreements as it is for people in Scotland. The first example relates to something that took place at the stroke of a Westminster pen earlier this year—the transfer of 6,000 square miles of Scottish fishing waters from the jurisdiction of Scotland to that of England. The English interest would be for those waters to be transferred, whereas the Scottish interest would be for them to remain under Scottish jurisdiction. If there had been a ministerial committee, chaired by the English UK minister, and he overruled the majority view—as he would be entitled to do under these agreements, with the final arbiter being that great ex-Scotsman Tony Blair—that would turn what is supposed to be a concordat into a discordat. That would cause enormous resentment—in this case north of the border. My second example concerns housing benefit reforms that will be announced in an English green paper on housing in the next six months or so. Huge differences exist between Scotland and England in the housing market, so some of the reforms that are proposed for England would be wholly inappropriate for Scotland. If the English UK minister chairing the joint ministerial committee on housing benefit reform forced through an English solution and tried to impose it on Scotland, that would also cause unnecessary rancour and resentment north of the border. It could also have a serious impact on the living standards of those people in Scotland who rely on housing benefit.  The third example relates to the Cubie committee on the future of student finances in Scotland. We read in last weekend's newspapers, as we have in previous weeks, that David Blunkett—who would be the English UK minister chairing a joint ministerial committee on student finance—is prepared to overrule the recommendations of the Cubie committee and of the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament. In other words, the English minister could unilaterally overrule the express wishes of the Scottish people on this policy area. That situation is totally unacceptable to Scotland. Of particular concern is the proposed overseas promotion committee, which—as the First Minister outlined—will oversee inward investment projects. It will be totally dominated by English UK ministers who will have the back-up of the Invest in Britain Bureau and the 10 new regional development agencies that will cover the whole of England. What chance does Locate in Scotland have against all those bodies?

The First Minister might not have read the document in detail, but it says on almost every page that the UK Government will have the last word on everything. That means that it can overrule anything that this Parliament decides. The document emphasises the fact that the Westminster Parliament can legislate even on devolved matters. I do not have a persecution complex; I think that the jerseys of the people of Scotland have been sold.

Allow me to quote from the Sunday Herald —which I know will be a favourite newspaper of the First Minister. It says that the final result of those agreements "has been a triumph for Westminster as having the power to legislate on any issue whether devolved or not, so it is quite clear that the Concordats repeatedly rub the nose of Scotland's devolved Parliament into the ground." That comes from a newspaper that believes in devolution and not in independence.

First, Locate in Scotland is not entitled to make political comments and, secondly, this issue is not theoretical. The Westminster Parliament has the power to overrule the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament—that is a matter of law. The First Minister cannot make a commitment that any future Administration in London will not legislate on devolved matters, although he may argue that the current Government would not do that.

I have given way to the First Minister rather a lot, but I will do so again.

There is a fatal flaw if there is to be genuine devolution. Let me make some suggestions about the joint ministerial committee. Why should not we recognise the conflict that could result from asking one minister to represent both English and UK interests? Why do we not insist that, on the ministerial committee, the majority view of the four devolved Administrations rather than the view of the English minister should be the UK view? Why do we not insist that the chairmanship be rotated among the four Administrations? Why do we not insist that the subject committees be chaired by people from the four Administrations? There is nothing anti-devolutionary in those suggestions. To do those things would give a clear signal that there had been genuine devolution from London, rather than the centralised control freakery represented in these documents. The documents are more akin to diktats than to genuine concordats. They have been drawn up not jointly, but unilaterally by the UK Government, as Mr Dewar has said.  The agreements are totally unacceptable to the people of Scotland. When the Scottish National party is elected to form the Administration in this Parliament, it will renegotiate the concordats. The concordats do not live up to the needs or aspirations of the Scottish people. Our simple message to Donald Dewar and to Tony Blair is: away hame and think again.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I move, as an amendment to amendment S1M-186.1, insert "Cabinet of the" after "Scottish Ministers and the". I also move the amendment to motion S1M-186, in the name of the First Minister, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to re-negotiate the Memorandum of Understanding and supplementary agreements concluded between the United Kingdom Government, Scottish Ministers and the National Assembly of Wales in order to protect the interests of the Scottish people and ensure that no additional constraints are placed on the powers of the Scottish Parliament."

Opening.

Will the First Minister give way?

Are the First Minister and Hugh Henry trying to kid us on that the concordats were  reached jointly? In an answer that I received from the First Minister on 1 October, he said that the UK Government had prepared the drafts.

May I raise a point of order?

I believe that it is—I would not raise it otherwise. At 11.30 am tomorrow the First Minister and the Secretary of State for Scotland are giving  a press conference at which five concordats will be published. Some of that information has apparently been leaked to the press already. Would not it be in order to ensure that members of this Parliament had copies of the five concordats before the press?

I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for including me in the list of speakers. I want to confine myself to a number of suggestions to improve the bill, as the nationalists' points have already been put adequately by my colleagues. First, I wish to build on John Swinney's point about local enterprise companies. I realise the minister's difficulty, as they are technically and legally private limited companies but spend something like £370 million of public money a year. Given that the total amount that this Parliament manages is only £15 billion, £370 million is a large chunk of public money not to be covered properly by the bill. I ask the minister to consider that again. There may have to be a change in status of local enterprise companies to wholly owned subsidiaries of Scottish Enterprise, but there is a case for doing that anyway. Secondly, I welcome the principle of resource—and not just cash—accounting. We are all familiar with what happens in the last three months of the year: new road works start and a massive number of public works take place so that people can spend their budgets before the end of the year. The quicker we move to a better system of accrual resource funding, the better; that should reduce the problem somewhat and let us get better value for public money. The third issue that I wish to raise is about the Accounts Commission for Scotland. Last year, the Accounts Commission was asked to investigate East Ayrshire Council's direct labour organisation disaster—as it was commonly known. However, the Accounts Commission is also the auditor for East Ayrshire Council. There is a potential conflict of interest in the Accounts Commission acting as the auditor and, when things go wrong during the financial year, as the independent investigator. The bill should provide, in relation to local authorities in particular, but also to other public bodies, that one body cannot be both judge and jury. My fourth point relates to the act that set up this Parliament rather than this bill. The bill covers the borrowing powers of public agencies other than the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament, which have no borrowing powers. I suggest that the minister should take up that issue with his counterpart in the UK Government as it is a serious deficiency in the financial management of the Executive and the Parliament. My final point—I will set a personal record by finishing within my three minutes—is on  transparency for the cumulative, year-on-year effects of changes to the Barnett formula. Again, that is strictly not within the scope of the bill, but in the spirit of freedom of information and full access to statistical as well as other types of information, it would be extremely helpful if the minister would publish an annual assessment of the impact of changes to the Barnett formula. I hope that the minister will consider those suggestions in the spirit in which they are made. Of course, when we become independent, we will make them all even better.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether local enterprise companies in central Scotland are achieving their performance targets. (S1O-394)

Can the minister confirm whether Strathclyde police is currently investigating irregularities in training contracts awarded by Lanarkshire Development Agency? If it is, will he advise when he will be in a position to make a statement on the outcome of those inquiries? Will he confirm that no similar irregularities are present in the training contracts awarded by other local enterprise companies?

Does the minister agree that another ingredient of silicon valley's success is the support that is given by the public sector, along with industry and academia? Expenditure in California and other US states is increasing on such projects. How does the minister reconcile that with the actual and planned cuts in Scottish Enterprise's budget?

I am surprised that the likes of John, Margaret and Mike  have a problem with our amendment, which welcomes the rough sleepers initiative, the establishment of a task force and the fact that this matter will be a priority. The amendment also expresses concerns that have been expressed by people outside this chamber who are living rough and by others who are homeless but not living rough. They have seen committees come and go; they are fed up with committees taking minutes and wasting years. Our concern is that the establishment of a task force and of another committee for Glasgow should not become an excuse for a lack of early action to deal with the problem of rough sleepers and homelessness. There is a general consensus in this chamber that this is a complex issue. The causes of homelessness and rooflessness are complex—they include drugs, the breakdown of homes, poverty and unemployment. We will probably not solve the problem of homelessness until we have tackled all those problems as well. However, there is a fundamental issue at stake here—that there are certain actions within the remit of both the Scottish Executive and the UK Government that can be taken to alleviate the situation. Let me deal with the issue of benefits, which is directly related to poverty. I can quote speeches that Mike and John made in the House of Commons, in which they said that one of the root causes of poverty among young people—of young people being forced to live in cardboard city in London—was the Tories' withdrawal about 10 years ago of benefit to 16 and 17-year-olds. Surely, one of the things that this Parliament and this Executive can do is to put pressure on what is supposed to be a Labour Government in London to restore that benefit, as we agree that that is one of the main reasons for young people sleeping rough. Consider some of the other changes that have been made, such as the one to housing benefit as it relates to single-room rent. That change affected 80 per cent of the young people in Scotland and forced many of them on to the street. The purpose of that change, which was made by the Tories and which was criticised by John McAllion and every other Labour politician, was to save £65 million a year, £6 million of which was being spent in Scotland. It is ironic that the £6 million that was saved equals the £6 million that has been announced for the rough sleepers initiative. There is no point in giving with one hand and taking away with the other. With all due respect to John, he was talking rubbish when he said that we do not know anything about the problem. Of course we do. Nobody has the solution, but we should all be agreed that the one way of tackling homelessness at its root is to give back to young people the  benefits that they have been robbed of. Why is righting the wrongs of the Tories not part of the Executive's agenda as well as taking the necessary action to address homelessness in Scotland?

I ask the Scottish Executive to join me in welcoming the leader of Plaid Cymru, Dafydd Wigley, who is with us today. [Applause.]  To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends making representations to Her Majesty's Government requesting an increase in the Scottish block. (S1O-302)

Is the minister aware of the independent report that was prepared by the London-based Centre for Economics and Business Research and published a couple of weeks ago, which shows that Scotland is a net contributor to the UK Treasury? We are paying more taxes in than we are getting money back out. Does he not agree that, rather than subsidising the UK Treasury, it would be far better for Scotland to get its own money back in order to use it to settle the teachers' dispute and to abolish tuition fees  without robbing any other budget in Scotland?

I congratulate the Executive on being very good on motherhood and apple pie, but it is very poor on substance. Let us analyse what this document says and what it will do in relation to the situation in which we in Scotland find ourselves. It says that the Executive intends to tackle poverty and ensure the best environment for children to grow up in, and that it will do that primarily through the new social inclusion partnerships. Let us consider the effect of the Executive's policy in the light of what its partners in London are doing. When we examine planned expenditure on the social inclusion partnerships over the next three years, two points stand out. First, the expenditure that is planned by the Executive in this area will go down—not up—in the third year. How can we tackle poverty when we are reducing expenditure in poor areas? Secondly, when we compare the expenditure that is planned—between £30 million and £40 million a year—and compare that with the scale of the problem, it is peanuts. It is putting a thumb in the dyke of poverty and deprivation in Scotland. We need also to consider Alasdair Darling's targets for poverty reduction in Scotland. Two weeks ago, he announced that he intends over the next three years to take 1.25 million people out of poverty in the whole of the UK. Even if he achieves his target, he will leave more than a million people in poverty in Scotland at the end of a four-year Labour Government and a three-year Scottish new Labour Executive—1 million people condemned by two Labour Governments to eternal poverty and deprivation. What is proposed in this document does not begin to tackle poverty and deprivation in Scotland. One third of our children are living on or near the poverty line—that is not my figure, it is the Government's figure. More than 30 per cent of our pensioners—who are not mentioned in this document—are living in poverty, and that is getting  worse. Our disabled people, who are barely mentioned, are living in poverty. Their benefits are also being cut from London by the Welfare Reform and Pensions Bill. The Executive's promises on welfare to work involve cutting welfare without creating work. How is it that, according to today's Daily Mail , people who live on peripheral housing schemes are going to be told by Gordon Brown that if they do not get a job their benefits will be frozen for at least a year?

I will take Duncan's intervention later. What hope have those young people when there are no jobs for them to take up? The Government says that its answer is the new deal, but according to the Office for National Statistics, despite the fact that £4 billion is being spent on the welfare-to-work programme, the way in which that money is being spent means that it is having no significant effect—the office's words, not mine—on the level of unemployment.

Absolutely.

More than 130,000 people are unemployed in Scotland. Until they get real jobs, we will have a high level of unemployment. We should compare the unemployment level in this country with that in other small European countries. In Luxembourg, the level of unemployment is 2 per cent; in Austria, it is 3 per cent; and in Norway, it is between 2 per cent and 3 per cent. It is three times those rates in this country. Consider the new deal. In Ayrshire, for example, 5,000 people are on the unemployment register and 211 are on the various options that are available under the new deal. Finding funding for a change is not a substantial problem: as Fiona Hyslop said, Gordon Brown is building up a huge cash mountain of between £10 billion and £20 billion. He should spend that money on creating jobs and eliminating poverty instead of saving it up for tax breaks for the rich. That is what socialism used to mean.

Is Dr Murray insinuating that middle-class people do not have the right to free education?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has set targets for the elimination of poverty in Scotland. (S1O-192)

Two weeks ago, the Secretary of State for Social Security set a target for the UK of taking 1.25 million out of poverty. Even if that target is achieved, it will leave more than 1 million people in Scotland in poverty. What is the minister intending to do to take those people out of poverty? Does she agree that it is impossible to eliminate poverty in Scotland while benefit cuts are imposed from London?

No, but I would like to ask a point of clarification.

There are two points that need clarification. First, the failure to publish the draft concordats received from the UK Government would be a breach of the Executive's own code of practice on access to information. Will the minister therefore confirm that those drafts will be published?  Secondly, as the Minister for Parliament, will he confirm that the Scottish Parliament will have the opportunity either to amend or reject any such concordats?

In light of what has just happened, perhaps you can advise me, Sir David, on how to elicit a response to my question.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would like some guidance on the Scotland Act 1998. I think that I am right in saying that, under the Scotland Act 1998, the Scottish Executive has no power to surrender its authority to the UK Government departments in London to draft concordats between the Government at Westminster and the Scottish Parliament covering such critical issues as inward investment.  As no such legislative authority exists, is it the case that the Scottish Executive cannot agree to such concordats without the explicit approval of this Parliament? Will you confirm that this Parliament has the legal right to reject or amend any such concordats?

Bearing in mind the principle of cross-departmental co-operation, will the First Minister speak to the Secretary of State for Social Security about the  holiday trap in which school cleaning, catering and clerical staff have found themselves? Staff have suddenly been denied benefit for the summer holiday period because there is a date in their contracts-12 August-for starting back at school. Surely, these people are either entitled to benefit, as has always been the case during the summer, or they are entitled to holiday pay from the devolved Administration.

rose-

Will Mr Raffan give way?

Much appreciated.  Mr Raffan quoted Alf Young saying that a school required PFI. Is it not the case that if we had adopted Liberal Democrat policy, putting 1p on income tax and earmarking it for education, PFI in education might not have been necessary at all?

Does Des McNulty agree that the Bank of Scotland's activities in recent years have not provided the best guide for judging anything? Is it not the case that, according to the Financial Times in recent months, the sub-committee established by the chancellor, Gordon Brown, to consider PFI-the so-called Bates committee-is likely to come out in favour of something akin to the SNP's proposals?

My point of order is also about written questions. The guidance on answering parliamentary questions states that ministers should reply within two weeks. That is fair enough but, obviously, from time to time ministers will not have a reply ready within two weeks. In those circumstances, and so that we know that ministers are held accountable, could ministers state why they cannot give a reply  within the two weeks and indicate when they expect to be able to give a reply-instead of giving the sort of reply that I received from Mr Wallace, which said that he would reply as soon as that was possible?

Will Mr Raffan give way?

The First Minister made a statement of two halves. The first three and a half pages pay excellent lip service to the laudable objectives of social inclusion, eradicating poverty and the like and include lines such as, "Our aim is social justice in a prosperous Scotland-a Scotland . . . in which all have the opportunity to fulfil their potential."  He also said that "we cannot accept a Scotland . . . where one third of Scottish households have below half the average UK income and where one quarter of our housing stock suffers from dampness or condensation."  I hope that few members-if any-would disagree with those laudable objectives or with the sentiments behind them. All members have to recognise the deep-rooted economic and social problems that beset the people of Scotland.  The tragedy of the First Minister's statement is that, although the first three and a half pages pay lip service to the aspirations of the Scottish Executive, the rest of the statement contains very little to achieve those objectives. Indeed, when we consider the major problems of poverty, unemployment and bad housing, the total impact of the legislative programme will be practically zero.  Let us consider unemployment. To be fair, for as long as the macro-economic policy that affects Scotland-and which is dictated not by the needs of Scotland but by those of the south-east of England-is set at Westminster, there is no way that the Scottish Executive in a devolved Parliament can overcome the problems created when the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer follows a policy of high interest rates, high exchange rates and massive job losses.

No, that is not the case. We want fiscal power and autonomy for the Scottish Parliament, here in Edinburgh, so that we can reallocate resources on the basis of economic and social need.

No, I will not give way to Mr McConnell.  How can we overcome the problems created by the economic and social policies being pursued by Messrs Darling and Brown-I use the term Messrs  advisedly-when we do not have the resources here in Scotland? This morning, I asked the First Minister which of the bills would do anything to reduce unemployment in Scotland.

I will not give way at the moment.  The First Minister came back with a bland answer. I have in my hand a document produced by the Parliament's information centre two days ago. It states categorically that, based on the International Labour Organisation measurement, there are 187,000 unemployed people in Scotland. According to the document, the forecast is that unemployment will go up. Nothing in the First Minister's statement will do anything to arrest the projected increase in unemployment or to reduce the figure of 187,000.  Similarly, the creation of social exclusion ministries and units is not the answer to the problem of deep-seated poverty in our society. Let us consider the facts. On the accepted measure that a poor household receives less than half the average national wage or income, some 1.2 million people in Scotland live in poor households-25 per cent of the population. Furthermore, 34 per cent of all children in Scotland and 41 per cent of children under five live in poverty, as do 29 per cent of our pensioners.  Nothing in the legislative programme will fundamentally alter those figures. I bet my bottom dollar or euro-whatever the case will be-that in a year's time, after we have passed, or not passed, all eight bills in the programme, those figures will remain the same. After the bills are passed, 1.2 million people will still be living in poverty in Scotland, one third of our children will still be living in poverty and 187,000 people will still be on the dole in Scotland.  On the first page of the First Minister's statement, he rightly says:  "People ask when the Parliament will begin to make a difference."  There is no doubt that a number of the proposed bills are welcome, as Mr Salmond and others have said. However, the bills tinker at the edges; they do not address the fundamental problems of unemployment and poverty in our society.  In particular, we should not underestimate the impact of unemployment, which is a root cause of poverty in our society. When a person is unemployed, their personality is destroyed. When a large number of people are unemployed for a long time, communities are destroyed. Unemployment leads to poor achievement in education and to a higher incidence of ill health. Unemployment is a cancer in our society and many of the other problems that we face will not  be cut out until we tackle unemployment at its roots. There is nothing in the First Minister's statement about that-the word poverty does not even appear in the 2,000 or so words in the statement.  I say three things to Labour members. First, they should look again at the legislative programme and give us a programme that will tackle the roots of unemployment and poverty. Secondly, they should recognise the limitations of devolution and demand the powers and resources from Westminster to tackle those problems. Thirdly, they should raise their ambitions for the Scottish people. We do not want this Parliament to sit for four years only for there still to be grinding unemployment and grinding poverty of the kind that we have at present. Success and the difference that we will make will be measured in terms of whether we create new jobs for the unemployed and whether we lift our people out of poverty. If we fail to do that, we will have failed the Scottish people.

During the election campaign, the First Minister rightly made the issues of jobs and unemployment a priority.  Which of the eight bills that he outlined will lead to the creation of jobs in Scotland and how many jobs does he expect to be created?

rose-

Will Mrs Mulligan give way?

Labour members' rhetoric about social inclusion would sound a lot less hollow if their colleagues in the House of Commons were not planning, simultaneously, to impose a savage cut in incapacity benefit.  I will address most of my remarks to the Scottish Liberal party. I remember when that party had a proud tradition; I remember the legacy of people such as John Bannerman and Jo Grimond. It was a radical party and a party of principle. With this new partnership agreement, we are witnessing the strange death of the Liberal tradition in Scotland. I  could never imagine people such as Jo Grimond adopting the marshmallow antics of today's Liberal Democrats in their dealings with the Labour party. I could never imagine the earlier generation of Scottish Liberals selling out on a basic principle of free education.  What did the Liberal Democrats get, apart from their ministerial positions? They got a committee of inquiry, but we do not know whether it will have the power, the remit or the composition to deal effectively with tuition fees. Who will nominate the committee members-the eight Labour members of the Scottish Cabinet or the two Liberal members? If the eight Labour members nominate Labour cronies who they know will come up with the answer they are looking for, will the two Liberal members have the right of veto over the nominations?  What will the committee's remit be? Will it look at the issue of student poverty? [MEMBERS: "Yes."] Will it be able to address the reintroduction of student grants and the issue of student loans? [MEMBERS: "Yes."] Will it meet, and take evidence, in public? [MEMBERS: "Yes."] If the committee recommends the abolition of tuition fees, do we have a commitment from the benches opposite that the recommendation will be accepted?

I did notice the silence, but I thank Mr Swinney for the intervention.  The actions of the Liberal Democrats reminds me that Winston Churchill used to say-it is not often that a nationalist quotes Winston Churchill-that the Liberals sat on the fence so much that they could be called mugwumps; they sat on the fence with their mugs on one side and their wumps on the other.  Last week the wumps wanted the abolition of tuition fees; this week the mugs have sold out on that issue. Last week they were going to demand radical changes in the private finance initiative; this week they have sold out on the private finance initiative. Last week they were going to start to use the tax-raising power for investment in education; this week they have ruled that out for four years.

I submit that this is the biggest betrayal of the Scottish people since the previous Lib-Lab pact, 22 years ago.