We should show great appreciation for all our foster carers. The Scottish Government has provided more than £1 million to the Fostering Network, partly to enable it to raise awareness of fostering through its annual campaign. Many local authorities run campaigns, which have been successful in reducing the shortage in the number of fostering households. The gap was 1,700 in 2011 and is now 850. No one can be complacent. Last year, the Scottish Government ran a fostering recruitment and retention seminar in support of foster care fortnight and established a forum to share experiences. We also recently announced our response to the foster care review.

I indicated that the shortage is reducing, but more can be done. The funding that we provide to the Fostering Network helps to support local recruitment, as the foster care review will. I would be happy to ensure that David Torrance meets Aileen Campbell, the relevant minister, to discuss further what can be done in his area.

We have no such plans at this time. The changes to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, which are being taken forward as part of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, implement a number of recommendations of the commission on the delivery of rural education. The commission considered the consultation process for school closure proposals as part of its remit and did not recommend a change to the statutory consultation period for local authorities.

I remember seeing at least the exterior of Bramble Brae primary school when the member was the by-election candidate in the constituency. It is a very good school, and I am glad about the decision that has been made. I also remember the Labour candidate in the by-election claiming that the delays were due to a failure of Education Scotland, which turned out not to be the case. There is a strong argument to be made about ensuring that the process is timeous and respects parents. I have concerns that councillors who operate what one might call a pre-consultation consultation are perhaps doing that not to gain information or gather views but in order to soften up or wear down opposition to closure. I hope that councils will be mindful that this is a difficult and stressful time for any community or group of parents. The legislation is designed to help and protect both sides and to create a level playing field for both sides. [Interruption.] Mr Kelly seems to have views on this matter that he wants to give from a seated position. When the amendments to the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill come to the chamber, I hope that Mr Kelly—voluble as he now is about the matter—will support the measures that are designed to assist parents and local authorities.

Oh!

I, too, offer my congratulations to Stewart Maxwell on securing the debate, and to all members who have participated. Clearly, this is a subject that unites all the members in the chamber and makes them think about the issues that it presents. The theme of today’s Holocaust memorial day is journeys. There is a sense in which we all talk about the journey of understanding that we have been on to understand the sheer scale, size and horror of the Holocaust. Mr Malik referred to that, and to the way in which it is difficult for the mind to grasp that horror. Journeys have other meanings, too. There is the other journey of genocide, which is represented by the end of the track at Birkenau. I was there this year; I will talk about that in a moment. At the end of the track there were two enormous gas chambers and one individual who, as people came out of the carts in which they had travelled across Europe, chose who lived and who died. That was the journey of genocide. It is an extraordinary fact that the vast majority of people who arrived at Auschwitz-Birkenau were dead within two hours. It was a real Holocaust—an enormous death, which took place almost instantly. Journeys can be journeys of survival and hope. Some people, although very few, escaped from the camp and some, although very few, survived. Some escaped mentally by writing about what they saw and what they heard while in the camp, even though the penalty for the possession of writing instruments was death. Journeys of survival have been referred to, such as the Kindertransport, whereby 10,000 mainly Jewish children were offered a new life in a new country. About 400 of them settled in Scotland, many in Glasgow, and helped make this country the diverse and inclusive country that we have today. Last October I went to Auschwitz with the lessons from Auschwitz project, which is organised by the Holocaust Educational Trust and part funded by the Scottish Government. Every year the Scottish Government helps hundreds of secondary 5 and secondary 6 pupils make that journey and it supports them to go on to be ambassadors for the project, teaching others about the importance of understanding and of never forgetting. Visiting Auschwitz is something that I wanted to do and which I am glad that I have done, but I did not aspire to do it. Those who have been there will recognise what I mean; it is an absolutely overwhelming experience. The details and images of the visit will stay with me forever. Different aspects of the visit moved different people. For some it was the poignancy of photographs of loved ones—there are big displays of photographs of individuals who died there. For others it was the things like the piles of shoes, which were mentioned, or the two places in Auschwitz where one is not allowed to take photographs—one is the gas chamber at the original Auschwitz camp and the other is a room that displays human hair in a glass case right along the length of the room. All that human hair came from individuals who died in the gas chambers and it then went to stuff mattresses, which became a commodity. For me, it was the symbols of journeys that were perhaps the most touching. When one thinks for a moment what people expected when they went on the journey to a concentration camp and then sees what they took with them, it is staggering. People had their house keys in their pockets, which were taken away from them. People who left their homes locked their doors, expecting to return home. There is a room there that has suitcases and bags along one wall. Many members know that I post a photograph every day of something that I see on a website called blipfoto. My photograph on 30 October last year was of that display of suitcases. In the middle there was a suitcase with a name on it—a number of the suitcases had names on them. The name was Raphaela Sara Tausik. That suitcase represented her personal journey from Vienna. She had a suitcase full of her possessions and her clothes and it had her name on it. She thought that she was being relocated. She thought she might go home, but she ended up on the railway tracks at Birkenau; she ended up in the gas chambers. The guides and members of the Holocaust Educational Trust who take people round seek constantly to rehumanise what happens. That is why I mentioned her name. I will mention it again: Raphaela Sara Tausik. I have never seen her photograph. She is on the major database, but I do not know what she looked like. We should think of her as an individual with a full, rich, detailed life—a woman who thought that she was carrying on with her life but whose life ended suddenly and arbitrarily in great distress. Those young people who take part in the Holocaust Educational Trust trips become ambassadors. Yesterday I was with two of them in Tarbert academy in my constituency: Rose Richmond and Hannah Prill. I went because they were holding an assembly and they had created an artwork of handprints. I went to add my handprint to the canvas, which says, “When we understand where prejudice leads, we can stop it in its tracks.” That takes me back to those railway tracks. If we understand where prejudice leads, we can understand that even the smallest prejudice can grow beyond all expectations and lead to death and disaster. It leads, ultimately, to Auschwitz. It also leads to the end of those tracks and to the most memorable thing about the visit that I paid. At the end of a long, cold October day at the site—it is enormous; the size really strikes one initially—it became very dark. Our whole group stood where the railway tracks finish, between the two enormous gas chambers. We all lit a small candle, and Rabbi Andrew Shaw, from a synagogue in the south of England, led a small service. He told his personal story, which was astonishing. Rabbi Shaw’s grandfather and grandmother were married in Vienna in 1939. They were told that their future was very doubtful, and indeed, within a fortnight of being married his grandfather was arrested and taken away. A neighbour—a young woman—said to his grandmother, “If you stay you will die. I have a ticket and a visa to go somewhere. Take it. Go.” His grandmother did that, and the place to which she went, which she had never heard of, was Glasgow. She had only just arrived when she fell ill, and while she was in hospital she discovered that she was pregnant. She knew nothing about what had happened to her husband, although she wrote to him every week, telling him how she was doing and telling him that she had given birth. At the end of the war, it transpired that he had died within a fortnight of arriving in Germany. She felt, and said to her children and grandchildren, that the real issues that came out of Auschwitz were not evil and prejudice but pride and hope. There is pride that survival took place. Despite the worst that anyone could imagine, the Jewish nation survived. Jews continued; Roma continued; life continued. And there is still hope, despite the worst that human beings can do to other human beings. Those were the odd things that I learned at Auschwitz. As we walked away, leaving our candles on the railway tracks, and walked towards the light and back into the world, we thought about the Holocaust not with despair—certainly with anguish, but not with despair—but with pride in the survival of the human race and with hope for our future. Even the great evils of the Holocaust and the continuing genocide to which Mr Macintosh referred do not extinguish humanity. If we take that message every single Holocaust memorial day, and if we continue on our journey to eliminate prejudice, we will be doing the right thing, whereby we can build a better world. Meeting closed at 17:48.

The Scottish funding council has developed an action plan to respond to commencement of provisions in the 2013 act. The action plan includes preparation of a specific work plan related to implementation of sections 3, 15 and 16, which are the parts of the act related to widening access. In the meantime, the funding council has been monitoring and agreeing annual outcome agreements with each of the higher education institutions. As the chamber will know, those agreements include activity to widen access.

I pay tribute to Marco Biagi for his work on this subject, which was extremely successful and very influential. When they are appointed, the new chief executive of the Scottish funding council will be focused on supporting delivery of our post-16 reforms, which aim to boost jobs and growth, improve life chances—especially those of young learners—and ensure that institutions are sustainable for a long time. The SFC supports the Scottish Government’s strategic objective of widening access and I am sure that the new chief executive will support that. I will be closely involved in discussing that with them, as I am with the interim chief executive and the new chair, who has been very supportive of the objective.

As autonomous institutions, the salary levels of university principals and other senior staff are matters for each institution’s governing body and remuneration committee. However, I expect senior university management and governing bodies to demonstrate clear leadership and accountability by ensuring that pay awards to principals are not out of step with those that are available to staff and to ensure the highest standards of transparency as recommended by the von Prondzynski review of higher education governance in Scotland. I will re-emphasise that point at the university sector advisory forum’s next meeting.

The code of governance that the universities accepted at the end of that process makes it clear that there should be transparency in salary setting. There are issues about the involvement in salary boards of what are, essentially, in business terms, executive directors. Therefore, it is better for that work to be undertaken by independent voices. I make it clear that I do not support or endorse what has taken place. If principals, as they do from time to time, ask my private advice on what they should do, my advice is unequivocal. They should do what has been done by Scottish Government ministers and right across the public sector: they should make sure that they show both restraint and leadership. They certainly should not allow themselves to be awarded pay increases that are massively out of step with the salary terms and conditions that are offered to their staff. I cannot be any clearer than that. Perhaps the member wants me to nationalise every Scottish university, but I seem to remember that his accusation was that I was interfering too much rather than too little.

The member’s indignation no doubt does him credit, but it does not address the practicalities of the issue. I repeat that universities are autonomous institutions. That is not a difficult concept. In those circumstances, universities are entitled to make their own decisions. Therefore, we need to show leadership in the matter. The Parliament has very effectively shown leadership on pay restraint. We also showed that restraint with those bodies for which we are responsible and which we control, although I must say that virtually all those bodies were willing to follow that restraint. Institutions that are entirely free to make their own decisions should remain free to make their own decisions. If the member wants us to nationalise universities, I again challenge him to say so. I am unequivocal in my view that what we have seen is unacceptable. I have made that clear. I am also unequivocal in my view that, when I am asked for my advice, I give it. Here I am giving it in public, too, in case those principals who have not asked for my advice decide to do so. It is unacceptable to allow senior salary increases to get so out of step with what is available to the staff of universities. I hope that that message is heard loud and clear. If the member wishes to introduce legislation to nationalise every Scottish university, let him do so; otherwise I ask that he join me and be clear and unequivocal in his view.

That is a reasonable question, and the reasonable answer is that I have made it absolutely clear that those who are in charge of setting the terms and conditions—those on university courts or elsewhere—need to make it clear that they do not believe that pay, and particularly pay increases, for principals and other senior staff should run massively out of step with what is available to other members of staff. At a time when increases are being restricted to very low levels—if there is any increase at all—that is the right thing to happen for those at every level in universities. There should not be a rule for one and no rule for another.

That is a decision for the autonomous institution. I stress that again. I remember that, in the debates on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, there was an attempt to criticise me virtually every time I stood up on the ground that I was trying to interfere with universities and colleges. There are many decisions that those autonomous institutions are entirely free to take. We can see from the published table where the salary of the principal of the University of the Highlands and Islands is. That is a matter for that university. The issue is not comparative rates; it is the freedom of the universities and colleges, and what they do year on year. As the table shows, some are showing commendable restraint—for some, there is no increase or a modest increase—but some appear to be substantially out of kilter with the current norm. That is the issue to which we should address ourselves. I have no hesitation in saying that that is unacceptable.

I know that the member, like me, is deeply committed to our rural schools and recognises their importance to many communities. In order to improve and strengthen the process for all school closure proposals, the Scottish Government is taking forward amendments to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. For rural schools specifically, I intend to amend the act to clarify how the presumption against closure should operate in practice. As many members on both sides of the chamber will recall, a key policy objective of the 2010 act, which was passed unanimously, was to create a presumption against closure of rural schools. However, following the recent judicial review, the court concluded that the 2010 act does not contain such a presumption, and the resultant confusion between communities and local authorities means that there is a need to revise it. The Government’s policy remains that there should be a presumption against closure of rural schools. Consequently, our amendments will clarify exactly what is meant by that presumption and will describe it precisely in legal terms to ensure that they will have the intended consequences.

There is a delicate balance to be had on this matter and Mike MacKenzie is right to draw attention to it. In areas where the population is increasing, such as Shetland, there is a need to provide new schools or expand schools. Closing schools at the same time can be misunderstood and can be counterproductive. Building strong communities is an issue in areas where the population is expanding and it is also an issue in areas where the population is declining. In Argyll and Bute, which I represent, there is a severely declining population—it is one of the worst population declines in Scotland. Closing rural schools there may accelerate population decline because it may threaten existing small communities. In all those circumstances we need to be very careful when we are talking about closing good, viable rural schools. That is very important. There is no evidence that the closure of a good school benefits education anywhere, and we should remember that.

There have been no recent discussions. However, I have received a joint letter from the International Christian College in Glasgow and the Scottish Baptist College in Paisley regarding tuition fees for Scottish students. A response has been issued this week.

I am, of course, willing to meet John Mason and representatives of the colleges. I should say, however, that while John Mason may be puzzled about the situation, there are strong reasons why it exists. There are many advantages to studying in Scotland and I do not think that those should be forgotten.

Mr Smith and I are known for consensual politics, of course. Ministers and officials have raised the issue of cross-border students in writing and in a series of meetings with the EU and with other European states.

I thank Mr Smith for the confirmation—I think that it is the first time that we have heard it from the Labour Party—that Scotland will be an independent member of the EU. I am grateful for that and think that it is a step forward. Page 199 of “Scotland’s Future”—which I am sure that Mr Smith has read—says that “our current policy of charging fees to students from the rest of the UK to study at Scottish higher education institutions” is the best way to maintain the positive current mix of students at Scottish universities, and to ensure that Scotland-domiciled “students continue to have access to higher education opportunities”, which is something that Mr Smith would wish to happen. Each member state is, of course, free to adopt its own domestic policies, consistent with the objectives of the EU. We believe that our fees policies contribute to student mobility across the wider EU while addressing the consequences of the unique situation of Scottish independence. In those circumstances, we believe that it will be possible to deliver our policy in a way that is compatible with EU requirements.

I am delighted to be consensual about that, because there is legal advice in the public domain. It is the legal advice that exists for Universities Scotland, which I am sure Mary Scanlon has read, and it is entirely clear. All I can say about Government legal advice is that ministers do not confirm or deny whether legal advice exists but, of course, the First Minister has made it clear that everything in the white paper is consistent with legal advice. I accept that, if he says it, it is undoubtedly true in this instance as well. Given all those circumstances, I simply assure Mary Scanlon that the policy is well founded, that the doctrine of objective justification is well understood throughout Europe and that a range of very special circumstances apply that would make the defence of objective justification entirely legitimate. I am sure that Mary Scanlon also now recognises that, as an independent member of the EU, Scotland will have much to offer. I am sure that the policy will be part of its offering to ensure that the nation continues to achieve in higher education.

I certainly have no difficulty in agreeing with that point. It is absolutely clear that, if we look across these islands, Scottish students have a great advantage, as debt levels have soared elsewhere. That has happened because of a policy that the UK Government has pursued—a policy that is based on a report that the Labour Party commissioned and which it has continued to support. Student debt levels are soaring. I will give members the figures. Student Loans Company figures that were published in 2013 show that the average student loan debt for Scottish students is £6,850. In Wales, it is £14,910 and in England it is £18,740. Those figures tell members the truth: higher education in other parts of these islands is being monetarised. It will not be monetarised in Scotland.

Neil Bibby should read the totality of the advice. [Interruption.] No, no. I pointed out yesterday that Mr Bibby’s figures do not compute; his reading skills do not compute either. The totality of the legal advice indicates that there is a perfectly strong argument and case to be made on objective justification. If Mr Bibby was prepared to argue for free education in Scotland—education that is based on the ability to learn, and not on the ability to pay—I would have more respect for his position. The fact that he threatens Scottish students, present and future, with substantial amounts of debt rather invalidates any contribution that he could make to the debate on higher education.

I regularly meet education officers from local authorities across Scotland to discuss a wide range of education issues.

I am more than willing to meet the member and her constituents to discuss the issue. We should always be willing to listen to parents’ views on educational matters. The provision of education is a statutory responsibility for the appropriate local authority, which is South Lanarkshire Council in this case. In discharging their legal duties, authorities are responsible for setting school admissions policies, which include procedures for dealing with placing requests. Local authorities have a duty to make such arrangements as they consider necessary for transport between homes and schools for pupils who reside and attend schools in their areas. However, if a pupil attends a school on a placing request, the local authority does not have to provide a school bus or any help with transport costs. I give two caveats. If there are spare seats on buses, an authority can offer them for free or at cost to pupils who are not entitled to transport. Such places are often referred to as privilege places. When a pupil has support needs, I would expect the local authority to be very sympathetic and supportive. Every member in the Parliament knows that parents of children with support needs often have to fight extra hard to get the support and services that their children are entitled to. Local authorities have an obligation to ensure that parents do not have to do that.

Following the moratorium and the report of the commission on the delivery of rural education, I am taking forward amendments to the legislation on school closures, as I have said. I expect those amendments to improve the consultation process for all school closure proposals and to clarify the presumption against closure for rural schools specifically. Parents and communities deserve an open and honest consultation process and decision making that is transparent. They also deserve to have a real say in decisions that affect them. I expect our amendments, along with improvements to the statutory guidance in relation to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, to deliver that.

The member raises an important issue and I entirely agree with him. Numbers are only one of the criteria that any authority would want to be aware of, and numbers can change dramatically. The member’s example of Logie Coldstone is replicated across the country. I know of many schools threatened with closure that were down into single figures but are now bursting at the seams. Educational benefit is at the centre of the school closure process. That is what we have built into the outputs that we are emphasising and stressing as we go forward. Scotland’s geography dictates that we will always need to have small rural schools. Scotland’s flourishing rural sector can flourish only if we continue to provide services within rural localities. Local authorities are supported to provide rural schools through the grant-aided expenditure funding mechanism. Local authorities should—indeed, must—explore all reasonable alternatives to the closure of a rural school and listen to suggestions from the community about alternative solutions; I think that the amendments that we are bringing forward to the 2010 act will help to ensure that.

The Education (Lower Primary Class Sizes) (Scotland) Regulations 1999 and the Education (Lower Primary Class Sizes) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010, which prescribe maximum class-size limits for primary 1, 2 and 3 classes, provide that, where teaching is conducted by more than one teacher, the class-size limit can be exceeded. That provision was introduced primarily to overcome accommodation constraints and is not linked specifically to the achievement of wider benefits from smaller class sizes. It is clear that contact time with each child is increased by using two teachers, which will have some effect.

Liam McArthur raises an important issue, and we should look closely at the matter. The use of team teaching in any situation may benefit children. There has been an increase in team teaching, and—with regard to the figures that Liam McArthur gave—that may well be the case in areas where there has been a population increase or where there is pressure on school buildings. He is right to draw attention to that, and I am happy to discuss the matter further with him. As we move forward on the class-size issue, it will be useful to look at the issue of team teaching, and I undertake to do so.

The Scottish Government is investing more than £134 million in eight new secondary schools and one new primary school in north-east Scotland through the £1.25 billion Scotland’s schools for the future programme between now and March 2018. In addition, in the academic year 2013-14, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will provide approximately £5 million of capital funding to colleges and universities in north-east Scotland for on-going maintenance of the educational infrastructure.

I am delighted to do so, although we are being thanked for a slightly overgenerous amount: the project’s total value is approximately £19.9 million, while the Scottish Futures Trust’s contribution is £13.3 million, or two thirds of the total. It is great news for the north-east, and demonstrates once more the Government’s commitment to delivering a high-quality school estate throughout Scotland. I am sure that Christian Allard will be generous in welcoming the fact that, in addition to the Alford project, the Government is supporting the replacement of two further secondary schools in Aberdeenshire—Ellon and Mearns academies—through the schools for the future programme. The completion of those three projects involves a total investment of approximately £78 million, which includes Scottish Government contributions of more than £14 million, and will benefit around 2,000 pupils.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the positive contribution that Labour has made to the debate on free school meals. I point out that I am talking about not the Labour Party from which we heard today but the Labour Party elsewhere—a Labour Party that is not so obsessed with the constitution and the SNP—[Interruption.]

The Labour Party whose contribution I welcome is the Labour Party in Islington. Last year, when the free school meals policy was announced south of the border, Richard Watts, the Labour leader of Islington Council, said that the case for free school meals is “compelling”. He wrote a piece in which he argued strongly that free school meals must be “a crucial part” of Labour’s response to the cost of living crisis, and he concluded: “Labour has a good story to tell on free school meals ... we have introduced it at local level; the GMB has made the case for the policy and we have had Government-funded pilots and a robust evaluation. Now is the time”— perhaps the Labour leader in the Scottish Parliament will remember this— “to tell the electorate that we support free school meals for all and give our activists a policy that will really resonate on the doorstep.” We did not hear a single thing from Johann Lamont today that would resonate, even on her own doorstep. What we heard was a speech from a leader who is incapable of changing the words that are in front of her. She responded to less than half of the First Minister’s announcement—as did most Labour speakers. The speech that Johann Lamont should have made is the one that Willie Rennie made—or at least, the first four minutes of it. Let us leave the final minute unmentioned. Willie Rennie realised that Parliament was hearing good news for the children and young people of Scotland. He realised that progress is being made in difficult times, and he wanted to ensure that his voice was raised in support of and not against Scotland’s young people. I want to dwell for a moment on the educational aspects of the announcements, because they are both vital in terms of education. Larry Flanagan of the Educational Institute of Scotland has welcomed the announcements this afternoon, in a statement that talks about the important and significant step that the Scottish Government is taking. He congratulates the Scottish Government for taking that step and says: “Poverty is the greatest barrier to educational attainment, and so it is essential that we continue to combat child poverty to ensure that all young people have a fair chance to achieve their potential.” He goes further. He talks about the fact that health and wellbeing are central to the curriculum for excellence and notes the way in which the announcement ties into the curriculum for excellence. He says that research evidence shows that the initiative “will bring real benefits for pupils’ health, aid their concentration during the long school day, and will support their ability to reach their full potential as learners.” He says that the initiative will benefit the whole of education. It will—both of the announcements will. Consider the recent programme for international student assessment—PISA—results. We know that our attainment record in Scotland is getting better. We are closing that attainment gap. However, we still have more to do.

I am sorry, but I want to make progress on this point. We have clear evidence that tells us that investing in both early learning and childcare has an effect, and that free school meals along with early learning does something for a whole cohort of young people. Positive benefits are felt not just at the point at which the intervention takes place but throughout the rest of their educational lives. There is evidence that the announcements that have been made today are significant.

I do not think that I can be accused of thinking the opposite. The 2011 manifesto—on which I stood and was elected, as were all my colleagues—said that we would seek to expand provision when finances permit, which is precisely what we are doing today. This announcement is of huge educational benefit. In a moment, I will talk about reactions to the announcement. First, however, I want to say something about the speeches that we heard today. We heard a number of strange speeches; I will pick out two. Alex Johnstone’s description of Iain Duncan Smith as a revolutionary was the high point, although I was equally surprised to hear Neil Findlay quoting Warren Buffett. He then went on to pin his colours to the mast regarding the council tax freeze. He described the action of this Government on education as “stomach-churningly cynical.” I do not want to get into a stomach-churning contest—

Thank you for that vote of confidence. The thing that I have found “stomach-churningly cynical” this afternoon is that Neil Findlay, the man who is against the council tax freeze, is sitting behind a woman who was elected in Dunfermline on the pledge of a council tax freeze: there is a definition of stomach-churning cynicism. It is also a good example of Labour’s policy disarray, which we have seen in its most stark form this afternoon. We must ask: what is Labour’s position on free school meals? I have counted five positions today—six, actually, if we include Ed Balls’s position. The article from which the First Minister read out a wonderful quotation includes a picture of Ed Balls distributing free school meals. I presume that if the Scottish Labour leader has her way, they will have to be given back. The first position that I would note is that of Labour backbenchers, as recorded in March 2013, in a motion to celebrate international school meals day—which, by the way, will be an even bigger celebration in Scotland this year. That motion, which was lodged by Elaine Smith, was signed by Anne McTaggart, Mark Griffin, Hanzala Malik and Margaret McDougall, all of whom will, I presume, vote for free school meals this afternoon. Then there is the Labour’s local government position. I am delighted to see that one of the warmest welcomes—

No, thank you. Mr Findlay’s conscience has swaggered around the chamber enough this afternoon. Last year, when the policy was announced, Councillor Gordon Matheson, the leader of Glasgow City Council, was quoted as saying that he wants the cash “and wants to use it to provide free school meals for P1 to P3 pupils.” Glasgow City Council wants to do that and has shown its commitment to young people. It already provides free breakfasts and free lunches for thousands of children. Councillor Matheson said: “We expect Glasgow to get more than £7m as our fair share of the extra money coming to Scotland to implement this policy.” So, that is Labour’s second position. A group of back benchers are in favour of the policy, and Glasgow City Council and—no doubt—other councils are in favour of it. Let us look at the trade unions’ position. Just this afternoon, Alex McLuckie, GMB Scotland’s senior organiser for the public sector, said: “There is so much good in this announcement. It will help tackle poverty and social exclusion and help remove the stigma some attach to free school meals.” Those are three Labour positions. Then there is Mr Chisholm’s position. He said that there is not a single mention of free school meals in the white paper—but there is. I was puzzled by a number of other things that he said. Mr Chisholm was also wrong about Labour policy in the UK. Labour policy in the UK, as announced at the 2013 conference, had two pledges: one was for 24 hours a week of childcare for three and four-year-olds, which it claimed would cost £675 million but which would actually cost over £1 billion; the other was for schools to be open from 8am to 6pm but with no funding attached, so local authorities would have to meet the cost. However, the astonishing thing about Mr Chisholm’s speech—I am grateful to him for it—was the commitment that he made on behalf of the Labour front bench to match whatever the SNP does in 2016. Previously, Labour’s only policy was a commission. The issue was raised first with the First Minister when the Labour leader met him and again in the debate in this chamber. However, we now know that the Labour commitment is to match whatever takes place.

I am afraid that that is simply not good enough. Labour has not costed the policy or said when it would be delivered, and today Labour is going to vote against it. That is the most astonishing thing of all. The position of Mr Bibby—who is pointing at me—is also unique. Mr Bibby cannot add 60 and 74.

I am sorry, Mr Findlay, but I have said no. Mr Bibby says that Labour’s policy can be afforded within £134 million over two years, but he has also admitted that the cost will be £100 million a year. Those two things do not compute, and neither does Kezia Dugdale’s position. She claimed on Radio Forth today that she wants 10,000 two-year-olds to be included in the policy. Our policy, which was announced by the First Minister this afternoon, includes over 15,000 two-year-olds, so I cannot see what would prevent her from supporting that policy this afternoon.

No. I am sorry, but I want to finish. The reality is this: Kezia Dugdale says that she supports the provision of free school meals, but she will vote against it. If the Labour Party votes against the Government’s motion, it will vote against free school meals—no ifs or buts.

No. I am responding to Kezia Dugdale’s point. If she votes no this afternoon, she will vote against including a larger number of two-year-olds than was proposed by Labour. That is twice—the Labour Party has form on this. In the vote on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, the Labour Party voted against widening access and against a single set of terms and conditions. The Labour Party in this Parliament has voted against education that is based on the ability to learn rather than on the ability to pay. We know what Labour is against. It is against young people and education, but we do not know what it is for. George Adam put it well this afternoon. The SNP is single-mindedly in favour of the people of Scotland, particularly the children of Scotland, and we want this country to be the best country to grow up in. We must achieve real transformation, and that can be done only through independence. The figures make it absolutely clear that independence is not an abstract idea but a way in which we can make Scotland better. It is the key that opens the door to the transformations that we need not just in childcare, but across our society. Step by step, we are getting there. We have made commitments and we are honouring commitments. We are making those commitments for our country and, most of all, for our country’s children.

We welcome the recognition that Professor Higgs is now receiving as a result of his deserved Nobel award and the inspiration that that is providing to the next generation of physicists. The Scottish Government is committed to supporting the Higgs legacy and I am delighted to announce that, via the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, we are further supporting that legacy through a £2 million contribution to the proposed Higgs centre for ideas and an additional £2 million to support postgraduate study in physics or mathematics.

It is quite significant that there was no applause from members on the Labour benches for the announcement of £4 million for the Higgs centre but there was applause for Iain Gray’s unfortunately partisan welcome of that £4 million. That says it all about the position of the Labour Party. It will not welcome investment in excellence in Scottish education; it will only welcome its own spokesperson, who wants to run it down. For the avoidance of doubt, I will say that research has no boundaries. That is what it says in the white paper. Research has no boundaries between Scotland and England and it has no international boundaries. Research excellence in Scotland has no boundaries—the work that Peter Higgs did had no boundaries. That is the way we should go forward with research, rather than taking the narrow, partisan view that we have just heard from Iain Gray.

We believe that the unique and unprecedented position in higher education of a post-independent Scotland will enable us to continue our current policy in a way that is consistent with the principles of free movement across the EU as a whole and which is compatible with EU requirements. As detailed on page 200 of “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, our policy is based on the unique and exceptional position of Scotland relative to other parts of the UK; the relative size of the rest of the UK; the fee differential; our shared land border and common language; qualification structure; the quality of our university sector; and the high demand for places.

It leaves the policy completely untouched, because the argument of objective justification—as the member will know, given his expertise in European law—is a clear and understood argument in these circumstances. The member should consider that argument. Perhaps he would also like to reflect on his party’s policy, which appears to be to impose tuition fees. The no campaign’s offering is to have tuition fees in Scotland. The Scottish Government believes that education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. If the member shared that view, he would be working hard to make sure that that continued to be the case in Scotland. However, of course, that pass has been sold by the member and the Labour Party.

The member is aware that such confirmation is not given by any Government. It is not given by his Government in Westminster and it is not given by this Government. However, I am happy to say to the member that the details that I gave in my initial answer—concerning the unique and exceptional position of Scotland relative to other parts of the UK; the relative size of the rest of the UK; the fee differential; our shared land border and common language; qualification structure; the quality of our university sector; and the high demand for places—are clear elements of an argument for objective justification, which is a term that I am sure he will understand.

Considerable discussion took place with other EU countries and EU officials about the concept of management fees, and the policy is extremely difficult to implement. It would still be considered, but it is extraordinarily hard to implement. In the white paper, we offer a positive approach to the issue of EU students. If the member has ideas about how we could improve our higher education system, I will always be happy to consider them. However, as the member’s ideas have also included charging students in Scotland fees, I suspect that we will not be able to come to an agreement on them.

Several colleges offer provision of that kind, including North Highland College, in the member’s constituency, many of whose graduates have been successful in securing relevant employment. That is a good example of a college designing courses to meet the specific needs of the local community, consistent with the aims of our reforms.

The member asks a good and pertinent question. It is important that people who are trained in the area, who go on to find jobs in a variety of sectors, are aware of the changing needs in those sectors. I am aware of the concern of the member and the committee that he convenes about deer in Scotland. I think that his concern is widely shared in rural Scotland. Therefore, it is extremely important to ensure that people who are trained as gamekeepers are up to date on and can cope with the pressures and issues. Colleges in general should ensure that their provision matches the needs of employers. I know for sure that that will be true in the area that we are considering, as it will be in many other areas.

I meet the chair and principal of Edinburgh College among others at various formal and informal events. For example, I attended the first birthday reception for the college that was held in the Parliament on Tuesday 1 October, which was jointly hosted by Colin Beattie MSP and Kezia Dugdale MSP.

I would urge both college management and union representatives to work constructively together in every college in Scotland because that produces success. The change team, among others, have been engaged in a range of situations, and what has been taking place has ensured that the necessary and important mergers, which produce colleges of scale—as those working in colleges at every level recognise needed to happen—go through by negotiation and discussion. I can assure the member that the Scottish funding council has assured me that the Edinburgh College principal and her senior team are addressing the issues raised by the unions and the SFC’s report. The SFC will monitor progress on that and provide regular updates. However, that should not detract from the fact that the college is delivering substantial benefit for learners; for example, Edinburgh College is now the single largest supplier of students to the University of Edinburgh.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council monitors regionalisation and reports regularly to the Scottish Government on progress.

If the member writes to me with his concerns about Woodburn house, I will be happy to address them. The question of asset disposal lies with colleges. If asset disposal was undertaken in a way that was disadvantageous to a college, that would be a concern. However, the relevant relationship would be that between the funding council and the college. I encourage the member to write to me. If he wishes to discuss the matter with me, I will be happy to do so, but it might be more appropriate for me to get the funding council to tell him its position on the matter.

How the Glasgow colleges decide to operate is a matter for them. The purpose of regionalisation is to ensure that resources are focused as closely as they can be on young people, youth employment, providing opportunities for young people, ensuring that retraining takes place at every level and ensuring that colleges compete effectively and work with local businesses. I recall that the member voted against regionalisation, but I am glad to say that it is going well and that front-line resources are benefiting.

Disabled students allowance is paid in response to demand, so costs reflect the number of claimants and their needs. Initial discussions with the disabled students advisory group suggest that the reduction in DSA spend in 2012-13 reflects a combination of a decrease in the number of claimants and institutions being in a better state of readiness to make the reasonable adjustments that are expected of them by the Equality Act 2010, along with technological improvements that mean that the functionality of equipment that students use lends itself much more easily to supporting students with disabilities.

No. There is virtually not a single word that I agree with in that, partly because there is not a single fact that appears to me to be justified or accurate. The reality of the situation, as I explained to Mr Hume—clearly he was not listening, so let me repeat my point—is that the budget is demand led. The budget has not been cut; the demand has reduced. Perhaps that is because support for students is better in Scotland; perhaps it is because students do not have to scrabble around looking for money in circumstances in which they would have to borrow it south of the border; or perhaps it is because the Scottish Government has been providing for and supporting changes in college funding and college support that will benefit students—all things that the Liberal Democrats could learn from south of the border.

What I said and what I will say again is that we believe, as does the disabled students advisory group, that the reduction has come about due to a number of things—a decrease in the number of claimants, which is because institutions are in a better state of readiness as regards the reasonable adjustments that are expected of them, along with technological improvements and better equipment. As the relevant minister, I have also provided additional support to charities and to others to support disabled students and I have encouraged the charities to expand the activities that they undertake. All of those are positive moves and it is about time that members realised that what is happening in Scotland’s colleges is a major improvement in provision and facility, which has been welcomed across the college sector.

The Scottish Government’s total funding specifically in support of local authority school PPP/PFI contracts in 2012-13 was £209.5 million.

I agree with George Adam. I am quite sure that Mrs Henry, the Labour convener of education in Renfrewshire Council, will wish to inform people that the PFI approach that was used in the past has not delivered best value for the taxpayer, with excessive profits being made by the private sector. Councils should be clear with parents about the massive costs that the approach imposes. Instead of paying a fair price for schools and nurseries, PFI mortgaged the financial future of Scotland’s councils. As a result, today’s pupils are burdened with PFI’s poisoned chalice, with nearly £400 million being top-sliced from council education budgets in 2012-13 to pay for PFI programmes. The mistakes that were made with earlier PFI contracts will not be repeated. I am sure that people from Renfrewshire—members as well—will want to make that clear.

My officials and I meet regularly with Colleges Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to discuss a wide variety of college issues. Our expectations on student numbers are set out in my letter of guidance to the funding council. The latest letter of guidance was issued on 21 October, and the SFC monitors progress through outcome agreements.

It is about time that Opposition members accepted that the college sector is working incredibly hard to promote opportunities for young people. That is what it does, and it is doing it better because this Government had the courage to implement a series of much-needed reforms that had to happen. The portfolio in each college changes from year to year and from time to time in order to ensure that the communities that they serve are provided with access to the latest “innovative, high quality, relevant learning”. It was not I who said that; Cumbernauld College used those terms. What is taking place is perfectly normal changes within courses. The college sector is going from strength to strength. It would be good to hear a regional or local member from the Opposition supporting their colleges rather than running them down.

We ensure that universities and colleges, like all public bodies, meet the needs of disabled students through compliance with the Equality Act 2010. We also provide direct financial support through programmes such as the disabled students allowance, extended learning support and college bursaries.

I have met the relevant third sector organisations on a number of occasions. I have encouraged them to use funding that I have offered them to ensure that their services and their advice to the Scottish Government takes account of the real needs of students. I am very happy to meet the member if he wants to discuss this matter further with me. I attended a meeting of a cross-party group that discussed this issue as well. I am keen to see those who are deeply involved in this issue being very active in telling the Scottish Government and the colleges what more is required. If the member would like to have a conversation about that with me, I am happy to have it. I am also happy to make sure that the learning disability charities are involved as deeply as we can possibly get them involved in offering good advice and providing services.

As Murdo Fraser would expect, I say with complete conviction that the Scottish Government fully recognises and supports the rights of all academics at universities to express their views on the constitutional debate.

It is such a great pity that the unanimity on freedom of speech and openness that that question and answer gave us has been broken by Mr Fraser. I have known Shona Robison for close on 20 years and, as the First Minister said from this very spot last week, I could not associate in the same sentence the words “intimidation” and “bullying” with Shona Robison. Clearly, Murdo Fraser does not know her very well; clearly, other members do not know her very well either. Let us find a way to agree on the matter. Independence is an important debate that we need to have—[Interruption.]—without jeering from Mr Bibby. We all need to be able to contribute without fear or favour, name calling or cat calling—[Interruption.]

The Presiding Officer has emphasised my point and I thank her for doing so. It is really important to have the debate. Yesterday afternoon’s debate showed that this chamber has the capability to be one of the best debating chambers in the world. We showed how we can come together in passionate, strong principled debate. If we do that for the next 10 months, Scotland will be a better place for it.

The member makes a wise point about ensuring that the bill is implemented well. I am sure that she will wish to do this anyway, but I recommend that she visits Angus, for example, or goes to see some of the excellent work that is being done in my constituency, in Argyll and Bute, to find out how policy is being converted into practice in a most impressive way. I think that it will set her mind at rest to know that people’s imagination, hard work and resources are resulting in that.

This has been, by and large—with the exception of the last few minutes—a positive and useful debate. The purpose of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill was defined by Aileen Campbell at the outset, and I will repeat what she said: the whole purpose of the bill is to improve children’s lives, and everything we do or say about it should be judged in that way. That is absolutely correct. By and large, members have responded to the challenge. It is right to say that the bill is not a single bill, but the coming together of two bills into one bill. We thought about and consulted on how to improve lives, doing just what Aileen Campbell asked us to do. I pay tribute to Aileen Campbell’s leadership on the issue—her leadership on the bill and her leadership within the ministerial team. She has a strong commitment, as have I, to continue to work with members across the chamber to improve the bill and put it on the statute book. That is what we should be doing. I thank everyone concerned with that process, particularly the Education and Culture Committee. The convener restated, cogently and eloquently, the constructive points that arose at committee—and they are constructive points, which are being considered by the Scottish Government. As with all proposed legislation, we are keen to improve the bill as it goes into detailed legislative scrutiny. The bill will have material added to it. As the committee convener indicated, I will be lodging amendments at stage 2 regarding school closure proposals. I look forward to giving evidence to the committee on 3 December and to discussing proposals on the subject that have—by and large, albeit not completely—been well received. I thank Jayne Baxter for her opening speech, and I welcome the support that she indicated in it. I am certain that, working together, we will be able to make the bill the best that it can be to ensure that Scotland is the best country to grow up in. I am positive that we can find ways to go forward together in that regard. Liz Smith’s speech was measured and positive, and I am grateful to her. It is wise that we acknowledge the concern within the Conservative Party about the named person provision. I think that the named person is a positive provision. I have taken some time to be persuaded of that, because I wanted to see the work that was going on and the actions that were being taken across Scotland, but the named person provision is immensely impressive to see in operation. It is wrong to define it as more work; it is about smarter work and how professionals change and develop what they do to meet the challenges that exist.

I understand that concern, and I think that Liz Smith—if I might say so without embarrassing her—put it much better than did Gavin Brown, who got trapped by his ideological views. However, there is contrary evidence from a variety of places, in particular from those who are doing the job, to say that the provision is not about increased activity or primarily about increased resource, but about different methods of operation. In giving evidence to the Education and Culture Committee, Bill Alexander stated in respect of the named person provision that “It is much easier to understand what is going on”. He went on to say that: “Teachers ... and midwives tell me that it does not change what they do but it changes how they are regarded” and that “they feel that it has empowered them.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 24 September 2013; c 2861-62.] Bill Alexander knows more about the subject than almost anybody else, and I have found what he says to be true when I have spoken to the people who are involved. I want that to be demonstrated to the committee and to the chamber, and if there are ways in which it can be demonstrated, it should be. The named person provision is about enabling, not enforcing. It is about not interference or approved parenting, nor substituting professionals for parents, but helping and assisting. It is a very important innovation.

It is possible to envisage that being included in the guidance, but I—and the minister, I think—would welcome a discussion with Liam McArthur and other members on the matter, because there are ways forward. I am grateful for that contribution. I will deal quickly with one or two other points. I share Kezia Dugdale’s anger about looked-after children; I expressed it in an article that I wrote in 2006 about the fact that the Parliament had, until that stage, talked about the issue a lot with genuine feeling but had not brought about change. The bill can help to bring about change, but it can also do what Kezia Dugdale wants it to do, which is to raise the profile of looked-after children—once and for all—in a way that makes us understand our responsibilities; makes society understand the issue; and ensures that we can make progress in a way that none of us has succeeded in doing until now. I say to Bob Doris that there is nothing in the bill at all that will interfere with the opportunities or rights of local authorities in relation to kinship carers—it is quite the reverse, in fact. I pay tribute to Cara Hilton for her maiden speech. She was quite right to drop the convention of paying tribute to her predecessor at the beginning. To be fair to her, she dropped quite a number of other conventions too, including the convention of making a maiden speech of a consensual nature. There was no harm in that at all—she has her mother’s passion for those whom she represents. I will be unconventional too, and pay tribute not just to the member but to her mum. Cathy Peattie is a loss to the chamber. We worked closely together in the first session of Parliament on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee; I regard her as a friend and I always will. She was a doughty fighter for her constituency, for education and schools, and for Scottish culture. Cara Hilton asked a number of questions of the Scottish Government, and the answer to most of them lies in the need for this chamber to have full powers. Her election literature—[Interruption.] If questions are asked, they should be answered. Her election literature asked why the SNP Government would not match Labour’s commitment to 600 hours of free childcare. With the greatest respect, I suggest that the question was put in the wrong way. Why did Labour not deliver those hours when it was in power? Indeed, it did not even deliver the 475 hours that we have now—it was delivering only 412.5 hours. We are delivering, and we could deliver much more with the full powers of a normal Parliament. Cara Hilton’s election slogan said that, “Dunfermline deserves better.” I agree, but I would go further and say that Scotland deserves better than the limit that her party has placed—and continues to place—on progress for her constituents. Let us have even more ambition for those powers. The centrepiece of the bill is the 600 hours of free childcare. It is there on offer and it needs to be supported. In supporting it, we will make a difference and make this country the best country in which to grow up. The bill is a major step forward, and the fact that members on all sides of the chamber wish to support it is incredibly welcome, but the task with all legislation is to make it as good as it can be. With the work that Jayne Baxter and Liam McArthur have offered to do, and perhaps with the consent and the work of the Scottish Tories—except on one issue, although I hope that we will be able to draw them into supporting that provision—we will have a bill to be proud of. We will have a country to be proud of in terms of how we look after and lead forward our children, and then, with independence, we can do even more.

My officials met the principal of South Lanarkshire College earlier this week to discuss our recently published consultation paper about the implementation of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Act 2013. Among the issues addressed by the consultation are the future regional arrangements for all the Lanarkshire colleges.

It is uncommon for me not to be heard, Presiding Officer, as you know. I answered the question very positively indeed. I pointed out that my officials met the principal of South Lanarkshire College earlier this week to discuss the consultation paper that has been published about the future of the regional college in Lanarkshire. I am well aware of the quality of the work that is undertaken in South Lanarkshire College and I commend the principal and the staff. It is a high-achieving college and it has a great many important links with local employers. The purpose of regionalisation is to strengthen that type of performance, ensure that a strategic view is taken across the region and ensure that the interaction between the regions works well for Scotland’s learners and its economy. I am quite sure that South Lanarkshire College, in either of the proposed iterations in the consultation, will do that. We now need to have a conversation with colleges in South Lanarkshire and elsewhere about how we take the issue forward.

I hear what the member is saying. In her statement last night, she said: “We need to make radical changes to the structure of education”. However, the Wood commission’s report states: “Our proposals don’t require time consuming, expensive restructuring of the education system”. Would she like to square that circle?

The member has cited some figures about school education that I think are a little suspect. Sir Ian Wood’s report says: “The introduction of Curriculum for Excellence in primary schools and in S1-S3 is already making a difference as a new approach to teaching and learning is helping pupils to develop many of the skills and attributes they will need to be successful”. The report goes on to say that that can be done “without splitting young people off into separate streams”. That is not what the member is saying.

I am sure that the member would not want inadvertently to misrepresent the report. I draw his attention to the bullet points on page 5. The first is on the curriculum for excellence, and the second refers to: “The move to larger regional colleges with more focus on regional labour markets and a greater emphasis on employment outcomes.” The reason why that is mentioned is that it is described as one of the “important drivers for change on which our recommendations can be built.” I think that it is important to point that out in the interests of fairness.

The last time the member raised this matter in the chamber, I encouraged him to write to me with details of his constituents who were on those waiting lists so that we could consider the issue that he raises. He has not yet done so. I encourage him again to do so. Only if he brings forward those names will we be able to find out whether those young people are genuinely waiting for a place or what the circumstance is. I make the offer again.

I can agree with the view that the debate has been, in the main, a productive and positive debate that teaches us many things. I start by welcoming Jenny Marra back to the Labour front bench on education and training matters. I agree entirely with her opening words. Most young people—indeed, all young people—want to work. We should have that fact at the heart of our considerations. We should also agree that young people have skills and can develop them further. We should look to make sure that they are developed in every young person. I agree with Kezia Dugdale’s closing words. The report is excellent, and we can agree on the vast majority of issues within it. I also agree with another point that Labour made this afternoon—I think that it was Richard Baker who made it—in that I am certain that the commission will note and consider everything that members have said and that their comments will influence the way in which the commission takes forward the next stage of its work. However, if we are listening to Ian Wood, we should do so accurately. I start with the issue of funding. Not all funding is new funding. At the start of his report, on page 2, in the foreword, at the start of the fourth paragraph, he states: “We believe our proposals are ambitious and challenging, but based on evolving good practice and thus can be implemented without significant additional funding and phased in over a fairly short period of time.” Later on, on page 13, as elsewhere, he goes into some of the detail. The responsible position on this point is exactly as expressed in Jenny Marra’s amendment, which I am happy to support. It will insert into the motion: “notes the resource implications for colleges of the report’s recommendations”. I note that. We all note that, and we will consider it carefully as we go forward. I do not think that there is any great difference on that matter, despite some Labour members’ attempts to create that difference. Given the situation of colleges, we should note that the vice-chair of the commission was Linda McKay, who was the principal of Forth Valley College at the time when she was appointed. Colleges are absolutely up for this—I know that from my very close work with them—and I note that the people who gave evidence include not only Kezia Dugdale and Johann Lamont but more than 20 individuals with college links. In other words, more than 20 members of college staff or college chairs gave evidence, as did Colleges Scotland and the regional leads. The report is fully informed by the real experience of colleges. The report mentions that the work should go forward based on the reforms of the college sector and on “The move to larger regional colleges with more focus on regional labour markets and a greater emphasis on employment outcomes.” In those circumstances, we should listen to that and recognise that it is the college reform process that has made the difference. I quote again, from page 10: “The regionalisation of Scotland’s colleges provides a significant opportunity for the sector to continue to enhance the perception of college education.” The report is informed by the reality of the changes that have taken place in colleges, and it will be built upon in that way. I want to address one or two of the points that were made in the debate, but before I do so I turn to the Tory amendment. In the final words of her speech, Liz Smith said that she is committed to the Wood principles. Having seen the amendment, I have to think that the Tories are more committed to the Gove principles, because the reality is that it says: “these objectives can only be achieved in full if there is greater diversity in schools and a reversal of the recent damaging cuts to the college budget”. What? All of them? Are we to move back to 43 colleges? Are we to undo all the reform process? The report talks about the importance of the reform process. Last night, the Tories issued a press release. To lean so heavily on abolishing—it says abolishing—the comprehensive system is, in essence, simply trying to use the report for ideological purposes.

I am sorry, but I simply cannot allow that to pass unchallenged. I have made the point that the press release that was issued last night in Liz Smith’s name states: “We need to make radical changes to the structure of education ... so that we can provide a much more diverse range of educational experiences.” That is one of the reasons that she gave for her amendment. Page 5 of the report says: “Our proposals don't require time consuming, expensive restructuring of the education system”. It is either one or the other: either the Tories believe that the report is a Trojan horse for abandoning the comprehensive system, or they accept it. I want to make a couple of remarks about the debate. I really do not want to fall out with my old friend Mr Malik. He and I go back a long way, and I was very concerned by his reaction to what I said, so let me couch it in other terms. If he believes that he has significant waiting lists in the area that he represents, despite the work that was done last year to prove that they did not exist, I invite him to come and talk to my officials. [Interruption.] I am sorry that people laugh at the Scottish funding council and the work that was done. That does no credit to the members who thought that that was a joke. I make a genuine commitment to Mr Malik. If he believes that that is the case and that I am paying no attention to the matter—unfortunately, that is what he said—I will make an appointment for him to talk to my officials. If he wants to give his information, they will tell him what they think the situation is. We can have a dialogue, because I do not want to fall out with him on these matters. He is nodding vigorously; I hope that he will take up that offer. A number of important contributions have been made about individuals. I want to conclude by speaking about individuals.

No. I want to mention a couple of individuals. Liam McArthur mentioned his constituent Sophie Turner, who has a stonemason apprenticeship at St Magnus cathedral. Unfortunately, he said that the message of good will that I sent to colleges was not played at the graduation ceremony at St Magnus cathedral. I am happy to go to St Magnus cathedral personally and deliver that message. I am sure that Liam McArthur will take me up on that offer. There are Sophie Turners across every constituency—individuals who are given unique opportunities to take part in apprenticeships that give them life-changing experiences and lead to new careers.

No. I must make progress. I have a very short time to conclude. Another of Mr MacArthur’s constituents, Owen Walker, has just won the Baird of Bute Society’s Loganair scholarship for flying—members knew that I would want to mention my constituency. That young man, who is still at school, is going out on a voyage of adventure to become a pilot. A private company has given him that first opportunity. Richard Baker made the point that we should remember the key influence of private companies. We should also remember the constraints under which we work. Gavin Brown’s speech was heavy on what will happen next with the commission in respect of what could be done to encourage businesses to do more. I agree with him entirely. I absolutely agree that that should be simple and straightforward. Last night, I spoke to members of the Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce, who made exactly the same point. However, employment law and personal employment activity are reserved, of course, so if we want to establish a new, simple and clearer system, we need to have powers over those things in the Scottish Parliament. In other words, we need to have independence.

I look forward to the member’s conversion on the matter. I am sure that he will want to raise the issue with me afterwards. The debate has been positive, as we are all positive about the future of young people in Scotland. Ian Wood and his team have done an exceptional job, but they have done it based on what exists. They have recognised the importance of the curriculum for excellence and college reform, and they have recognised the work that my colleague, Angela Constance, has done with others on modern apprenticeships. They have recognised all those things and said, “Now let’s do better.” That is a challenge to all of us. We should accept that challenge and do better. The report gives us a chance to get on with things. Let us do so together.

The rankings confirm what we already know about the strengths of our world-class system of higher education. Students who study here—let us not forget that a record number of Scottish students were accepted into our universities this year—can be confident in the quality of what our universities offer, which is precisely why more than 90 per cent of graduates find themselves in positive destinations six months after they complete their degrees.

Absolutely. Such concerns are shared across the higher education sector; university principals will make that point. At a recent event on the future of higher education that I took part in at the University of Dundee, every panel member—including Opposition spokespeople on education—agreed that the policy of successive UK Governments has been negative. The result has been a detrimental impact on the international competitiveness of Scottish education. The policy adds burdens for our institutions and students and it deters students. I have to say—I am sure that members will not be surprised—that independence will provide the clearest and best way of giving us the opportunity to manage immigration so that we can meet our nation’s economic, social and demographic priorities.

The Scottish Government undertakes annual teacher workforce planning discussions with local authorities, as represented by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Directors of Education, together with the professional associations, universities, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the General Teaching Council for Scotland and Education Scotland. The exercise includes provision for supply teachers. The Scottish Government plays an active role through the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers in discussions on pay. An SNCT pay offer is on the table that will improve pay for those who undertake supply work, and I hope that the teacher unions will accept that offer. It is of course each local authority’s responsibility to manage its teacher workforce in a way that ensures that it has sufficient staff to meet local needs.

I am glad that the quality of the education at Marr college shows so obviously to the member—it was indeed of high quality. I stress that the matter is for South Ayrshire Council, and I do not want to diminish its responsibility. As the member knows, I have asked the council what progress it is making and whether assistance can be given. The council is resolving the matter and is taking steps to do so. Those steps appear to be bearing fruit, including appointments to new posts. The council hopes that the matter will be resolved in the next week or two. I encourage John Scott to come back to me on whether more help can be given if that is required.

I welcome the recent figures that show that teacher unemployment is at its lowest level in eight years. The jobseekers allowance claimant count has fallen by 29 per cent in the past year to the lowest August figure since the current time series began in 2005, which endorses the actions that we have taken. We have achieved the drop by cutting student teacher numbers, moderating the supply side of the equation and securing a shared commitment with local authorities to maintain teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers, which ensures a continuing demand for teachers. The figures also show a far lower level of teacher unemployment in Scotland than anywhere else in the United Kingdom. Of course, we can adjust those figures as needed, and I know that subsequent questions might enable me to go into more detail about how we do so.

The Scottish Government discusses a wide range of issues with local authorities—including issues relating to teacher employment—on an individual and a collective basis. In addition to ad hoc bilateral discussions with individual local authorities, we engage more formally with them about teacher employment issues in three ways: we regularly attend the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland’s personnel network; we have a key involvement, as I have said, in the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers; and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland are represented with us on the teacher workforce planning advisory group.

There is an obligation to provide teachers to teach in schools—that has been an issue of some contention on other occasions, but I would not expect teachers to be substituted for. We need to ensure that there is an adequate number of teachers to meet most of the anticipated circumstances. Obviously, there cannot be a system that deals with every single circumstance of every absence in every Scottish school and there will be times when that has to be borne with, but, for most of the time, there should be sufficient teachers to be able to cope in those circumstances. The difficulties with teacher employment are historical; they arise from an oversupply up to 2007, which had to be adjusted. It was unsustainable in the circumstances. We have now brought the numbers broadly into balance and we need to continue to keep them in balance. The teacher workforce planning exercise includes an element for supply. The new arrangements that are on the table with regard to salaries adjust the agreement that we reached two years ago. That agreement was accepted by the unions and the local authorities. It was not imposed—it was an accepted agreement—but it has required to be looked at again and it is being looked at again. I also say to the member that one of the surest guarantees of success in this matter is to accept that we should keep essentially the ratio of teachers to pupils that we have at the moment. It is a very good measure to continue with. It is there, it is being used, it is part of our agreement with COSLA, and I do not think that we should go into a situation in which anybody questions the effectiveness of that measure. We should keep it in place.

The year of probation is a unique offer and it is an offer that is extremely well thought of worldwide. Prior to the introduction of Scotland’s unique teacher induction scheme, many teachers spent their probationary period working on a piecemeal basis in a variety of schools with little or no continuity of experience or support. It was very much a sink or swim experience. Now all new teachers who are eligible to join the scheme are offered a year-long contract with one local authority in one school. They enjoy a four-hour weekly reduction in class contact time compared with experienced teachers, continuity as regards the class or classes that they plan for and work with, dedicated time with their mentor, and a structured programme of professional development that is provided by their school and local authority. That is part of the growing and developing arrangements for teacher employment. I spoke yesterday morning at an event that was organised by the teacher employment group that is working with the Scottish Government to look at how teacher employment and training issues develop through probation into whole-career assistance. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, as long ago as 2007, said that Scotland’s approach to teacher induction was world class. It remains world class and will go on being world class.

There is even more that I can say on this theme, but the Presiding Officer does not look that enthusiastic that I do so. Post-probation employment prospects for new teachers are better than in each of the past four years and I have given the figures. We achieved that by taking difficult decisions to limit the supply of new teachers—we cut student teacher intake numbers in 2009, cut them more severely in 2010 and then pegged them at that level in 2011. We have also addressed the demand side of the equation. Despite the financial constraints, we have secured a shared commitment with local authorities to maintain teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers. However, given the lead time that is required to bring new teachers into the profession, we are gradually increasing student teacher intakes again by 300 in 2012 and by a further 370 in 2013 to ensure that we meet future demand without reverting to the boom-and-bust situation of the past. I will be looking at the situation again later this year.

I should probably say that I refer the member to the answers that I gave earlier, but I assure him that we look at such matters very seriously. I think that the current SNCT pay offer—I urge teachers to accept it—will make a difference and should bring in some who have opted out of supply work. However, the surest guarantee is maintaining the number of teachers.

As universities are autonomous and independent bodies, board meetings are a matter for individual universities and are not generally attended by Scottish ministers, nor do ministers often have meetings with boards. However, ministers meet regularly with a wide range of university chairs and principals. I have met the principal of UHI formally and informally in recent months—also in the absence of a chair.

UHI is of course a unique institution, consisting of 13 colleges and other bodies. Representatives of one or two of the colleges have raised issues with me—in particular during my summer tour this year—about accommodation and the difficulty of attracting accommodation. In raising her question with me, the member will probably be mindful of the position in Shetland, as the issue was raised with me by members of the board of Shetland College, one or two of whom I met when I was visiting Shetland. The issue of how the university or the colleges invest in accommodation is an important one, and I am always happy to have discussions on the matter. Universities are often able to fund student accommodation through commercial arrangements, but if colleges are having difficulty, and if it is proved that the accommodation is needed—the University of the Highlands and Islands is also a distributed university, with a distributed studentship, many of whom are online—those discussions can take place. Of course, that is in a context of very great pressure on public finances.

That has been a long-term issue. As the member will know having participated in the discussions on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill and having met other MSPs and me on this specific issue, the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Act 2013 contains provisions that should ensure that an agreed amount of money is taken and that there is a role for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. The real solution to the problem, which has been a matter of grievance in the past, as the member knows, is to ensure that the positioning of the further education board within the University of the Highlands and Islands is strong and that there is mutual respect between the board, its component parts and the university as a whole. I believe that the recent change to the university’s articles of association will help to achieve that. The legislation guarantees that and builds that in. Were there to be any question of that not being the case, the Scottish funding council has a role. There is a triple lock on that. The Parliament, and Highland members in particular—I pay tribute to all the Highland members involved—have helped to secure that. There were also representations from a range of colleges.

I can give the member a positive no. We are not waiting until December. New Glow services are being rolled out now, and they will continue to be introduced and to come on stream in the coming months. That includes services to support the migration of information into Office 365 as well as the introduction of agile, open, best-of-breed systems that will enhance learning for children, young people and practitioners in Scotland. I can announce today that Bill Maxwell, chief executive of Education Scotland, will be writing to all directors of education later this week about the next level of support that we will be giving to local authorities to help them to manage the change as they move from the decade-old SharePoint 2003 portal into a SharePoint 2013 environment. Migration has proved technically challenging, as I know from my conversation last week at the Scottish learning festival with representatives of the contractor, RM Education, but they and I are confident that it will be successfully completed.

I would advise the member to be careful about some of the rhetoric surrounding the issue from one or two individuals. It is not borne out by the teacher membership of some of the significant groups, and it was not borne out by a number of people to whom I spoke at the learning festival, or indeed by some of the traffic at the learning festival. Let me be clear about what is happening. The move from the current Glow to Glow in Office 365 started in April 2013, with the migration of the email system, which is now complete. There were significant technical issues associated with the migration of the data from the current Glow portal to the new SharePoint 2013 environment, which we have worked with our partner organisations RM and Microsoft to overcome. The migration of the content is now well under way. To date, about two thirds of the content has been migrated and 20 local authorities have access to all the new services in Office 365. The remaining 12 local authorities will have their portal content migrated by December 2013, which will include access to the Office 365 environment. The data is being transferred from SharePoint 2003 to SharePoint 2013, but the unpacking of the data into the new SharePoint 2013 environment is proving difficult for some local authorities to manage. On-going work with key Glow contacts in local authorities continues to support them during this period of change. That includes an adoption support site that is available in Office 365, with some bespoke materials. [Laughter.] I am glad that Jackie Baillie is enjoying this, because, being very switched on, she will be entirely familiar with the technical matters that I am talking about. The materials are being developed by teachers for teachers. The Office 365 support materials have been made available by dual running of the current Glow and Office 365 for a period of six months. That will give local authorities more time to carefully consider and consult on what content they want and need to populate the new environment and on creating the best possible experiences for children and young people and other users of their Glow service. [Laughter.] I am glad that members are enjoying this. I have a great deal more, if they wish to hear it. [Interruption.]

I think that I heard a no there from some members, so clearly they are fully satisfied with what is taking place. Glow has been and continues to be a remarkable success, but of course it will change. It has an average of 55,000 users weekly and there were 1.3 million Glow logons in May and June this year.

If the member wishes to have access to Glow by means of her own password, I am willing to arrange that. Then she will see how it operates, which will give her huge confidence in what is taking place and in the work of so many people to make it work.

Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council figures show that the majority of college learners are female. According to the funding council, the figure for female full-time equivalent students was 68,724 in academic year 2006-07, and 68,642 in 2011-12, which was a change of 0.1 per cent. I am pleased to say that that means that overall learning activity for female learners has been broadly maintained.

We have been clear all along that it is, and was, important at a time of considerable pressure on youth unemployment to move as quickly and as radically as we could to ensure longer and more focused learning opportunities to take account of employment needs. That has been challenging, but it has been successful. We have more than met our targets for full-time equivalent student numbers, which are virtually unchanged since 2006-07. That focus on full-time equivalent numbers has been important, but I accept the point that it is also important to continue to focus on women learners, and particularly on disadvantaged women learners. For example, we have asked colleges to deliver more for women. We have invested an extra £10 million in the academic year 2013-14 to target additional places for women returning to education, and those learners will be supported with record levels of student support—£97 million, including an additional £1.9 million this year for childcare and improved bursaries. Actions are being taken, and those actions will help in terms of employment and access.

It is important that local authorities are open and transparent in their consultation with parents, children and communities on school closure proposals. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 sets out a clear process for statutory consultation on proposed changes to the school estate, and ministers expect councils to comply fully with those statutory duties.

I am aware that, on 16 September, Fife Council commenced a phased consultation under the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 on a series of school closure proposals. Those consultations will run over the next three weeks. Full details can be found on Fife Council’s website. However, the 2010 act requires the council to inform relevant consultees—which includes parents of any pupils at any affected school—of the proposals and how they may respond to the consultation. That includes attending a public meeting or responding in writing to the consultation. I strongly encourage all parents and any other interested parties to take those opportunities to ensure that their voices are heard. Under the 2010 act, the Scottish ministers may call in and subsequently determine a closure decision. It is inappropriate to comment further at this stage on Fife Council’s plans in case that is seen to prejudice any decisions that must be taken. However, as the 2010 act clearly requires, I expect educational benefits for the affected children to be central to all school closure proposals that any council makes.

As I indicated earlier, we welcome talented people to live, learn, work and remain in Scotland. However, the negative message that is sent to prospective students by the UK Government’s student visa policies is a significant concern. Those policies threaten a detrimental impact on the international competitiveness of Scottish education, create additional burdens on institutions and students, and could well deter prospective students from applying to study in the UK. The Government has made clear its concerns to successive UK ministers of various hues on several occasions. An independent Scotland would manage immigration in a way that effectively meets our nation’s economic, social and demographic priorities for a sector that is one of the largest in our economy.

I understand that the UK immigration bill is expected to be introduced during the second week in October. That bill will propose that banks should no longer be permitted to operate bank accounts for certain migrants. I also understand that the Home Office intends to consult on additional powers to compel banks to close bank accounts for certain illegal migrants. My understanding is that that should not affect the bank accounts of those who are studying legitimately in Scotland, but I stress that the Scottish Government has not seen the draft legislation, and we will monitor it closely. I cannot imagine that any legislation of that nature will draw people to study in Scotland, and that is the issue. If those actions are deterring people from studying in Scotland, they are deeply undesirable. The Scottish Government should have a responsibility there, and I do not think that any Scottish Government of any hue would act in that way.

In Scotland, we welcome international students and researchers to our world-class institutions and value the significant cultural, economic and intellectual contribution that they make. In addition to the dedicated staff that universities provide to attract international students, we provide funding through the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council for an international officer based at Universities Scotland who has responsibility for promoting Scottish higher education globally. We also provide support through the saltire scholarships programme, the primary aim of which is to raise the profile of Scotland in key overseas markets as a place in which to live, work and study. The scholarships are designed to support the promotion of Scotland as a learning nation and a science nation. In the research field, the scholarships for excellence programme provides funds to top researchers to come to Scottish universities to undertake their PhDs.

I am happy to provide a one-word answer to that: independence. The reality is that the actions of the UKBA and the Home Office cause deep problems for all universities. Sir Ian Diamond, the principal of Aberdeen university, has been in the forefront of taking forward these issues. Members of other parties like to shout that there is some other way. There is no other way. I heard Liam McArthur debate the issue in Dundee last week and saw that he could not provide any other way. The only way to deal with the matter is to have control of immigration in this Parliament. Then we will show our merit, which is to welcome students, not be suspicious of them.

The interpretation of waiting lists is very important. If what Hanzala Malik says is the case, I am surprised that he has not been in touch with me directly to draw my attention to those things. I would have thought that that would be the first thing that he would do.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on the motion and I declare an interest as I, too, am a graduate of the University of Edinburgh. To extend a metaphor that was used earlier, cabinet secretaries for education cannot be entirely monogamous in their affections for universities, but I have the strongest affection for the University of Edinburgh and its achievements, on which I congratulate it. I entered freshers week at the university 43 years ago this week. Last night, when I was walking along Holyrood Road, I saw a number of freshers wandering around and I wondered what their experience of this great university is, particularly as it has grown and changed so much. I was struck by the point that was made about investment in the university, which has come from the university’s resources and from other assistance over a period. Last night, I was in the remarkable Inspace building, which is used to encourage and develop new technologies. As various members have said, the university has a remarkable track record of taking ideas and ensuring that they work and that they work in the marketplace. That knowledge exchange work, which Kezia Dugdale mentioned, is important. The Scottish Government made a commitment to ensure that a single knowledge exchange office is developed in Scotland and I will shortly say more about that, but we also want to protect the good work that is already done. We should not put in a single monolith, and Edinburgh is an exceptional university for knowledge exchange. Just two weeks ago, I met some of the people who are involved in that. Before going into the substance of my speech, I will respond to a couple of points that have been made. I am happy to take Aileen McLeod’s point and to talk to David Willetts about the KIC project. I think that we have already been in touch about how to take that forward, and I always try to work with others to project the future and the work of Scottish universities on the international stage. Kezia Dugdale made important points about how things should work in universities and about ranking systems. There is a range of ranking systems in the world. Next week, the Times Higher Education rankings will be announced. The QS rankings use a scoring system that allocates 40 per cent to academic reputation, 20 per cent to the faculty to student ratio, 20 per cent to citations per faculty, 10 per cent to employer reputation, 5 per cent to the international faculty ratio and 5 per cent to the international student ratio. There is a range of other systems, which weight other factors. I am certainly intrigued by the good idea that widening access should count as an important feature of a university, as it relates to how a university develops and extends itself. Of course, Edinburgh has a good story to tell on that. This year, it has 50 more widening access places than it previously had, which it is filling. In 2012-13, it awarded 158 access bursaries to Scotland-domiciled new entrants. If widening access was a feature of rankings—it would be interesting to try to persuade a rankings system to take that on—Edinburgh would continue to compete. We should look at the continuation of competition. The outcome agreement process that the Scottish Government has established with universities considers how each university should perform. The University of Edinburgh’s 2013-14 agreement says: “Analysis of the rankings”— that is, looking at the progress that the university has made— “indicates that this level of investment”— the global excellence investment, which is a new form of investment that is designed to encourage research and internationalisation— “in addition to other strategies already in train, should move Edinburgh into the top 15 in the QS world rankings.” Gavin Brown pointed out the progress that is being made. We should remain ambitious, to ensure that all our universities continue to progress in that way. All the world ranking systems are not the only judge of a university; there are other ways to judge them, such as on the quality that students find in a university and the contribution that it makes to the setting in which it lives—for Edinburgh, that is the city and the wider country. The access issues are intriguing, but we must ensure that competition continues, because that draws students to us. The activity is international and global. It is also very valuable to Scotland as a country. Higher education is the third-largest sector in our economy, which is an extraordinary thought. I know that Gavin Brown always questions figures that are given in the chamber and particularly those from the Government front bench, but my source is a Universities Scotland report. Higher education is also an enormous exporting activity. Universities are estimated to leverage £1.3 billion into the Scottish economy from sources outside Scotland. I congratulate Edinburgh on what it has done. It has a wonderful and rich history. As Jim Eadie pointed out, it is the place of Hutton. When we look up through the window that is to my left, we can see Hutton’s stone on Salisbury Crags. It is the foundation of world geology and the place that proved that two geological theories went together. Of course, Edinburgh is the place where many other things have happened. Dolly the sheep and the Higgs boson have been mentioned. Nobody has mentioned that Edinburgh is the last university in these islands that had a student executed for heresy, but we should probably gloss over that. In history, in English literature, as Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, in medicine, in veterinary medicine and in a variety of other fields, including in the area that I studied—Scottish studies, Scottish literature and Scottish history—Edinburgh has been groundbreaking and has had tremendous success in teaching and in research. Jim Eadie made that point forcibly and it should be made again: all our universities in Scotland are universities both for teaching and for research. Keeping those two things together, making sure that one feeds the other and, in particular, encouraging the growth of postgraduate research and teaching in our universities is the way forward. This Government has increased investments for university research and knowledge exchange activities. This year we put in place the global excellence initiative with Edinburgh and—I say to Mr Malik—with Glasgow. Edinburgh and Glasgow are matching with their own fundraising in order to drive themselves forward in the international rankings. The University of Glasgow rose three places in the QS to 51, the University of St Andrews rose 10 places to 83 and the University of Aberdeen climbed 14 places to 148, so, including Edinburgh, those four universities are in the top 200 in the world. That is a unique achievement because Scotland has, per head of population, the largest number of universities in the top league in the world. That is remarkable for a nation of 5 million people. Edinburgh has been called the capital of the mind and it is a place—and we have a country—that values learning. Learning, to some extent, is in our DNA. That is proved by the excellence of our universities. It is also proved by the way in which the universities are attracting investment from places outside Scotland. I opened the Fraunhofer centre for applied photonics at the University of Strathclyde—the first Fraunhofer centre in these islands. That is one example out of many of the type of investment that is taking place and will continue to take place in Scotland. Universities are growing; universities are exporting; universities are increasingly attractive. The universities are driving our economy. Edinburgh is at the forefront of that. It is a wonderful university to attend, as so many young people—and older people—will discover this week as they enrol for the first time. We should, in the chamber, celebrate the success of Scottish institutions. They are founded upon the principle of education being based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay, and long may that flourish in our country.

I welcome Kezia Dugdale to her new role. It is the first time that we have met in the chamber, and I hope that we will have a positive exchange for the benefit of Scotland’s children and learners. Some local authorities are experiencing challenges in relation to supply teachers. There are three issues. First, more new teachers are securing full-time contracts, so there are fewer available for supply. Secondly, the level of teacher unemployment in Scotland is lower than it has been since 2005. Thirdly, there is the impact of the 2011 pay agreement. We have taken steps to address all those issues. We have increased the number of student teachers by 300 in 2012 and by a further 370 in 2013, and I will continue to monitor the situation on an annual basis. The Educational Institute of Scotland is currently balloting its members on a pay offer that will improve pay for teachers who undertake supply work.

It is a matter for each individual education authority to address the teacher supply issue. The freedom of information publication that the BBC used last week pointed to South Ayrshire Council’s difficulty in finding English teachers for my old school, Marr college. That is a problem for South Ayrshire Council to address through manpower planning of one sort or another. The job of Government is to ensure that there is a sufficient supply of teachers coming through but not an oversupply because, as the member will know if she has looked back on the issue, an issue that we have had to address again and again is the difficulty of teacher unemployment. We have tried to bring the supply of teachers into balance. There will always be areas and subjects in which there is a difficulty in providing enough recruits. In the circumstances, we ensure that the recruitment process of universities is targeted to those shortage subjects. Indeed, there will be a further report on teacher workforce planning in December so that we can ensure that those subjects are being addressed.

I remind the member that it is not my offer to supply teachers. The method of agreeing terms and conditions and salaries in the teaching workforce is tripartite. It is an agreement between the unions, local government employers and the Government. The offer was agreed by all three, and the changes that were made in 2011 were agreed by all three, including—this is an important point—the EIS, which accepted the change to the terms and conditions of supply teachers. There is now a new offer on the table, which I hope will be accepted. I am not going to try to influence the ballot by going into detail, but I think that, in the circumstances, the offer is the right one. It has been agreed by the parties and it is now up to the members of the union to decide whether they want to take it. It is important that Moray Council and other councils undertake robust workforce planning, ensure that their workforce is available across the board and, where there are shortages, fill the positions. They must also ensure that they employ enough teachers. That is an extremely important issue. We have heard some siren voices in one or two local authorities talking about teacher numbers. We have a national agreement on teacher numbers with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. It is obvious that we need to have that number of teachers, and we should continue to have them.

I very much welcome the fact that the August claimant count figures were the lowest in education since that series of records began in 2005. There were difficulties with teacher unemployment from 2008 until 2010. As I have said previously in the chamber, I strongly believe that that was a result of artificially high and unsustainable teacher numbers in 2006-07. We took the difficult decision that we had to move on from that. We have made a shared commitment to local government to maintain teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers. Those actions have enabled us to rebalance teacher employment at a more sustainable level. Members should remember that in Scotland we have a unique offer of probation in teaching that means that everyone who qualifies as a teacher is entitled to a year in the classroom as a probationer. We have more new teachers—that is, post-probationers—in employment: 75 per cent of post-probationary teachers were in permanent or temporary employment in publicly funded schools in September 2012, which was an increase from 66 per cent in 2011. There is always flexibility, because there always need to be teachers who are available to take up posts as they become available during the year. Over the past 12 months, the number of teachers who claim jobseekers allowance has fallen by 29 per cent. It is much, much lower than the level in the rest of these islands. In August 2013, the figure for the number of jobseekers allowance claimants in education per 1,000 was 51.8 per cent in Northern Ireland, 15.1 per cent in Wales, 10.9 per cent in England and 4.7 per cent in Scotland. It is quite clear that we have focused strongly on ensuring that young teachers get into jobs, and we will continue to do so.

I also welcome Mary Scanlon to her new role—there has been quite a reshuffle in the education ranks over the summer. Mary Scanlon raises a good point. There is always the potential for imagination to be used in finding solutions to such difficulties. I have been to some schools in remote areas that depend on distance and e-learning to provide a range of subjects. It may not be the best or most permanent solution, but imagination is needed where difficulties are experienced, and I commend all education authorities, all schools and all headteachers who employ it.

I congratulate the member on getting a debate on the Dunoon-Gourock ferry service. The only reason why I did not sign the motion is that ministers do not sign back-bench members’ motions. The success of the campaign for a reliable commuting route, which I thoroughly support, has always depended, and will depend, on the parties and communities working with the press and others. The work that Mr Stewart and I have tried to do together is part of the foundation of that campaign, as should be the case across this chamber.

This is the first time I have intervened from the front bench. My constituents will greatly welcome the Coruisk on the Dunoon-Gourock route. I presume that the operator will monitor the performance of the Argyll Flyer and the Coruisk in terms of reliability and keeping to the timetable so that we can avoid the difficulties of the previous winter.

Under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, education authorities have a duty to ensure the “adequate and efficient provision of school education” in their area. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 sets out the consultation process that an education authority must—and I stress “must”—follow when it is proposing changes to its school estate, such as school closures, relocations and changes to catchment areas.

I understand that Renfrewshire Council plans to carry out a preliminary consultation on a range of options for reorganisation of its school estate. I encourage George Adam’s constituents to respond to the consultation so that their views can be taken into account. Where a council decides to take forward a relevant proposal under the 2010 act to close or relocate a school, there must be no doubt that there is a clear statutory consultation process that it must—I repeat “must”—follow. I expect Renfrewshire Council—and every council—to follow the law and engage in an open and honest discussion with the community that it serves about any school closure proposal. I also expect educational benefit for the affected children to be central to any and every such proposal.

In opening yesterday’s debate, the First Minister not only set out our programme for government; he reminded Parliament how, in the months ahead, while we might debate our particular views on education, health, employment and welfare reform, we should never lose sight of the kind of nation that we are and, more importantly, the kind of nation that we can become. Scotland must always play its part as a responsible global citizen. In recent weeks, the world has seen harrowing images of men, women and children in Syria injured and dying as a result of an illegal, unprecedented and abhorrent chemical weapons attack, which must result in the trial of those responsible before the International Criminal Court. The United Nations has warned that, as a result of the conflict, 10 million Syrians—half the population—will need humanitarian aid by the end of the year. Yesterday it highlighted that more than 2 million people have become refugees fleeing that event. That marks the biggest humanitarian crisis of the century. We cannot stand idly by. Every country in the world must help. That is why the Scottish Government is announcing today a new donation of £100,000 to help those who are struggling to survive in a country that has been ravaged by civil war. That comes on top of the £100,000 that was provided to the Disasters Emergency Committee earlier this year. The new funding will again be allocated to the Disasters Emergency Committee to support vital humanitarian relief through the provision of food, clean water, emergency shelter and medical care within Syria and to the displaced Syrian population. We must also respond as individuals, as members of Oxfam Glasgow have done today by setting up a makeshift refugee camp in Buchanan Street in Glasgow to highlight for a few moments the months, days and hours of suffering of those in such camps in Syria, and to mark Oxfam’s 50th anniversary of helping in such circumstances. I am sure that the whole Parliament will welcome my announcement today and will continue to support such efforts. In his opening speech yesterday, the First Minister unveiled a strong programme of action that will support economic recovery and the creation of more jobs. Those measures will create a fairer Scotland and empower communities, as well as mitigating the impact of Westminster’s austerity measures on the people of Scotland. In contrast, the leader of the Labour Party came to the chamber devoid of ideas and calling for things to happen that are already happening. For example, she challenged the Government to act now on childcare, but we are already acting. The new Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will increase free and more flexible provision of early learning in childcare from 475 hours to a minimum of 600 hours per year for three and four-year-olds and for looked-after two-year-olds. The bottom line is that that is an increase of 45 per cent from 2007 when Labour and the Liberals were last in power. We are fully funding the initiative, which will benefit around 120,000 Scottish children. Willie Rennie was similarly behind the times when he mentioned the importance of focusing on our youngest children. I agree, and we all agree, which is why we are doing it. We are doing more than any Scottish Administration before us in investing in early years. Through our world-leading early years collaborative, we will also make progress in the coming year towards stretching aims to reduce stillbirth and infant mortality and to improve child development. We are making progress in other areas, too. In our schools, we are continuing to work closely with teachers to provide the support that they need to deliver the curriculum for excellence with confidence. We will continue to protect the principle that educational opportunity should always—always—be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. That is a foundation stone that supports one of the highest-achieving university systems in the world. Of course, we heard yesterday, as no doubt we will hear today, Labour voices calling for action on colleges. We have acted on colleges; it was Labour and its little helpers—it was Mr Findlay and his little helpers—who tried to scupper that by voting against widening access, against national pay bargaining, against better gender balance in governance and against college courses that lead to jobs. That was Labour’s action on colleges, which was against the colleges that help young people.

Mr Findlay is as accurate as ever—I will really miss him, though I am sure that Alex Neil will not, now that he is Labour’s spokesperson on health—in that his accuracy is as questionable as ever. The Audit Scotland report indicated the progress that was being made. Every young person in Scotland knows that progress is being made. Unfortunately, Mr Findlay and his party do not keep up with progress. Throughout this period of essential change in the colleges sector, we have maintained our manifesto commitment to maintain college numbers. Indeed, a record number of young people are now studying full time in our colleges and the number of hours of learning per student has increased by 36 per cent since the Labour Party was last in power. That investment in colleges has helped Europe’s only dedicated minister for youth employment to reduce youth employment from a peak of 113,000 to 77,000. That is still far too high, but it is progress and we will continue to make progress. Yesterday, the Labour leader referred to a speech that I gave in Glasgow in March. Her account of that was of course a little different from the press account of it the next day, but then, for Labour, living in a fact-free universe is nothing new. In that speech, I outlined the actions that the Government is taking to bear down on educational inequity in Scotland—something that, to be fair, our predecessors tried to tackle. There is much that we can do—I will outline more when I speak at the Scottish learning festival later this month—but there are things that we cannot do without completing the powers of this Parliament. With control of taxation, welfare and labour market regulation, we could bring to bear on educational attainment those things that will accelerate and expand the progress that Scotland must make to eradicate poverty as a determinant of educational destiny.

I believe in change for the better in Scotland; that is why I came into politics. The record of this Parliament demonstrates that decisions made in Scotland about Scotland are best for Scotland. That applies to all decisions—they need to be made here. Ultimately, in my portfolio as in all others, that can be achieved only by securing independence on 18 September 2014. As the clock ticks towards that date, let us approach it as, I hope, we will approach the debate this afternoon: with passion, with vision and with courage in our abilities as a nation. In that spirit, I am pleased to open this second day of debate on the programme for government.

Will the member give way?

I hear what the member is saying. It is worth discussing the issues to do with named persons, but I urge her not just to discuss the matter in the chamber. Yesterday I visited a primary school in Forfar, where I met a young man in primary 7. I do not think that he will mind my saying that he is a looked-after child and that, because of the availability of a named person, that is, his teacher, he had been able to get through some very difficult experiences. It is important that we talk to the people who are affected rather than organisations and politicians.

I did not say that.

How very kind of you, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to respond to the motion and to congratulate Alex Fergusson on having secured the debate. I am particularly delighted to congratulate the team that is going to Milan from Dalbeattie. As a former South of Scotland member of the Scottish Parliament, I know that we can learn a great deal from the south of Scotland. I also know that the baking in Dalbeattie is very good, although I regret that none has been brought here for us to sample today. I am certainly astonished to discover the amazing range of challenges that the young people will have to overcome when they go to Milan. It is appropriate that we commend all of them and that we wish them the best of luck. With your permission, Presiding Officer, I will give them a name check. They are Jenna Miller, Matthew Campbell, Amy Scobie, Georgina Murray, Emma Forsyth, Ailsa O’Donoghue, Rhiannon Gerrard, Isla Parker, Catherine Kellett and Alex Lammie. The team leaders who are going to Milan are Piers Butler and Samantha Campbell. The observant among us will notice that there are nine girls and one boy in the team. No doubt in time there will be members on our benches who will argue for gender balance in the da Vinci competition, but that is a very good start and I commend the team for it. I have to say that I was unaware of the challenge, but so were my officials when the debate was announced. It is fascinating that such an idea should come by means of an exchange teacher to Dalbeattie—one Zak Inward. I could not believe the name, but it was Zak Inward who brought the idea to Dalbeattie and encouraged the school to take part. The idea of an exchange from Knox academy—a wonderfully named school—to Dalbeattie and a trip on to Milan says something about the interconnected nature of the world in which they live. Our education system in Scotland is an interconnected one. It focuses on higher-order thinking skills, problem solving, teamwork and creativity, which is precisely what the team will have to show and undertake when they are in Milan. Their tasks will range from engineering to philosophy to code breaking to cartography, taking in science, English, art and poetry. They will carry out all those tasks to compete and, we hope—as Anne McTaggart said—to win. It is a wonderful reflection on Dalbeattie that its young people are going, and a wonderful reflection on Scotland that our curriculum can support that type of activity. When I think of da Vinci, as I am sure all of us in the chamber do from time to time, I think of his logo, “The Vitruvian Man”—the man in two different positions. Perhaps that should be the logo for curriculum for excellence because it is about perfect proportion, interchangeability and connections. I thank him for drawing our attention to that and for reminding us of the importance of interconnectivity within our education system.

I am not entirely sure that Mr Don is going to win the da Vinci challenge with that poetry, although he might win another challenge with it. However, he is quite right to say that there is a lesson for us all to learn, which I will draw briefly. Our curriculum reforms in Scotland are driving essential change, with the learning journey from the age of 3 to 18 and beyond. Anne McTaggart was right to remind us of the role of community learning in that process; it is vital. The process of transformation that is required to deliver curriculum for excellence in full, and to improve Scottish education, continues. We are committed to finishing the job of delivering a curriculum that is fit for the challenges of our modern world—even that most intensive challenge that Dalbeattie high school has stepped up to the plate to take. It is an unprecedented programme of transformation—curriculum for excellence is not quite like anything that takes place elsewhere. Lots of people are looking to Scotland to try to understand the system and how it may benefit them. The purpose is to improve children’s and young people’s achievements, attainment levels and life chances through nurturing every individual young person as a successful learner, a confident individual, a responsible citizen and an effective contributor. That underpinning strength of curriculum for excellence will, I believe, benefit every school and young person in Scotland. Liz Smith is right to draw attention to the STEM subjects and to engineering. In relation to science, we must ensure not just that our young people have those skills, but that our teachers are keen to impart those skills. They must see the importance of the STEM subjects—of science and engineering—as connecting subjects within schools and be keen to take them forward. We must see other things, too, including the vision that the Government has for language learning and teaching, which are important. We are the first part of these islands to commit ourselves to the Barcelona system of learning one’s own language and two others. Over two school generations, we will roll that out so that Scotland’s experience of languages will be transformed. If Italian has not yet reached Dalbeattie high school, there will be some to be learned during the October break. All across Scotland, curriculum for excellence is energising learning and teaching. It is making education more relevant to the modern world and is giving young people the skills and knowledge that they need to succeed in learning, life and work. I hope that it is also inculcating ambition, which is a wonderful thing. For Dalbeattie high school to have the ambition to compete and take part in something that no Scottish school—indeed, no school in these islands or in Europe, apparently—has yet taken part in is a tremendous achievement. In Dalbeattie, as in the rest of Scotland, it is the learners who are the greatest natural resource. They are the investment for the future and are what the future will be. Curriculum for excellence is designed to support them, to take them forward and to allow them, through schools and other learning providers, to focus on individual need in the context—which we in Parliament should never forget—of education’s having not just an individual benefit but a societal benefit. By investing in education, we invest in the whole future of our country. I am grateful to Alex Fergusson for having brought this matter to Parliament, and I am grateful to the members who have spoken in the debate. Most of all, I am grateful to the team from Dalbeattie high school, who will have heard all the praise and excitement today. I hope that they enjoy the challenge, but they have a lot of hard work to do; they have a lot of research and learning to do, and they have a lot to work on in the next six weeks. We should not, therefore, talk any longer; we should let them get on with it. Meeting closed at 18:14.

I have approved a proposal from Langside, Cardonald and Anniesland colleges to merge. The colleges aim for a vesting date of 1 November 2013. The necessary order has been laid before Parliament. I will also be considering the merger of John Wheatley, Stow and North Glasgow colleges, in due course.

That will be a matter for discussion by the colleges with the regional board, which is taking the regional overview. That is a major innovation, because it will allow the colleges to look at regional need and to operate as colleges of scale. The matter will also be for discussion with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, which is, of course, sensitive to the issue of how places should be provided. The important thing is that we have met the targets that we set ourselves for places, and that those places are high-quality places that ensure that young people—and older people—are well prepared for the world of work. That will be greatly welcomed by many people across the city of Glasgow. It is about time the Labour Party got in step with that.

I believe that that is true, and it would perhaps be surprising if I did not. From his seat, Mr Findlay just shouted out, “Well read!” at a fellow member, which neither shows respect for that member, nor is it the type of debate that we need in the chamber. Why am I surprised that Mr Findlay did that? The reality is that we need to have colleges of scale that deliver for the people of Scotland. We have started off on that process of reform and we have listened to the concerns of the sector and worked with it. I hope that, this afternoon, we will pass a bill that will put in place regionalisation, which is a significant change, and which will assist the colleges in delivering what they are best at delivering. That is a big step forward.

The reclassification of incorporated Scottish colleges as public bodies is a result of a decision by the Office for National Statistics based on existing levels of ministerial controls. In Scotland, our relationship with colleges is founded on strong partnerships, with associated governance arrangements. Through the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, we are strengthening the existing arrangements to improve democratic accountability. Since the ONS’s decision in 2010, we have negotiated with HM Treasury on the need to implement the decision in Scotland. It remains our belief that HM Treasury has the power to mitigate the impact of the ONS’s decision on Scotland, and yet it has refused to do so.

The education minister really cannot win: if I actually have a policy, I am accused of being dictatorial; if I try to work with colleagues of Mr McArthur’s in the Westminster Government, I am accused of dithering and dillying—I think that that was the word he used. The reality is that the reclassification is unwelcome and unnecessary. If Mr McArthur exerted himself to speak to his colleague the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, we would not have to deal with the issue. The blame lies entirely with the coalition Government. Its action is anti-college and will not help colleges, but the good news is that we are working closely and positively with the colleges to put in place arrangements that will take them forward and work round the difficulties that are being placed in front of them. The difficulties are coming from the United Kingdom coalition Government, the Treasury and the Liberal Democrats. We will make that clear everywhere in Scotland.

Later this afternoon, we will have the opportunity to vote on the framework for national pay bargaining, which is very welcome indeed. Of course, comprehensive negotiations are taking place. We are delivering on our commitment to ensure that we stop the balkanisation of Scotland’s colleges and of terms and conditions in Scotland, which was introduced by Michael Forsyth and continued under Labour Administrations. We are the ones who are changing it.

Ah, Mr Findlay thinks that he has me but, of course, we have been trying to listen to and work with the sector. I made a commitment on national pay bargaining before Mr Findlay was even a member of the Parliament. I have gone on with that commitment and I have gone through with negotiation. We set up the framework but, to have belt and braces, I decided that we would also put a commitment in the bill and honour that commitment. [Interruption.] Mr Findlay finds that funny—astonishingly, he finds the prospect of national pay and conditions in the college sector to be entertaining and amusing. That really tells us all that we need to know. Mr Findlay has no serious intent on further education. His intent is only to laugh at it. My intent as the minister is to deliver, which is precisely what we will do this afternoon.

The recruitment of senior staff is entirely a matter for individual universities as autonomous and independent bodies, and not for the Scottish ministers.

As I am sure John Finnie is aware, I have made it clear whenever I have been asked questions or spoken on that issue that right across the public sector—and not just in universities—people need to lead by example. Indeed, I remember a question on the matter, to which I was pleased to respond, from George Foulkes when he was a member in this chamber. I agree with those who say that the example needs to be clear and obvious and that it needs to demonstrate restraint, particularly at this stage. I encourage everybody in the public sector to show restraint and to lead by example, as ministers and members in this chamber are doing by not taking pay increases. It is essential that that happens, and the members of the university sector who ask me for advice on the matter—as some principals have—receive a very clear piece of advice: “Do not accept any increase, and make sure you lead by example.”

There are considerable freedoms already available to schools in Scotland to govern in a way that best suits local needs and parental wishes. Curriculum for excellence emphasises the autonomy of teachers and other education professionals in providing effective—and often innovative—learning and teaching, and Education Scotland encourages innovation through the new framework for inspection.

We have a clear structure that exists in Scotland through local authority delivery, but it is not monolithic. There are opportunities for others to establish schools if they wish to do so. The important thing is that all schools in Scotland should meet a very clear standard of education, and we will insist on that national standard when any new schools arise. I would encourage parents, if they wish to found or create a school, to enter into creative dialogue with their local authority, to ensure that they have the opportunity to deliver and to consider which part of the sector their school would best fit into. I do not believe that we should balkanise the education system. We should judge it in one very clear way: whatever structures exist must prove to be of benefit to the educational attainment of children. As long as that can be proved, I am very relaxed about the innovation that takes place. Indeed, I would encourage innovation, as long as it is driven by that principle and is seen to be part of the national state system.

As I stated a few moments ago in my answer to Drew Smith, I have approved a proposal from Langside, Cardonald and Anniesland colleges to merge. The colleges aim for a vesting date of 1 November 2013. The necessary order has been laid in Parliament. I will also consider the merger of Stow, John Wheatley and North Glasgow colleges in due course.

I will be very happy to provide those details in writing to the member. Obviously, some of the figures still require to come out of the development of the business case, but the member will be pleased to know that, overall, college reform will deliver efficiencies of £50 million-plus per year from 2014-15. Of course, reform is not all about money; it is about providing a better service to students, more full-time courses, better opportunities for students, and colleges of scale. That is precisely what will happen with the mergers, and that is why they are being so warmly welcomed.

That is an interesting point. There have been no recent college mergers in which the name of one college has become the name of the whole. I encourage colleges to think creatively and constructively about their names. I would like to see the commemoration of significant educational figures within college names. College names that are purely utilitarian or functional are perhaps not as good as those that commemorate the great figures. For example, I know that, in Glasgow, a proposal has been made to consider the name of Mary Barbour. That strikes me as a positive proposal. It has come from the trade unions and it has been supported by some Labour MSPs. It is not for me to say what the name should be, but that proposal seems very positive and, were it to come about, it would be warmly welcomed.

Employment prospects for teachers generally, including probationer teachers, have been improving since autumn 2010. The latest indication is that more than 90 per cent of 2011-12 probationers were in teaching posts in March 2013.

The percentage in classes of 18 or fewer is 18.8 per cent, which is up 6.1 percentage points since 2006. That is a growing trend. More significantly, in primary 1, where legislative sanctions now apply, the proportion of classes that are below the set class size is vast; a tiny number of pupils are in classes above that size, which is largely to do with special circumstances, such as allowing siblings to enter the same class.

I was pleased to welcome the proposals in the von Prondzynski review and agree that it is important that they are implemented appropriately. The work to develop the draft code is important in taking the process forward and building on existing good practice. The provision in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to determine the principles of good governance will also help. The willingness of Lord Smith, as chair of the group that drew up the code, to listen to views for improvement and to consult is welcome. However, it is obvious that a new code cannot implement all of the review recommendations. That is why it has always been our intention to implement the recommendations in three distinct ways: by engaging key sector stakeholders as implementation partners; by engaging the sector itself in implementing recommendations by agreement; and by employing legislation where necessary.

From the very beginning, I have been keen to see that the students, staff and others are involved in the process. On a number of occasions, I have drawn the need for that to the attention of the chairs of court. I fully support the principle of having more transparency. I expect the recommendation on that to be further reflected in the final version of the code. Last night I—and, I believe, the convener of the Education and Culture Committee—received a letter from Lord Smith that indicates areas in which he is likely to make progress. That will be positive. However, we need to see the final code before deciding what further action, if any, is required. The university sector advisory forum, which has a broad membership from across the sector, including student, staff and trade union representatives, will also have an important role to play. Indeed, that arises out of the von Prondzynski review. On 12 June, I chaired the advisory forum’s first meeting, at which it was agreed that the key part of its initial focus will be the implementation of the von Prondzynski recommendations and the new governance code. We will also have an opportunity to consider whether further legislation is required, and I have committed to bringing a bill to the Parliament in coming years.

As Mr Kelly knows, I wrote to him last week to confirm that the colleges estimate that their merger will save some £21 million in the five years to 2016-17.

All public finances are transparent and I am quite sure that, as the merger progresses, the college will publish its accounts and they will be made fully available. Of course, the member will be able to identify from them what proceeds, if any, have come from asset sales.

I have approved a proposal from Adam Smith College and Carnegie College to merge. The colleges aim for a vesting date of 1 November 2013. The necessary order has been laid in Parliament.

I am happy to put on record my admiration for the fortitude, perseverance and talent of the staff and the student body of Adam Smith College. I met them some weeks ago when I visited the college and I know that they are keen to ensure that, before it ceases to exist, the present board acknowledges clearly the mistakes that have been made; that the board members—many of whom were not responsible for the difficulties—recognise their corporate responsibility to apologise to the staff; and that, whatever happens in the future, such difficulties never arise again. This has been an incredibly difficult time for Adam Smith College. I am quite sure that the college will come through it well and that the new college will do well. Adam Smith College is in a strong position ahead of its merger with Carnegie College. There needs to be continued improvement, but nobody should forget that it is the staff and students who have carried the college through.

The Government’s further and higher education sector funding and support for engineering and related areas includes: colleges continually reviewing their curriculum and provision to ensure that they meet local economic needs; the establishment of the energy skills partnership across Scotland’s colleges to deliver energy and engineering-related activity collaboratively across regional and sub-sectoral hubs; the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s allocation of an additional 1,200 undergraduate places from 2012-13 to 2014-15 and 850 postgraduate places over the next five years in science, technology, engineering and mathematics; the establishment of innovation centres as sustainable communities to support innovation for future growth and enhanced industry relevance; and the development of an engineering skills investment plan, which Skills Development Scotland is due to complete during the summer.

The member is right to pay tribute to North Highland College. I have visited it and seen for myself the remarkable facilities that now exist and the work that is being done there. Of course, regional outcome agreements provide the means to demonstrate the move forward in better aligning college provision with the needs of learners and employers. We want learners to develop the skills and knowledge that they need to get a job or a better job or to develop a career. Those arrangements also require colleges to be mindful of their regional and local labour markets and to prioritise provision to meet those needs.

I will not rehearse all the arguments that have been heard already. Suffice it to say, we have endeavoured to develop and improve the bill by listening to the sector and the Opposition parties as we have moved through the process. We have a series of amendments that continue that process, which I am pleased is taking place. When Neil Findlay lodged at stage 2 a very similar amendment to his amendment 5 today, I agreed—as I continue to agree—that consultation should be at the heart of the development of any governance standards that are adopted across universities. Progress has been made on that and other changes to the bill have achieved that. The Scottish funding council’s existing duties allow for a sufficient level of consultation, which has also been improved by the bill. The Education and Culture Committee accepted that at stage 2 and the amendments are not substantively different from those that were previously lodged in a way that makes me reconsider the position. Joan McAlpine’s amendment 100 raises an important point. I fully support the principle of having more transparency in the area and I expect to see Professor von Prondzynski’s recommendations in that regard properly reflected in the final code of governance. Indeed, as I said during education questions, Lord Smith has now indicated to me and to the convener of the Education and Culture Committee that he has made substantial progress in that regard. Amendment 100 expresses an aim that I share but, unfortunately, it will not achieve that aim. Our universities are many and varied, as Liz Smith has pointed out before now, and their governance instruments—some of which date back hundreds of years—introduce a level of complexity that the amendment does not accommodate. Nevertheless, it is right that, when we see the final code of governance, we should consider whether further legislation is required in the proposed higher education governance bill that I have committed to bring to Parliament in the coming years. As we know, there are some things in the von Prondzynski recommendations that cannot be implemented except by an underpinning statute of the type that von Prondzynski asked for. I support my colleague Joan McAlpine’s aim, but her amendment, alas, will not achieve that aim. I therefore ask her not to move amendment 100—the matter is very much taken to heart.

No one is defending the woeful record of university and college boards. The boards themselves have accepted that the gender balance on them is atrocious—indeed, in some cases, it is more than atrocious. We need to get that situation changed quickly, and that view is supported not only by me and the education team but by the equalities minister and the Government itself. The question is how we get there. Unfortunately, Jenny Marra’s suggestion shows a regrettable lack of knowledge of what would actually happen were we to pass amendment 3. [Interruption.] Presiding Officer, can I have the opportunity to make this point?

Essentially, amendment 3 is a wrecking amendment. The bill would go not to the Lord Advocate but into constitutional limbo. It would require the attention of the Advocate General—whoever that is—and the process would take a considerable time. As a result, all the things that we are trying to achieve through the bill such as widening access, improving governance and mutualisation would go. Perhaps that is the idea; perhaps Labour wants to put the bill into constitutional limbo. I have spoken to Jenny Marra on the matter, have told her the facts and have indicated my support—indeed the equalities minister has now sought the support of the leader of the Labour Party on this—for getting responsibility for this issue transferred to the Scottish Parliament. In that way, Ms Marra’s fine nationalist rhetoric—she made a good job of it—could be matched by actions. Instead of her standing up and making a speech about what needs to change, she could vote for that change—and the most effective vote for change would be to vote yes next year. [Applause.]

Even if Jenny Marra is not going to do that, she and her party might support the necessary moves at Westminster to transfer responsibility for equalities legislation to this Parliament. However, I will not hold my breath for that change of heart. Clare Adamson’s amendment goes as far as we can within the powers of the Parliament. I want to go much further than that and to test the powers of this Parliament; indeed, I want to test those powers to destruction, which is what we will do when we have independence. Let us recognise—[Interruption.]

Let us recognise that we cannot do that in this bill here and now unless we wreck the bill here and now. If that is Labour’s intention, I hope that Parliament rejects it. I would have been happy to make common cause with Jenny Marra and to ensure that we had a united approach on the matter. I regret that she was not willing to do so.

Section 3 is at the very heart of the bill. During stage 2, we had a detailed discussion about widening access provisions. Liam McArthur in particular lodged a number of amendments, which I opposed at the time because I felt that they went too far in diluting the effectiveness of the provision. However, I think that the entire committee agreed that there was merit in some aspects of his proposals, so I have worked with Universities Scotland and the NUS Scotland to agree some small but important changes to the provision that will make clearer the nature of the agreements between institutions and the Scottish funding council. It is important that ministers will retain the power to drive the agenda but—this was the key point—universities, with the agreement of the funding council, will be able to go beyond that to extend agreements to other groups, as they see fit. That strikes the right balance between respecting responsible autonomy—which we do, of course—and ensuring that there is progress in an area in which the track record has left a lot to be desired. On the other amendments in the group, the principles that underlay Marco Biagi’s stage 2 amendments were eminently sensible. His updated versions in the group will widen the scope and therefore the benefit of his previously lodged amendments, and I am happy to support them. I move amendment 7.

However we got here, we have got here. I hope that we can now legislate on widening access, which is needed to drive forward progress that has been too slow. I will not spoil the moment by disputing all the various arguments that we have heard. I have listened—I certainly listened to Liam McArthur, as I said in my opening remarks—but I have listened particularly to Universities Scotland and NUS Scotland. I pay tribute to Robin Parker, who is just finishing his period of two years as president of NUS Scotland. He has been a tower of strength in taking the issue forward, which he has driven almost personally, and he certainly deserves much of the credit for it. Amendment 7 agreed to. Amendments 8, 10, 11 and 15 moved—[Michael Russell]—and agreed to. After section 3 Amendment 16 moved—[Neil Findlay].

Amendments 17 and 45 fulfil commitments that I gave to Neil Bibby in committee at stage 2 to place new duties on regional colleges and regional strategic bodies in relation to economic and social regeneration and social inclusion and cohesion. I am grateful to him for the positive role that he played in raising the issue. The duties are part of a wider duty on regional colleges and regional strategic bodies to improve economic and social wellbeing in their localities. Amendments 18 to 20, 22, 23, 46 to 48, 50 and 51 integrate more generally into the bill local matters, by which I mean skills needs and economic, social and cultural issues. Local matters are for the regional bodies to determine. National issues will be for the Scottish funding council, in consultation with ministers, as is the case now. Given the way in which the bill is constructed, a lot of amendments—nine in total—are required to deliver on one good idea, but I am satisfied that the result will be a better bill. Amendment 53 will align the consultation provisions in new section 23K of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005 with similar provisions elsewhere in the bill. Amendment 119 will enable ministers to obtain from a regional strategic body, a regional college or an assigned college such information as they may reasonably require in connection with the exercise of their functions under the 2005 act. At stage 2, Neil Bibby lodged identical amendments to today’s amendments 101 to 103 and 106 to 109, and I outlined then the good reasons why I cannot support them. It is true that colleges play an important role in CPPs, but the Government will consult this summer on a draft community empowerment and renewal bill, which will be the appropriate vehicle for considering the issue if any changes are to take place. There is nothing preventing colleges and regional strategic bodies from consulting community health partnerships, transport providers and community planning partnerships. During my meeting at Adam Smith College two weeks ago, we discussed the role that the college could play in assisting with transportation, as many colleges have always done. I see no convincing reason to place a statutory obligation on them to do so.

Amendments 65, 66, 68 to 70 and 89 to 91 will ensure that a person who is removed by ministers for reasons of mismanagement from one relevant board that is an incorporated college board or regional board will be removed from all such boards. The effect of Government amendment 99 will be that, if a person cannot be a member of an incorporated college board or regional board, they will also be barred from being a member of or serving on the Scottish funding council. Government amendments 29, 31, 86, 87 and 88 provide for two elected staff members on assigned college boards—one elected by teaching staff and one by non-teaching staff—and make related provisions relating to their tenure. Amendments 67 and 85 relate to terms and conditions of appointment. Amendment 67 prevents a regional board from setting the terms and conditions of the appointment to the board of an assigned college chair. Amendment 85 makes provision for who sets the terms and conditions of incorporated college board members. Amendments 34, 35 and 64 ensure that relevant staff unions are consulted on the election rules relating to staff members on incorporated college boards and regional boards. Amendment 62 increases the minimum number of “ordinary” members of a regional board. It would ensure that a regional board with three assigned colleges would have a maximum board size of 18. Mr Findlay’s amendments 25, 26, 28, 30, 60 and 61 are identical to those that he lodged on the same topic—that of trade union nominees on boards—at stage 2. As I committed to doing, I have reflected and consulted on the matter. While I recognise the value of trade union experience and background on boards—the bill achieves major gains for trade unions—I have concluded that I do not want to exclude anybody. I want to leave it to boards to determine how, in addition to the two elected staff members, they access and utilise such expertise, subject to any guidance that is issued on appointments. I will consult on the appointments guidance, as the bill would require me to do. Amendments 32 and 33 proposed by Mr Findlay take us back to assigned college boards being responsible for their own appointments, albeit with the regional strategic body’s approval. If that is how regional strategic bodies want to work with their colleges, that is fine, but it should be a matter for regional strategic bodies to determine. That is the hierarchy that the bill seeks to establish. I will make that clear in the appointments guidance. Amendments 27 and 63 that have been lodged by Mr Findlay prescribe a level of detail that I think is inappropriate for legislation.

I am minded to support amendment 39, despite the fact that Mr McArthur has tried to talk me out of it. The reality is that I was sympathetic at stage 2. I am happy to support the amendment, which is a Colleges Scotland amendment. The Griggs review recommended “the removal of the Chair and/or Board if they do not fulfil the required outcomes.” Amendments 37, 73, 38 and 74 would unduly restrict the powers to remove board members, taking us back to the largely process-focused provisions that we have now. Adherence to any code of governance would be a condition of grant, so the bill already provides a mechanism for removing board members if they fail to deliver on the code. However, that is not the only type of condition of grant. Outcome agreements, for example, would be terms and conditions of SFC grant to regional colleges and regional or strategic bodies. Serious or repeated breaches of an outcome agreement would, therefore, be grounds for the removal of board members. In its written evidence to the Education and Culture Committee, West Lothian College summed up the issue well. It stated: “The Board notes the introduction of Ministerial powers to remove chairs and other members for reasons of failure in addition to mismanagement. The Board reiterates its view that it has no difficulty with being audited against a set of agreed outcomes.” I fail to see why failure to discharge duties—failure to discharge legal obligations—is not also an appropriate ground for removal. I have some sympathy for the idea behind amendment 105, but the amendment has no detail at all. It is not clear how recourse to an independent review panel would sit alongside the existing mechanism of parliamentary scrutiny—nothing is clear in the amendment. Amendments 39 and 75, in the name of Liz Smith, which are supported by Liam McArthur, provide a much better way to achieve an independent look: consultation with the SFC before an order can be made. The amendments are supported by Colleges Scotland. I therefore urge members to support amendments 39 and 75 and to reject the rest.

Amendment 40 would remove the entry establishing a regional board for Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire colleges because the colleges in the region are proposing to merge. That is an indication of the progress that has been made since the bill was introduced. Amendment 41 would require the funding council to propose or agree to the removal of a college from the list of bodies eligible for council funding, the purpose of which is to ensure that the council is satisfied that proper arrangements are in place for a multi-college region before stepping away from the funding process for assigned colleges. Amendment 42 is consequential to amendments made at stage 2. It gives the funding council the role of proposing or approving colleges new to public funding, when assigned to a regional strategic body. Amendment 42 adds regional strategic bodies, where they exist, to the list of those to be consulted before an order is made under new section 7C to assign colleges. Amendment 43 corrects a cross-reference to the relevant order-making power. I move amendment 40. Amendment 40 agreed to. Amendments 41 to 43 moved—[Michael Russell]—and agreed to. After section 9

Highland members, of whom I am one—I declare that interest—are aware of the correspondence on the matter, which has been going on for some time, and a number of Highland members have met colleges in their area that are part of UHI to discuss it. Amendment 95 seeks to give ministers a power to impose terms and conditions to require regional strategic bodies to comply with specified matters before they receive funding from the funding council. It specifically addresses the issue that is raised in the UHI circumstances and will provide parity with the power that is already in the bill in relation to the provision of funding to institutions. Amendment 96 is a technical amendment that links to amendment 95. It will have the effect of restricting the power so that it can be used only to set terms and conditions that relate to regional strategic bodies as a group, as opposed to terms and conditions that relate to any particular one. I support the objectives of Liam McArthur’s amendment 44, but after a great deal of consultation, I consider that amendment 93 and the linked amendments—we will discuss amendment 93 when we come to the final group—are a more effective and lasting mechanism to achieve those objectives. Although amendment 44 is well intentioned and I can understand where it comes from, it would not give the funding council any additional powers that it does not already have. Amendment 93 will regularise the situation and is supported by Colleges Scotland. Whatever we do—I hope that amendment 93 is the right way to proceed—will provide support and succour to the Highland colleges and will give them a degree of reassurance on the matter, which is what they want. As far as I am aware, what we propose has the support of every Highland member in the chamber. I ask Mr McArthur to withdraw amendment 44, as the amendments that I have lodged will take care of the matter, which is something that we all support.

As I explained at stage 2, the basic policy intention behind the staff transfer provisions in the bill is twofold. The provisions assist in the sharing of services and ensure that, in multicollege regions, the regional strategic body has the power to give effect to its duty to plan for delivering coherent provision in the region. The judgment to be made in multicollege regions is in balancing the autonomy of the institutions with the ability of a regional body to pursue its regional plans. I agree with what Mr Findlay seeks to achieve in amendments 55, 56 and 59, and amendment 110, in my name, achieves those things. There is no need to make specific provision for transfers outwith a region. The bodies involved have other powers to effect such transfers, so I am happy to remove the provisions from the bill that deal with such transfers. The Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006 will apply to all transfers of staff made under new section 23L of the 2005 act as well as to transfers of staff from a regional strategic body to one of its assigned colleges. I know that unions wanted TUPE in the bill, and I have delivered on that. Amendment 54 makes it clear that directions under new section 23K cannot be used to direct colleges to transfer staff. I know that some, including the Educational Institute of Scotland, support the balance that we have struck in the bill on the question of consent, but I know that the sector still has concerns, which are reflected in amendments 57 and 58, in the name of Liz Smith. I want to consult more widely on the issue and take the view of organisations that we cannot yet consult, which are the new regional boards. I therefore propose order-making powers that will enable changes to be made in the future; ministers will be under a statutory obligation to consult widely before using such powers and the order will be subject to the affirmative procedure so that there will be full parliamentary scrutiny, as provided for in amendment 120. I think that the amendments that I propose will meet the objections that are dealt with in the amendments from Mr Findlay and Liz Smith. I hope that that will be recognised in the decisions on whether to move the amendments. I moved amendment 54.

I have nothing to add. Amendment 54 agreed to. Amendment 110 moved—[Michael Russell]—and agreed to. Section 11—Regional boards: constitution Amendment 60 moved—[Neil Findlay].

I am absolutely committed to a system of national bargaining for terms and conditions in colleges. I raised the issue well before Mr Findlay was in the chamber, and I have done the—[Interruption.] Members should wait a moment, Presiding Officer. I hope that they will find it interesting to hear from me about the discussions that I have had with Mr Findlay on the matter. I now feel quite at liberty to divulge that information, given that we have just heard what I must say was a misrepresentation of the situation. I have backed such a system for some considerable time. I have worked with the regional leads and the trade unions, and we now have a framework in place. Amendments 1 and 2 are exactly the same amendments that were lodged at stage 2. Before stage 2, I asked to meet the Opposition spokespeople from all the parties. Mr Findlay came to that meeting, and it was not lengthy, but I asked him twice, “Are there any amendments that you would like to lodge? Is there anything that I can do to try to bridge the gaps that exist?” The matter that we are now discussing was never mentioned by Mr Findlay—not once. Members: Oh! There we are. He may just have been forgetful at that stage. When the amendments were lodged at stage 2, I explained to Mr Findlay very positively that I supported what we were both trying to do, and that I would be happy to work with him to lodge amendments that would actually work, as opposed to amendments 1 and 2, which would not work. In fact, if someone wanted national pay bargaining, those are the amendments that they would not lodge, but that is okay: everybody makes mistakes. I said—[Interruption.] Yes, everybody makes mistakes—and members are about to hear about another one from Mr Findlay. I said to Mr Findlay, “Come back and have a conversation with me about how we put this in the bill.” We had our second meeting. The first meeting was nine minutes long; the second was seven minutes long. At the second meeting, Mr Findlay again wanted only to see the amendments that we were lodging. We shared those amendments, and amendment 79, which is before us now, achieves the aim and objective in question. However, Mr Findlay had already lodged the same two amendments. Was he going to withdraw them? No, he was not. What we have ended up with here is what we have always seen from Mr Findlay: he is the master of grandstanding on this. Members: Oh! Yes. Now, I am quite—[Interruption.] Gosh! It sounds as if a sea lion has got in here. I am quite happy to share the credit for bringing forward the issue with any member in the chamber who wants to share it, because I hope that all members will accept that we should not back a balkanisation of pay and conditions in the college sector. It would have been of great credit to the Parliament if, instead of what we have heard from Mr Findlay, we had all said, “Yes, this is a good thing to do—let’s do it.” What we have heard from Mr Findlay has defined exactly his approach to the bill, which is regrettable. However, I am pleased that, despite those rather wasted 16 minutes of my life talking to him about it, we now have an amendment that we can agree on.

As I said at education questions earlier, there is a way in which Mr McArthur and Liz Smith could help to influence the matter immediately. They should speak to their colleagues in Westminster and call off the dogs from the UK Treasury, which is involved in an unwelcome set of actions of reclassification. There is huge inconsistency in the UK Government’s approach. The UK Government is backing actions south of the border that include the imposition of a sort of commissar for further education who would intervene in what are called failing colleges. [Interruption.] Labour no doubt supports that because it supports almost everything that the Tories and Liberals do. A moment’s rationality would make Labour think that, if that is direct intervention in the college sector south of the border, it is a type of intervention that should demand reclassification of colleges in England similar to the reclassification that we and, I have to say, Wales are suffering. We will not allow education policy to be driven in that way from outside Scotland, either by accounting practice or by hostility from the UK Government, so we are taking a number of actions to assist colleges. I would like to ensure that the bill did the same, but it is impossible to do that, because the classification issue is reserved to Westminster. Liz Smith’s amendments would not nullify the ONS’s classification of colleges or mitigate the effects. I would like to think that it was possible to do that, but it is not possible. Unfortunately, Liz Smith is wrong or misled on the matter. Amendments 71, 72 and 81 to 83 would mean that regional boards and incorporated college boards could borrow money without legal constraint—just think about that. They could also grant securities and give guarantees or indemnities as they saw fit. No matter what members think of them, regional boards and incorporated college boards are public bodies. Given the percentage of public funding that colleges receive, controls are not only appropriate but essential. College assets have been built up largely as a result of public investment. Colleges are public assets. It would be wholly inappropriate to have colleges’ finances managed in the proposed way. As the amendments would not nullify the ONS classification, they are ineffective and irresponsible. Other aspects of the nature of the relationship between colleges and the Government in Scotland mean that reclassification would continue to apply. The relationship between the Government and colleges is founded on strong partnerships. It has associated governance arrangements, which we are strengthening in the bill in order to improve democratic accountability. We should remember that that was a key element of the thinking behind the bill. Democratic accountability was vastly diminished by what took place in 1992 and 1993. We cannot work our way around ONS reclassification in the proposed way. In my view, ONS reclassification is politically driven and we need to recognise that and do as much practically on the ground as we can. That is what we will try to do. The amendments would not do that and would lead us down some very dangerous paths.

I would like to emulate Liz Smith and make people feel better, so I will be brief. Amendment 84 changes the procedure in relation to an existing order-making power in section 12 of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 that allows the powers of college boards of management to be modified. The change from the negative procedure to the affirmative procedure provides consistency with the changes that were made at stage 2 in response to concerns that were raised by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. It provides additional parliamentary scrutiny. Amendment 92 ensures that the Education Act 1994 continues to apply to incorporated colleges. The principal effect of amendment 93 is to add two new criteria to the fundable body list. First, it ensures that colleges and universities seek to ensure that there is a students association. That is a big step forward for colleges and I am glad that it is happening. Given the way in which the bill has been framed, the requirement will also apply to assigned colleges and learning providers that are directly funded by the funding council. Under the reform process, benefit for all learners should be at the heart of everything that we do. Autonomous, sustainable and appropriately funded student associations will help us to achieve that. The second criteria in relation to fundable bodies addresses the constitutional arrangements for the type of regional strategic body that is also a university or college that is eligible for funding. Many individuals and groups have expressed serious concerns about safeguarding the nature of the UHI’s delivery of FE arrangements in its region. I pay tribute to Dr Michael Foxley and his working group, which made a series of important recommendations in that regard. As I confirmed to Mr MacArthur, amendment 93 adds to the fundable body criteria for certain learning providers that are eligible to receive funding from the funding council. In practical terms, it means that the funding council will need to be satisfied that the UHI is delivering the arrangements in the manner agreed to by the UHI working group and articulated in its report. The UHI is an important issue for most people and I hope that that will be welcomed by the Parliament. Amendment 94 amends section 9(4) of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005. It is technical in nature and I will not go into it any further. Amendment 98 requires the funding council to inform regional colleges and regional strategic bodies of the socioeconomic groups, skills needs and economic, social and cultural issues that it has identified in Scotland that are relevant to them in discharging their duties. Amendments 116 to 118 clarify ministers’ powers in new section 7D of the 2005 act as they extend to incorporated colleges. I move amendment 84. Amendment 84 agreed to. Amendments 85 to 88 moved—[Michael Russell].

Today is a good day for learners in Scotland: we have given final consideration to a bill that shows what can be achieved when the Government, the Parliament and stakeholders work together for the benefit of Scotland. I said during the stage 1 debate that my hope was that the final iteration of the bill would be a product of partnership. I am delighted to say that that is exactly what it has turned out to be. I thank the members of the Education and Culture Committee for their thorough consideration of the bill. In particular, I thank Stewart Maxwell for his professional and fair-minded approach in chairing its proceedings. I thank the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Finance Committee for their valuable contributions to scrutiny of the bill, and I thank my officials and the officials of the many organisations that have worked closely with us to improve the bill at each stage. The depth and quality of positive engagement and constructive debate between the Government and stakeholders has been excellent. That has resulted in a stronger bill that is supported by staff and students, and by colleges and universities. It is a bill that has scope and ambition; it was never going to be possible for everyone to agree on everything. Stakeholders have argued passionately and persuasively—but usually pragmatically—for the amendments that they believed would improve the bill. Despite some distractions, this has been what I would call a mature and enlightened approach to developing legislation, and I commend all those who have contributed to it. There have been important changes to the bill, which have improved what I believe was already a good bill. The amendments are indicative of this Government’s determination to listen, its commitment to working in partnership and its focus on producing high-quality legislation. We listened when the university sector told us that the term “management” in the governance provisions represented an unintentional threat—it came from another piece of legislation—to institutional autonomy. We listened when the college sector told us that assigned colleges needed larger boards, and we listened when staff and students told us that they should be consulted on development of the widening access agreements. We have accepted amendments from across the chamber. We have listened because we are a Government that forms its policies—whenever we can—on the basis of consensus and agreement on what will provide the best outcome—which on this occasion is the best outcome for learners in Scotland. We listened because we understand where the knowledge and expertise on Scottish education lies. It lies in the sector, in the staff and the students who have made our post-16 education system a good system that can be better. The fruits of our partnership are clear in the amended bill, which will be voted on shortly. It tackles head on the problem of underrepresentation of people from our deprived communities who, for too many generations, have lacked the opportunities but not the talent or the ambition to succeed. The Victorian Liberal politician and rector of the University of Aberdeen, Mounstuart Grant Duff, once said: “There is no investment of national energy that so quickly brings fame to a nation, as energy invested in acquiring knowledge.” However, for decades—perhaps even for centuries—widening access to higher education has been something that we aspire to; something that we would like to achieve some day. That day is dawning because the bill establishes widening access as one of the core matters to which the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council must have regard in exercising its functions. It enshrines widening access agreements in primary legislation and it enables ministers to drive widening access forward by identifying—in consultation—the priority groups on which the efforts of institutions must focus. The bill also makes substantial improvements to the governance of both the college and university sectors, delivering appropriate levels of assurance for the substantial investment that the state makes of about £1.6 billion every year. In the college sector, the bill will ensure that statutory regional chairs are appointed through the public appointments process, which ends the reign of self-appointed and, sometimes, self-perpetuating boards, thereby dramatically improving governance and accountability. It also makes provision for the governing bodies of colleges and universities to have explicit regard to equalities duties in appointing new governors, which makes clear the Government’s desire that the concern about lack of diversity on governing bodies be addressed. We could do more with the full powers of a normal Parliament—and that will come. The bill will pave the way for the re-introduction of national pay bargaining in the college sector, which is an important step towards ending what I have called the balkanisation of pay and conditions that was set in train by Michael Forsyth in the early 1990s. It protects the rest of the United Kingdom’s students from ever having to pay more for a Scottish education than they can access in fee support from their own Administrations. They would have been better served had that monetisation of higher education never started south of the border. The bill contains innovative provisions that will allow Skills Development Scotland to share and receive information in more structured ways, which will be critical to helping young people who are at risk of dropping out of education, and it establishes the legal structures that are necessary for the proper operation of a regional college system, with all the acknowledged benefits that that will deliver. It does not tinker around the edges or skirt round the issues. It will deliver real reform for the benefit of learners and of Scotland as an essential part of a wider reform programme. It is important to reflect on the remarkable progress that has been made since the publication of “Putting Learners at the Centre” in September 2011—just 21 months ago. That paper set out our ambitious plans to reform the college sector, to maximise its potential and to ensure that it delivers the best possible outcomes for learners and makes the best possible contribution to the Scottish economy. At the heart of the paper lay the belief that colleges of scale, distinction and influence—educational powerhouses that could transform learning opportunities for learners in their regions—are the best way to remove unnecessary competition and wasteful duplication, and thereby to allow a stronger focus on delivering better outcomes. In those 21 months, college leaders have seized on the opportunities that the reform programme presents by setting in train an unprecedented programme of no less than 10 college mergers. Once those structural changes are complete, we will reap the full benefits of reform. We look forward to more strategic planning of provision, with a sharper focus on the needs of employers, which will simultaneously improve the life chances of learners and generate the skills that are necessary to drive forward our economy. Regionalisation will maximise the impact of colleges and will ensure that provision always leads somewhere positive, whether that be to higher learning or to employment. It will help to create closer links between schools, colleges and universities, and will result in better-quality provision through the emergence of innovative centres of excellence in specific curriculum areas. Underpinning all that are the outcome agreements, which for the first time are making crystal clear the relationship between public funding and what institutions are expected to deliver. The reform process also applies to the university sector. Our universities are already among the best in the world, so there is no need for a revolution, but improvement is always possible. The bill will widen access and increase accountability. The outcome agreements will provide absolute clarity on the arrangement that exists between the state and the universities, which can only help both sides. We have no intention of moving away from our commitment to free education, and we have removed tuition fees for about 125,000 students. We have backed those students to succeed with by far the best student support package that is available anywhere in the United Kingdom. In this academic year, we have invested a further £10 million to create an additional 2,089 funded places. Those places are targeted at recruitment and retention of students from Scotland’s most deprived communities. They will increase articulation from college to university and boost skills for growth. Additional places are being provided in key sectors that are likely to have the greatest impact. Our post-16 reforms will ensure that Scotland is truly a nation where there is opportunity for all. I urge members across the chamber to put aside the differences that have divided us during the bill’s consideration and to consider the bill on its merits and on the basis of the benefits that it will deliver for people all over Scotland. There are no political or practical reasons for opposing the bill. It will extend access to our poorest communities. To oppose the bill would be to oppose more accountable and representative governance, and to oppose a return to national pay bargaining in the college sector. Worst of all, to oppose the bill would be to oppose the efforts of the students, staff and institutions that have worked so hard to help create the bill in its present form. I urge Parliament to come together and to unify in backing the judgment of those who know Scottish education best, who are now backing the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The estimate is 16,000. Can the member explain how many would benefit if the bill did not go through? Given that you will not support the bill, how many would you achieve?

Two weeks ago, I had a visit in my constituency office from the former MSP for Argyll and Bute, Jim Mather. Those in the chamber who know him will know that he would recommend a number of books to me. He recommended a management book that was, he said, particularly relevant because it addressed the issues that one finds in public life when new ideas are promulgated. The book outlines four types of opposition. The first type of opposition is to say, “We don’t need it—yet.” The second type of opposition is to say, “We don’t need it—period.” The third type of opposition is to ask endless questions of detail to stop it from happening. If all that fails, the fourth type of opposition is character assassination. We have seen all of that. I want to cut through all that today—

No. I am sorry, but I would like to make some progress. I have only eight minutes. It is essential that we recognise what the bill achieves and address the consequences for those parties that will not support the things that are being established today. The bill will deliver stronger widening-access provisions, establishing widening access at the heart of what the Scottish funding council and the institutions do. Secondly, the bill will create structures for a reformed college sector that will deliver better outcomes for learners and businesses. That is accepted across the sector. If people vote against the bill, they will be voting against better outcomes for learners and businesses. The bill will pave the way for national pay bargaining in the college sector. Anyone who votes against the bill will be voting against that.

No, thank you. I would like to make some progress. The bill will address the lack of equality on the governing bodies of our post-16 institutions. It will do that to the limit of the Scottish Parliament’s powers. Anyone who votes against the bill will be voting against progress on gender issues. The bill will improve governance across both sectors. There is no doubt about that. It takes on board the recommendations of two independent reviews—I stress that the reviews were independent. The bill puts in place mechanisms to prevent young people from dropping out of education. It also does things for student associations. There is the shopping list. If the bill does not pass, those things will not come to pass. That is important.

No, I will not.

I would like to make some progress, Presiding Officer.

I do not recognise any ideological objections from Labour at all; I simply recognise oppositionalism. However, I recognise the Tories’ ideological objections to what we are trying to achieve in this bill, so I want to address one or two of the points that Liz Smith raised. I was surprised when Liz Smith defined the way in which reform should come about. She said that we would have to ensure that a sector that is being reformed is in agreement. I will use two words to question that point: Michael Gove. It is simply not true that, when reform is under way, everyone will agree with it. However, I am glad about the wider level of support that we have across the sector, and I will quote three people’s views on the bill. Professor Sir Timothy O’Shea, the principal of the University of Edinburgh, said: “We are very supportive of the whole bill in terms of intentions with regards to widening participation, greater efficiency of the sector and greater accountability”. John Henderson, the chief executive of Colleges Scotland, said: “Colleges support the principle of reform and there is much in this Bill to be welcomed.” Robin Parker, of the National Union of Students Scotland, said: “The legislation must happen.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 1985.] The impression that has been given—intentionally or unintentionally—that nobody supports the bill, and that it has simply been dreamed up and put on the statute book, is incorrect. The bill is supported across the sector. It is also the result of a lengthy and detailed process. Again, someone who was observing this debate having just arrived from Mars might think that no work at all had been done to get the sector onside and involve it in the process. Stewart Maxwell was right to say that the bill is controversial and complex. It requires some hard work from members to understand how the sector will change and improve and to participate in the improvement of the bill. We have seen that from most sides of the chamber. However, what we did was publish a set of intentions around putting learners at the centre. Then, there were two independent reviews of governance—not one, but two—which were wide ranging and had representation from across the sector. The reviews were unanimous in their recommendations, with one exception. Following that, we consulted widely. Then we published a bill. Then, at stage 1, considerable evidence was taken. After that, there was a process of amendment—there was not a particularly detailed set of amendments in terms of numbers, but the process took place. We listened at stage 1 and stage 2 and, when we came to stage 3, there were further improvements to the bill. Again, someone who had just arrived from Mars might believe that the Government lodged thousands of amendments to burden the poor members of the committee. However, fewer than half of the stage 2 amendments—76 out of 191—were lodged by the Government. None of those represented a major policy shift, but they were developed to improve the bill for the benefit of learners. Similarly, out of 120 stage 3 amendments, 58 came from the Government and, again, they were amendments that resulted from our having listened to the sector. Indeed, 17 of those amendments were the result of Labour members making points in the committee with which I agreed. I would have been happy to accept improved amendments from Labour had they come forward, but none did. On national pay bargaining, the same amendments that could not have effect and the same amendments that would not have achieved the effect were simply slapped down again without discussion. That is not the hard work that we need to improve a bill. Fortunately, the sector has behaved differently. It has worked closely with the Government and some members of the committee—Mr McArthur, for example, worked on the University of the Highlands and Islands amendments along with the Highlands and Islands MSPs to do something that was important—and we ended up with a much-improved bill. That is the purpose of legislation. The much-vaunted system that we have in the Parliament improves legislation as we go along. If some members do not understand that and are not prepared to put the effort in, that is tough, because the job of legislating is to put the effort in. Now we have a piece of legislation that works for Scotland. [Interruption.]

The bill will improve the situation for learners in Scotland. Therefore, I go back to the point with which I opened. If anybody in the chamber votes against the bill, here is what they are voting against. They are voting against widening access—it is not possible to support widening access and vote against it. They are voting against a reformed college sector delivering better outcomes for learners and businesses. They are voting against national pay bargaining in the college sector. They are voting against measures to improve gender balance on the boards of the governing bodies of colleges and universities. [Laughter.]

Ah, I wondered how long it would be before Mr Findlay started to laugh at the things that need to happen in Scotland. He would vote against governance across both sectors and mechanisms to help the young people of Scotland. That is what members vote against if they vote against the bill. I quote Robin Parker again: “The legislation must happen.” That is what students are saying. I hope that the Parliament is listening.

I thank the Parliament for the opportunity to make a statement in which I will set out the Government’s response to the recent report by the commission on the delivery of rural education. There are few issues that unite all sides of this Parliament, but the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 achieved that distinction when Parliament agreed to it unanimously in November 2009. Prior to the 2010 act, significant concerns were expressed on all sides about the inadequacies of the procedures that local authorities had to follow in relation to school closures. The legislation was intended to make the proposed closure of any school open, transparent and fair. The act also secured a number of special provisions for rural schools: where a council proposes to close a school, it must have regard to three special factors before it moves to consult. The intention was to ensure that a decision to close a rural school must be regarded as a decision of last resort—in other words, at the heart of any decision about rural schools should lie a presumption against closure. In addition, prior to the 2010 act, the involvement of ministers in closure decisions mainly related to issues around occupancy and distance. The new act established a more formal role by means of a safeguard, whereby ministers can call in decisions where they perceive serious flaws in the consultation or decision-making process. When Parliament passed the legislation, most people envisaged no more than a handful of cases being called in. However, it soon became clear that, despite the Parliament’s good work, local government, communities and national Government interpreted the 2010 act in widely differing ways. The number of call-ins has risen to a level that is far higher than expected, which is undesirable. The differing interpretations of the act have hindered the clear policy intention behind it, and the improvements that we all felt we had made did not lead to as much improvement on the ground as we had hoped. That situation was neither sustainable nor acceptable, and the problem was particularly acute with regard to rural schools. Accordingly, the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities announced in July 2011 the establishment of a joint commission on the delivery of rural education. The commission, chaired by Sheriff David Sutherland, was given a remit to review the 2010 act and its application and to make recommendations on best practice in the delivery of education in rural areas. It was also asked to look at innovation and the link between rural education and rural regeneration. The commission published its report on 19 April 2013. I thank Sheriff Sutherland and the members of the commission for all their hard and thoughtful work over the past two years. The commission’s report provides some clear and concise analysis of the issues, along with 38 helpful recommendations. I have given careful consideration to all the recommendations. In doing so, I and my officials have had extensive discussions with COSLA, so that we could understand clearly local government’s view of the report. I can support the vast majority of the recommendations and, working closely with COSLA, I will be taking the steps necessary to implement them. The Government’s response to each of the recommendations is published today. Many of the recommendations can be taken forward administratively, through revised guidance; others will require legislative change. Once in place, I am confident that the changes will lead to real improvements and will deliver more effectively the policy that the whole Parliament intended when it passed the 2010 act. In particular, I note the commission’s assessment that greater clarity, transparency and consistency are essential on financial issues around proposed closures. Parents deserve no less. I therefore welcome the commission’s recommendations that, where financial arguments are presented, they should be based on clear and accurate data. I know that COSLA shares that view. I am committed to working with COSLA to develop the financial template and associated guidance that will deliver that. I also welcome the commission’s advice that educational benefit statements must continue to be an important part of a closure proposal. I am happy to accept the commission’s recommendation that further guidance be provided to ensure that, going forward, those statements are improved. However, after careful consideration I have concluded that there is one area in which the Government cannot accept the commission’s recommendation. The 2010 act established a high bar—that for every school closure proposal, a key component would be the educational benefit statement, setting out the educational benefit from the change. That principle is very dear to me, the Government and, I am sure, many in this Parliament. Education provision can and should change over time, to meet the needs of new generations of young people, but what must characterise those changes is educational improvement. That is a core purpose for every one of us. It is vitally important that a rigorous assessment is carried out of the educational impact of any change, and that closure—which can be disruptive to children and detrimental to communities—proceeds only on the basis that it will deliver an educational benefit to the children involved. I therefore do not intend to bring forward changes to the 2010 act to implement recommendation 20. However, I know from my conversations with COSLA that local authorities are rightly concerned about how to deliver the statutory requirements of educational benefit statements, which I recognise is both difficult and challenging. In light of those discussions, it is clear that we all need better and more focused guidance on how to evidence educational benefit. I am committed to working jointly with COSLA to develop that guidance. I believe that the guidance can be improved and made to work better for education authorities and communities. Following discussion with COSLA, I will also implement the commission’s recommendation for a greater role for Education Scotland to provide a detailed response to the proposed educational benefits and have a more sustained involvement in school closure proposals. At the heart of this is the shared desire of Government and local authorities to improve the quality of closure proposals so that the number of cases that have to be called in for determination can be significantly reduced. That is our joint aim. It will help communities, too. The commission’s work was unavoidably delayed by the court case that involved Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, which tested the 2010 act. The judgments in that case have now been received, most recently on 31 May. The court concluded that ministers’ role in considering school closures is to look at the merits as well as the process that was applied. The commission considered the court’s conclusion carefully and supported that approach. Following the judgment, the commission’s recommendation and discussion with COSLA, I will introduce amendments to the 2010 act through the Children and Young People Bill this autumn. Those amendments will clarify the 2010 act and provide a statutory basis for what is required when a local authority’s closure proposal is being reviewed. I consider that it is essential to set out how the Government will in future review the local authority’s assessment of the merits of the proposal and consider the process applied by the local authority. It will be important that the approach continues to respect the primacy of local authority decision making in this area and restricts potentially open-ended consideration. None of this is about second guessing local authority decisions. My object in proposing such amendments would be to prescribe clearly the role of ministers and the factors that have to be taken into account in coming to a decision on a closure proposal. I will consult on the principle of those amendments during the summer. The final judgment in the case also commented on the presumption against closure under the 2010 act. I will want to reflect on that aspect of the judgment and consider whether further amendments to the 2010 act are required to ensure that that central aspect of the Government’s policy on rural schools is secured. I recognise, as does the commission’s report, that schools, including rural schools, sometimes have to close. Communities change, populations move and, sometimes, buildings become unsuitable. However, it is our duty to ensure that such decisions command public confidence as a result of a rigorous, transparent process for any proposed closure. It must also be an objective process that reviews the specific circumstances of individual schools and recognises the different issues of rurality and remoteness that are faced by particular schools, communities and areas. As well as accepting the commission’s recommendations on the call-in process, I want to build on them and address the issue of who should determine closure proposals that have been called in. It continues to be suggested that the nature of such decisions is not one that sits well with ministers and that it might be appropriate to take this opportunity to establish a better arm’s-length system. I believe that responsibility for considering whether a school closure proposal should be called in should remain the responsibility of Scottish ministers. However, once a call-in decision has been made, proposals might well be best referred to a new independent decision-making body. I am exploring options for that body and considering alternatives, including dispute resolution mechanisms such as arbitration, an independent adjudicator or a panel. I intend to work closely with COSLA in developing thinking around that issue. It is important that we get the mechanism right, so at this stage we all need to be open minded about how it can be delivered, rather than come at it with any fixed or preconceived ideas. Such an approach would remove school closure decisions from accusations of political bias and provide an independent and objective assessment of the most controversial cases. It would also—importantly, and unlike judicial review—be easily accessible to the communities affected by the proposal. It is important that local government has confidence in the mechanism and we will work jointly with it and parent representatives to ensure that the appropriate knowledge, skills and links are built into the process, to allow it to reach fair and objective decisions. Schools can be fundamental to a rural community’s social and economic make-up. They allow its young people to be educated in the community, by the community. They provide a meeting place. They underpin social cohesion. They support a wider and broader learning community in the area. Their removal can undermine a community and rob it of its future. Although closure decisions are emotive and difficult, they are nonetheless necessary in some cases, but it is right that we put in place a mechanism that will allow the communities themselves to have confidence in the consultation process and its outcome. I put on record again my thanks to David Sutherland and the commission members for their thorough and sensitive work, which goes to the heart of many issues involved. It is clear that the 2010 act has not provided the clarity that we all wished it to, and that we all have more work to do. I am committed and look forward to working closely with local government to deliver the many improvements that Mr Sutherland has identified and which both of us would like to be implemented. I also recognise that the commission’s work has delayed some decisions and that communities and education authorities now need clarity and certainty as soon as possible. We will work as quickly as we can to deliver that clarity and certainty, including using the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to amend the 2010 act. I hope that members will be supportive of that approach. I believe that our rural communities and their young people are a vital force that energises and drives Scottish society. The rural schools on which they depend deserve the thorough consideration that the report has delivered and I commend it and the Government’s response to Parliament.

I am not sure that I detected a question in all that, but I will address the issues that have been raised. First of all, I must tell Neil Findlay that the costs of the court case are not yet to hand. A process requires to be gone through; as I am sure he will know, having read all the legal documentation, the question of expenses is reserved to the final interlocutor. In those circumstances, there will be a decision at some point on the matter of costs. Of course, Mr Findlay was not here when the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill went through the Parliament, but it is regrettable that he has not grasped its purpose and the fact that it had the full support of the chamber, including the Labour Party. I am sorry that there seems to be some indication that that support has now gone and that Labour members want another system to be put in place. When we introduce the amendments through the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, Labour members will have the opportunity to vote against them or to lodge amendments of their own. However, when the original decision was made, it was absolutely clear that we needed a different process—that is why the whole Parliament agreed to the 2010 legislation. Unfortunately, it has been hard to get the process exactly as we wish it. The reason why rural schools are different was explained fully when the 2010 legislation went through. It is quite clear that rural schools are in a special category, and I am sorry that the Labour Party seems to think that that is not the case. That is a very odd view, which is not shared across the chamber. [Interruption.]

Rural schools are in a special situation, as their relationship to the community is particularly strong. When a rural school’s closure is proposed, there are questions about whether many other things in the community will be lost. Therefore, the commission that we set up jointly with COSLA—it was not just the Scottish Government that set up the commission—was supported across the chamber. Unfortunately, for whatever reason, that support appears to have been withdrawn this afternoon, and I regret that. As I said in my statement, I am open-minded about the next step. The commission says that it might be best to leave the present situation and then to review it. However, there remains—largely from Labour councils, I have to say—criticism about the politicisation of the process. As part of the constructive nature of this Government’s engagement, we are asking, “Can we envision a better way to do this?” We have said that we remain open-minded about the ways to take the matter forward. However, Mr Findlay has already decided that that is not to happen and that there is a political fight to be had. Mr Findlay can create a fight in an empty room, but he is not going to create a fight with me. I will remain open-minded about the matter and will try to create opportunities to ensure that there is an understanding that we want the process to be fair to all parties. Having been involved in fighting for rural schools for many years, I take the issue immensely seriously. I do not shout out from a sedentary position; I take it seriously, and I have to make difficult decisions. The difficult decisions that the Scottish Government has made are reflected in its record, which shows that it has been able to save some, although not all, schools. It is interesting to note that, from May 1999 to May 2007, the Labour-Liberal Executive did not save a single one of the 45 schools on which decisions had to be made. In those circumstances, my record—the record of this Government—speaks for itself.

I thank the member for those questions. It is important to stress that I am not proposing a panel but opening up the debate. I think that a number of options are available. For example, using the Scottish arbitration service is a reasonable and possible way forward. Good, modern arbitration allows the parties to be heard and to be represented, but appeals are possible only on points of law. Communities would be able to take part in that approach in a way that they cannot usually take part in the judicial review process. There are a number of options. I will discuss them with COSLA, and I will be happy to discuss them with the member and with the Parliament. I am also happy to discuss them with parents and parents’ representatives. It would be helpful if we could get a consensual view across the chamber—excluding Mr Findlay, who obviously does not want to be part of this—about the best way forward. The member is absolutely right to welcome the issuing of much clearer guidance. The commission is very strong on the need for financial guidance. Those of us who have been through repeated school closure processes know that a great deal of difficulty is caused when figures are bandied about by all sides. Getting the template right will be good and is important. We also need to ensure that there is clarity about what determines educational benefit. We will work with COSLA on that and I am happy to work with parents groups on it, too. Education Scotland has a role to play. One of the issues on which the commission touches and which we need to bring forward is the continued role of Education Scotland during a closure process. That will help to point out what needs to be done in such circumstances. I have sat through closure meetings in small communities in which there has been real confusion about what was being said. That should not happen. It was not intended by the legislation, and we need to improve.

That is an important question. We have to start by making it absolutely clear that local authorities are best placed to take decisions about the provision of education in their areas. We have a distributed system of education delivery in Scotland, but there should be a safeguard in place to review those decisions—one that is accessible to local communities. That is particularly important given the difficult nature of these decisions, and we all know how difficult they are. The commission has had the opportunity to consider the judgment—indeed, it did not want to report until it had considered it—and it supports the approach of ministers reviewing the merits of a proposal. However, we need to have a system that ensures that we do not interfere in decision making but can review the merits of a case alongside the process issues. We need to discuss what that means and what it would look like in legislation and in practice with local authorities, parents and others to ensure that we understand with absolute clarity—Liz Smith made the point that clarity is all—what it really means.

I welcome that question. I am tempted to say to Mr Pearson, “Come on down.” He could clearly make a stronger contribution to education debate than his front-bench team can. I will address his point, because it is serious and good, and must be addressed well. I propose that ministers will retain the right to call in. The court supported that right. Ministers will be the first line of defence, so to speak. They will take the call-in decision. However, there has been criticism—indeed, there has been strong criticism from Labour councils recently—of the same ministers making the final decision. I suggest that we can get a better decision-making process. Ministers would remain responsible for the operation of the 2010 act and for general education delivery. However, we already have a split situation: local authorities make the decisions and ministers review them. Mr Findlay appears to criticise that situation, but he does not have a solution to it. It is entirely appropriate that, if there are grounds for review—that is what the minister decides—the final decision be made in a way that is fair to all sides. The proposal will allow that to happen, but I am very open to discussion about what the process should look like and what should be built into it. If Mr Pearson wishes to contribute to that discussion, he will be welcome to do so, so that we get it right. The Parliament agreed to the 2010 act unanimously. It is my hope that we might reach the stage at which we can agree on this matter, too. I hope that Mr Pearson will play his role in that regard.

To accept the Presiding Officer’s strictures, I agree with Sheriff David Sutherland on the matter, and I am accepting those recommendations. That is the right thing to do.

No, I disagree with that, and I am sorry that Mr McArthur takes that point of view. It is clear that we need to clarify the role of financial decision making in the process. That is one of the issues that the commission looked at and came up with recommendations on. It would have been positive if Mr McArthur had welcomed those recommendations, because they have been accepted. They will clarify the situation, and clarity is necessary. In previous decision making, financial considerations were excluded. The commission is saying that such considerations need to be taken into account, but that the information needs to be presented properly. That is what will happen. I am surprised by the attitude that the Liberal Democrats seem to be taking on the mechanism, because it provides an opportunity to depoliticise the situation and to have a better—[Interruption.] Mr Scott shouts out. He is constantly arguing that things should be depoliticised. Most recently, he argued that the Royal Highland Show should be depoliticised, although Mr Lyon is politicising it. When I provide an opportunity to depoliticise something, he shouts out. The inconsistency of the Liberal Democrats is absolutely stunning. The voters cannot understand what they do, which is why they do not vote for them.

I am keen to ensure that the stability in teacher numbers that this Government has achieved, following the failure of the previous Government, is maintained. We must ensure that teacher employment is consistent throughout Scotland. For example, under the teacher induction scheme, a financial incentive is available to probationer teachers who waive their right to specify in which authority area they would like to work during their probationary year. That allows them to be placed in authorities in rural areas where probationer teachers are needed but might not otherwise go. We have also been looking at the issue of dual qualification as a concern for education authorities. We are working with the General Teaching Council for Scotland to explore how the issue can be taken forward. It is extremely important that we can provide a good supply of properly trained teachers to every school in Scotland. There are great attractions to teaching in rural schools, which present a real opportunity for ambitious teachers. We should send out that message loud and clear.

I addressed that in my statement. I am happy to confirm that we want to get the matter concluded as soon as possible. We have identified a legislative route for doing that. We expect all councils to be mindful of the points that I have made this afternoon and the discussions that are going on with COSLA. There is legislation in place, but I expect the highest-quality practice to take place, too. We will want to ensure that, when councils consider closure proposals, they are mindful of the need to do the type of things that are being talked about, not just by me but in what is an extremely comprehensive report, which they will all have read. I am confident that councils that are in that position will want to produce robust and clear proposals that meet all the tests that I have set. I must point out that we accept the argument made by the members of the rural schools network during the commission’s inquiry on the importance of educational benefit remaining at the heart of what we are doing. I hope that they are pleased about that. I also hope that they are reassured by the statement.

I have indicated that we want that guidance as quickly as possible. We will consult intensively with COSLA and others over the summer to ensure that we bring it forward. I have made it clear that the educational bar that the Parliament set unanimously is an important one. It tells us that everything that we do in education must have an improvement motive and must be judged by the improvements that we bring. The educational benefit statement, which is vital, is being retained in that way. That will be positive for education not only in rural Scotland, but in urban Scotland; it is the right thing to do. Providing that we get consensus in the chamber—I am hopeful, but one never knows—we will be able to get the matter through quickly.

I have an open mind about what that will look like. I keep stressing that point, because we will base the final decision on accessibility, among other factors. An arbitration process would allow representations to be made—that is why it is a strong contender. However, other processes could be constructed that would allow representations to be heard. It is important that such a process happens. I am keen to ensure that rural communities in Argyll and Bute and throughout Scotland are happy with the process, and accessibility is one factor that we will bear in mind.

There are very good recommendations in the report that make the links that many of us have made for a long time around the presence of rural schools in communities, including shared services, the imaginative use of buildings, and how the potential closure of a rural school is treated not only as an educational matter, but as economic and social matters. Those are all questions of good practice that we are keen to encourage, and the recommendations will help local authorities to take them forward.

The Scottish Government has no plans to install automatic electronic defibrillators in secondary schools, because—rightly—that is a decision for local authorities. I am aware that North Lanarkshire Council, in partnership with NHS Lanarkshire and Amey, has recently taken the decision to install defibrillators in all 24 of its secondary schools. The deployment of publicly accessible defibrillators needs to be achieved as part of a wider community resilience scheme. The community needs the skills, training and awareness in order to deploy such defibrillators effectively.

I know that the member has a long-standing interest in the subject, and I think that we are all in agreement that access to defibrillators is time critical and of extreme importance, but schools might not always be the best locations for them in communities. International guidelines require there to be a reasonable probability of an automatic electronic defibrillator being used at least once in two years. There are some spectacularly successful deployments in other places. I pay tribute to Heather Munro, a girl guide in my constituency—indeed, in my own community of Glendaruel—who masterminded the installation of a defibrillator in a disused phone box, which was a tremendous thing for a small community. There are many such opportunities, all of which we should encourage.

I will start with two irrefutable facts: first, if you charge students fees, they will end up owing more money. That is the missing sentence from Mr Henry’s opening speech: if you charge students fees, they will end up owing more money.

No. I want to make some headway. The second irrefutable fact is that if you vote against widening access, you will not widen access. Of course, that is precisely what the Labour Party did at stage 1 of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill.

I will take Mr Findlay in just a minute. We wait with bated breath to see whether Labour will vote against widening access for the second time. Will Mr Findlay tell us?

The merest sophistry as ever from Mr Findlay. I repeat: if you vote against widening access, you will not widen access. However, that is what Labour did. [Interruption.]

I thank Labour for bringing the debate, because it allows me to celebrate one of the great successes of the SNP’s second term: the implementation of the manifesto commitment to introduce a minimum income for students. We did what we said we would do, and in fact we went further, because we set the minimum income at £7,250. I note Mr Henry’s full-frontal attack on the National Union of Students. However, I will quote again what the NUS rightly said, which was that we have produced the “best support package” available anywhere in the UK. The Labour Party seems to be hell-bent on telling people what they cannot have and what will be taken away from them. We have had Ed Balls saying this week that the Tory cuts will be sustained. If ever there was a shameful statement, it was that. [Interruption.]

Presiding Officer, can the record note that Mr Findlay is enjoying himself by shouting, as usual? Now we have the Labour Party’s determination to take away free education in Scotland. This is what the Labour motion is all about, yet again: “Let’s take away free education in Scotland.”

There is no direct line from Ed Balls to Hugh Henry. That is yet another spending commitment made that has not been cleared by the shadow chancellor and which is obviously not in the manifesto. The reality is that all the rhetoric from Labour is about imposing student fees, but it has not got the guts to say so. That is the reality of where we have been for the past year. Free education is central to my vision of the Scotland that we should have and, indeed, to the vision of Scotland that most people in Scotland share. It is also central to the NUS’s vision of the country that it wants to live in. I listen and talk to the NUS; I do not deride it in the Parliament chamber, as Mr Henry does. The NUS said, after we had been talking about student support and student finance over a long period, that it wanted to ensure that there was “money in student pockets”. That is what the NUS wanted to see. We worked hard with the NUS, to adjust the amount of money that was available to support bursaries, so that we could make the maximum amount available to students. In that way, we have been able to produce the minimum student income.

Mr Henry continues to mutter and shout. That is Labour’s contribution to debate. All Labour members are prepared to do is mutter and shout. Let us look at student debt figures, which are crucial. The UK graduates survey in 2012 showed clearly that the average student loan debt for Scottish students at that stage was £6,480, compared with £17,140 in England and £13,650 in Wales—that is without student fees.

No, I want to make progress. It is now estimated that the English and Welsh figures could climb to £50,000. That is the reality of the debate that we are having. That is what Labour wants. There is to be that massive increase, but it is all cloaked in the language that we heard. We are trying to widen access in a way that will work, because we know that fees will turn people off. We are trying to legislate for widening access. Statutory widening access agreements will be put in place, and this will be the only place in these islands where there is such a commitment. We are determined that the agreements will work, and our discussions with Universities Scotland and universities themselves have been very positive. Of course, Labour does not want the agreements to work, because Labour’s absolute approach is that whatever the Scottish Government proposes is to be opposed.

No, sorry. I want to finish my point. Labour’s way of opposing the agreements is therefore to vote against a bill that will widen access and to bring to the Parliament the mess of a proposal on student finance that we are considering, as though that makes a contribution in some way. We must ensure that we widen access. We know from every survey that has taken place that what puts students off is the prospect of fees. The motion has nothing to commend it at all, except Labour’s oppositionism. What we need to commend is the commitment to free education that the Parliament has shown. We need to ensure that we continue to deliver free education, because that is the only way—along with the legislation that we have—that we will genuinely widen access. Let us not have these silly games about the notions that Labour is putting forward. Let us look at the truth. In Scotland we provide the best package of student support that is available anywhere in the UK. That is something of which we should be justifiably proud, and which is supported by students and universities. Only Labour and perhaps other parties are against the expansion of higher education that we have undertaken. I move amendment S4M-06843.2, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “believes that access to university should be based on ability to learn, not ability to pay; further believes that neither upfront nor backdoor tuition fees have any place in Scotland; welcomes the removal of tuition fees, saving around 125,000 students up to £27,000 compared with England; further welcomes the introduction of the minimum income guarantee to give the poorest students a minimum income of £7,250 per year in maintenance support from 2013-14 and the increase in the minimum level of student loan to £4,500 a year for every eligible student, and agrees with comments by the National Union of Students Scotland that Scotland has ‘the best support package in the whole of the UK’.”

All the evidence shows it.

Will the member give way? That is a very—

The point that I was going to make earlier, before Murdo Fraser ran out of time, is precisely the point that I will make now. Professor von Prondzynski also argues—very convincingly, I think, and I have heard him argue it several times—that the reality is that we need to do more than simply have free education. That means including things such as compulsory progress towards widening access—which he supports—in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. The Tories voted against that. It would be—

Politics always eventually comes down to the argument that some things are simple common sense. Simple common sense says that transferring the burden of funding of higher education from the state to the student will massively increase the student’s debt and change the way in which society views education. Education will be seen as a private good and not as a societal benefit. What we have seen—[Interruption.] Presiding Officer, I would like to be able to speak without constant interruptions from members on the Labour side of the chamber. I do not know whether that is possible.

Such a view of education is a major problem in a society. If the Labour Party has now bought into that view of education—as it proposed to do by setting up the Browne review that accelerated the process south of the border—its members should say so quite clearly. Any system that decides to transfer the interests of the state and society to the individual student monetises higher education, which is inimical not just to the traditions of Scottish higher education but to the important things that underpin its success. Many people—including me—fear that, if that approach is taken, we will see a massive erosion of the extraordinarily high standing and status of Scottish higher education. For those who are prepared to take it, such an approach is playing with fire. If they are prepared to bring in those proposals—which is what they are talking about, despite all their fine words—they run the very substantial risk of undermining the whole of Scottish higher education. I will address one or two key points that members have raised. Hanzala Malik made an interesting point, and I agree with his support for the University of Glasgow’s access to the professions scheme. The scheme is important, and its success has led to a large increase in those from the most deprived communities entering the professions. That is precisely the type of initiative that is encouraged and underpinned by the agreements on widening access. Unfortunately for Mr Malik, however, his party voted against that system in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. If he is in favour of that scheme, as I am—it is a wonderful scheme—he should attempt to persuade front-bench Labour members to support rather than reject it in the bill. The simple question that must be asked is how we meet the needs of students and widening access. One does not bring in tuition fees that cost thousands of pounds—

I would like to make some progress. One does not bring in tuition fees that cost thousands of pounds while arguing, as Labour has done, for a £900 bursary increase. That is either economic illiteracy or gross hypocrisy, and I leave it to members to decide which it is, because that is the thesis that Labour has presented today. If we look at what happened when Labour was previously in power in Scotland, we see the reality. Student debt rose at that time—indeed, it rose by £26 million—because of the imposition of the graduate endowment. I suppose that we should say, “By their works shall ye know them.” In reality, Labour’s time in office resulted in an increase in student debt, including debt for the poorest. Margo MacDonald made an important point, which I will address—I am sorry that she is not in the chamber. She wondered whether there were too many university courses. We should remember that 25 per cent of higher education is delivered through further education, so the proposals that we heard from Labour today—which would damage and destroy higher education—would also affect further education. All the evidence shows that having fewer courses deters those who are least likely to go to university. Reducing the number of courses and creating these barriers would not affect most students, but it would affect those who have the most difficulty.

This is the only Government in these islands that provides the opportunities for all guarantee, which will be available to the member’s constituent if he is 16 to 19. If the member writes to me—he has not done so yet—or to Angela Constance, we will of course intervene to help in the matter. For young people above 16 to 19, we would like to see that guarantee expanded. Indeed, the European Commission has recommended that there should be an expansion of such schemes, but that is being prevented by Westminster.

I want to see guaranteed places, but it is absolutely clear that the opportunities in many colleges are expanding as a result of regionalisation. The more that we see that, the more that I am convinced that regionalisation will answer those questions for the member’s constituents. I want to finish on a point that Mr McArthur raised. He seemed quite incapable of recognising the following very simple equation. Debt is rising, undoubtedly, and will be higher for students, but it will be massively higher south of the border under the system that his Government has actively supported. Debt there will be massively higher because of the cost of tuition fees. If debt is the great disincentive, he and the Tories, who are tied together, along with Labour are actively supporting a system in which debt will be absolutely higher—

Mr Fraser argues constantly that that will not apply to the poorest students.

By their works shall ye know them. If debt discourages in that way, the system south of the border is a disaster. Please do not support any party that will destroy Scottish higher education, because that is what will happen.

Our commitment to a consistent level in college funding of £522 million a year this year and next year makes clear our commitment to learners. The current economic circumstances mean that it is right to ask colleges to prioritise young people. However, colleges offer very valuable support to older learners—some 21 million hours of learning in 2011-12. In recognition of the important role that they play, our additional funding for next year includes a further £6.6 million for additional learner places and £1.9 million for additional childcare support.

Westminster—[Interruption]—or, as a member of the Opposition has just called it, “Westmonster”, which is an interesting way of looking at it, is a considerable problem, so the right way for Scotland to move forward is as an independent country that will be able to offer a consistent and considerable set of opportunities to older and younger learners. It is vital that the college sector continue to ensure that its offerings are wide and widely accessible. The changes that are taking place through Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill will also guarantee that.

No matter what the Scottish Government did, there would be something that it was not doing that Mr Findlay would regard as being near fatal. I am absolutely certain that the Scottish Government’s record on adult learning is good and consistent. No matter what Mr Findlay waves around, no matter what he finds to criticise, and no matter his inability to work with others, the reality is that in adult learning, college learning, university learning and school learning the Government is delivering good education in Scotland, as opposed to what Mr Findlay, who is delivering only constant oppositionalism, is doing.

Information on leaver destinations of further education students is not currently collected. However, we want to ensure that, with the right support, disabled people are able to find fulfilling jobs that are suitable to their skills and experience. We are currently working with the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability and Enable to develop a programme to build on the success of their project search and their transitions into employment programmes to increase the number of students with learning disabilities who move from our colleges into employment by 200 per year. We are also working closely with local authorities and the Scottish Union of Supported Employment to promote supported employment opportunities, where disabled people can learn on the job with support from colleagues and a job coach.

As I said to John Pentland, we are currently working with the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability and Enable to develop a programme to build on the success of their project search and their transition to employment programmes in order to increase by 200 a year the number of students with learning disabilities who move from colleges into employment. There is a number attached to that; there are existing projects attached to that and there are bodies attached to that. I have met representatives of those bodies on two occasions recently, and I continue to meet them regularly and to talk to them about what more we can do to support their work. That is a positive set of discussions. I have been to the cross-party group on learning disability and I have had conversations with its members to ensure that there is satisfaction about what is taking place. If John Pentland wishes to see me about the matter, we can have conversations, too. All the things that I mentioned are actually happening.

The certificate of work readiness is a very positive step forward. It is an employer-assessed work-based qualification to help young people to prove that they are ready for work. That includes young people such as the 17-year-old Fife teenager Nico Hutchison who, after completing the certificate for work readiness with a local electronics firm, secured a two-year apprenticeship with the company. Numerous employer surveys show that one of the biggest barriers that face young people in today’s challenging labour market is lack of experience. With its employer-assessed work-experience placement, the certificate is a meaningful qualification, which employers recognise and trust. Successful completion gives young people the chance to prove that they have the skills and experience that employers want. That is a very useful and positive step forward, not just for the system but for each young person who is involved.

The educational psychologists workforce planning group met on 8 March this year, following a meeting on 25 October 2012. We are currently working with the group to monitor the impact of the changes in funding arrangements for the training of educational psychologists in Scotland. The group has worked to revise its terms of reference and will meet again on 12 September. Full minutes and agendas can be provided to Claire Baker and to others who are interested.

There is no end to the spending demands of the Labour Opposition. In addition to that demand today, yesterday Mr Findlay was calling for free entry to Our Dynamic Earth. There is nothing that it will not demand of this Administration. Of course there are restrictions on public finance and they will have some effect, but there is a new agreed funding position with the Student Awards Agency for Scotland, whereby students are eligible to apply for the £3,400 postgraduate tuition-fee loan for each of the two years, which they will not start repaying until they are in employment and earning over a threshold. An alternative funding mechanism is the professional career development loan, which is a deferred-payment bank loan to help to pay for vocational training that leads to employment in the United Kingdom and European Union. The loan can cover up to two years of learning and can be between £300 and £10,000. Students have to start paying that money back once they finish their courses. Of course there are difficulties within the current public finances. If Claire Baker really wishes to make a difference to that, I commend to her support for independence, when all the resources of Scotland will be available to the people of Scotland. That is the way forward.

Local authorities have historically reported varying degrees of difficulty in engaging supply teachers. As Mr Henry knows, the degree of difficulty varies geographically across Scotland and across the range of secondary subjects and fluctuates throughout the year. The Scottish negotiating committee for teachers has undertaken three surveys over the past 18 months to establish the level of difficulty and any reasons for it. The surveys have identified a number of possible issues, which include the changes to the salary scale and the fact that teacher unemployment is lower in Scotland than it is anywhere else in the United Kingdom. The Scottish Government is working with partners through the SNCT to identify and implement solutions.

I accept Mr Henry’s point that further progress is needed, but there is a complex series of issues. Mr Henry is aware that the payment for supply teachers was agreed as part of the tripartite agreement two years ago, which was accepted by the trade unions. All three parties to the agreement accepted those changes. Teacher unemployment is at its lowest level for a very long time and is the lowest in these islands. Mr Henry shakes his head as if to say that that does not matter, but of course it matters because, for a long time, we have been trying to drive down teacher unemployment. We have succeeded in doing so, but sometimes that creates a problem in some areas. A third issue is that, in the present on-going discussions, there is a discussion about supply. However, the local authorities have to prove themselves willing to come to the table along with others to ensure that the issue is solved. If Mr Henry has any influence with any local authority education leader—I believe that he does—I hope that he will influence that leader or leaders to ensure that they come to the table to be genuine in the discussions, along with the Government and the unions. We can then get a resolution of the issue. It is important that we try to make progress on the issue. There is a complex series of reasons and the situation is not the same everywhere. We are trying to ensure that solutions are found.

The oil and gas sector is a hugely important industry for Scotland, and our universities and colleges provide world-class education and training in Scotland and internationally. We recently provided £1.7 million through our energy skills Scotland funding to support the establishment of the oil and gas academy of Scotland, which is a collaboration—initially between Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen College, the University of Aberdeen and Banff and Buchan College—to share resources and facilities to ensure that maximum provision is available to the oil and gas industry. I am aware of the concerns that have been raised by the principals of the University of Aberdeen, Robert Gordon University and Aberdeen College about the impact of the United Kingdom Government’s student migration policy on those institutions’ ability to recruit international students to their oil and gas courses. The principals wrote to me on the matter on 30 April. I share their strong concerns and, once again, I am taking them up with the Minister of State for Immigration.

The short answer is that we need independence. We need to have control of our migration and immigration policy. That would ensure that we set policy that was suitable for Scotland, not policy that was set for other places. Our universities and colleges have a global reputation, but the most important thing is that we ensure that, apart from having a reputation for excellence, they have a reputation for welcoming overseas students. The problem is that the way in which the UK Government is handling this matter means that it is becoming unwelcoming in that regard, and we are losing students as a result. All university and college principals know that. We should be working together to change that situation, and the only proper way to do so is for the Scottish Parliament to have full control of the policy.

The reason for the increase in the number of pupils with additional support needs in Scotland is well understood. Prior to 2010, only pupils who had co-ordinated support plans or individual education programmes or who were attending a special school were recorded and reported as having additional support needs. In 2010, that was extended to include anyone receiving additional support, regardless of whether that was under a formal plan. That accounts for the large increase in the number of pupils who are recorded and reported as having additional support needs since 2010. The children and young people who were not previously recorded and reported as having additional support needs already received support. The difference is that their information was not collected as part of the annual census and it was therefore not reported.

I am glad that Murdo Fraser accepts the reason that I gave for the change in statistics. It is very important to separate out the reason for the change in those statistics and statistical reporting from the issue to which he refers, which is worthy of further discussion. It is obvious that in some areas there was—and may still be—an increasing trend. The problem with the reporting of the issue is that the two things became conflated. If we can separate those out, I will be very willing to ensure that we take the issue further. I would be happy to make sure that Murdo Fraser, who has taken a long-term interest in the matter, meets the appropriate minister—in the first instance, Dr Alasdair Allan—so that we can begin to discuss how we might take it forward. I would be happy for that to be a wider discussion.

At the outset, I state unequivocally that the Government treats this threat to the community of Millport and the island of Cumbrae very seriously indeed. I have been working and I will continue to work, along with my colleagues—including John Swinney, who obviously has a responsibility in terms of economic development—as closely as possible with all the stakeholders and all those who are prepared to work together to do everything that we can to help. That has been my intention from the day and hour that I heard of the likely decision of the University of London and it will continue to be the Government’s position until we have a successful outcome. I do not want anyone to doubt that in any way. I am grateful for the opportunity to put that on the record at the very beginning. I have been working very closely with the stakeholders, elected representatives, the community and the staff, and I will continue to do so—as will my officials—so that we are absolutely certain that we can try to get the best possible outcome. We have been engaged on this issue throughout the period. We have stepped up to the plate on numerous occasions and we will continue to do so. It is unhelpful for any suggestion to be made that that is not the case. It is not a question of backing one place against the other. That is also a wrong and divisive suggestion. For those who are unaware of the full background to the situation at the marine station, it might have been easy to become a little confused by some of the accounts that we have heard. The decision to close the Millport facility was taken by the University of London. Despite being located in Scotland, the station has been under the ownership of the university for more than 40 years. It is absolutely true that in those 40 years it has been much valued; thousands of students from Scotland, the UK and overseas have used it on a regular basis and each has paid the University of London for so doing. In fact, we have added money to the station despite that situation. The Scottish funding council contributed £125,000 last year to assist the University of London to make marine science provision. It did so, because the funding gap—the subsidy that the station required—had been growing all the time. Mr Jackson asked the apposite question, why has HEFCE withdrawn its funding? I will come to the total in a minute. It has withdrawn its funding because of the failure of the University of London over a long period to invest and produce a viable business plan, which is much to be regretted. The Higher Education Funding Council for England presently contributes just under £500,000, so we are talking about £625,000 in total revenue support. The University of London claims that it also provides a very hefty subsidy. So, there is a big revenue shortfall in the station. There is also a capital need, because the station has fallen into a state of disrepair—there is no other way of putting it. The capital funding required is between £7 million and £10 million. The Stevely report commissioned last year by the Higher Education Funding Council for England highlighted the failure to invest and emphasised the critical financial situation that the University of London had allowed to develop. In those circumstances, it was eventually not possible for HEFCE to continue to fund the station. The problem was finding at very short notice the funding required in capital, which is very substantial, as well as any revenue funding. We have come together in Scotland with a willingness to try to make a difference, to preserve the provision of marine science field studies and to provide a secure future for the island of Cumbrae. I represent a large number of islands—more than any other member in the chamber—and I entirely understand the effect of a closure on a small island community. I have spoken to the University of London and given it options to mitigate its decision, which it has not taken. I have also personally suggested to the vice-chancellor that the university considers giving the facility to the community or some other body. I have visited the station—in fact, it was my second visit—and spoken to the staff there. I have listened to opinions. I have convened several meetings with stakeholders who have an interest in the facility and the local economy, including the University of London; North Ayrshire Council; Highlands and Islands Enterprise; the marine alliance for science and technology for Scotland, which brings together the universities in a marine science pool; the Scottish Association for Marine Science; the Scottish funding council; and Kenny Gibson, MSP for the island—I will come back to him in a moment. From those meetings, we have developed a number of proposals on the way forward. I have tasked those from the marine science organisations to work on proposals that will preserve marine science fieldwork in Scotland, including historical data collection, which is carried out from Millport. It is important to recognise that one of the big assets of the station is the long sequence of historical data that has been collected. We are keen to see staff from Millport involved and absorbed into that. In the circumstances, of course, we also need to provide support for all the other staff, so we have already activated the partnership action for continuing employment team, which stands ready to help. No formal notices have been issued as yet, and that is required, but when that happens, the PACE team will be there to help. However, I have to tell members that, of all the universities in Scotland—the SFC has contacted all of them—not one has been prepared to come up with the capital that is involved. That is not surprising. It would be unrealistic to expect any university, at this late stage, to alter its long-term plans for strategic investment to compensate, essentially, for years of underinvestment by somebody else. We have enormous pressure on capital investment in Scotland owing to the ridiculous situation that we are in vis-à-vis our budget, and that is a problem. Other people have been trying hard, too, and we have all said that we need to get that viable business plan and investment so that we can support the station in some way. When I went to the island last month, I met opposition members from North Ayrshire Council and Margaret McDougall to talk about our plans. I emphasised then, as I do now, that the best way forward—indeed, the only way forward—is for everybody to work together. It is not to be divisive or to blame others but to see whether we can find a joint way ahead. I said to Margaret McDougall at that stage and have now confirmed in writing to Katy Clark that I would invite her to join the stakeholder group, and if she cannot attend, Margaret McDougall can attend in her place. In addition, I spoke to North Ayrshire Council. I was asked by two opposition councillors—a Labour councillor and a Tory councillor—and I spoke to the council to make sure that it was continuing to keep local members involved. On local members, I pay a very strong tribute to the work of Kenny Gibson, which has been absolutely tireless. I have known Kenny Gibson for a long time. He is not a man who rests on anything, and certainly not on his laurels. He has been absolutely tireless in pursuit of this and he will continue to be so. I also pay tribute to Alan Hill and to the leader of North Ayrshire Council, Willie Gibson. There has been an absolute focus on taking the issue forward, and that will continue. North Ayrshire Council’s views and activities are important. The local member referred to the new analysis from the University of Abertay of the station’s commercial development potential and the work that is being done to find other partners. In the meeting that we had with staff, I was impressed by some of the ideas that came from them, and that is feeding into the process, too. We will go on considering funding commitments that were previously made by bodies—smallish but important funding commitments such as those of the coastal communities fund and the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority. Those commitments were made before the University of London’s decision, and maybe we can harness them back in. All that work is going on and will continue. Once we have some account from the work that North Ayrshire Council and HIE have commissioned, we will bring the stakeholder group together again to look at that. However, I make a final plea. I made it to the opposition members when I met them in Largs, but they do not seem to have listened, so I want to make it again. The success of the venture will mean everybody working in the same way—working with the members of the community, who are very welcome here today and who need to be reassured that such work is taking place; with the development company; with the local representatives; and with North Ayrshire Council. The surest way in which to not succeed is to sow division in such a campaign. I look forward to working with everybody, and I make the pledge again that I made at the start of this speech: we will continue to work, and the object will be success. 12:59 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I want to stress what unites us in the debate, as Malcolm Chisholm has very effectively done, rather than what divides us. However, I hope that members will forgive me if I say something before that, in the light of the speech that we have just heard. Annabel Goldie’s use of the word “glacial” was fascinating. The reality is that the actions of the Tory and Liberal Government south of the border, just through the changes in child tax credits and working tax credits, are taking away from working families £700 a year—a figure which equates almost exactly to the sum of money that we are trying to put into the pockets of hard-pressed parents. If we want ice analogies, perhaps the best thing that we could do would be to thaw the icy heart of Iain Duncan Smith on those anti-family actions.

No, I will not. I am sorry, but I want to make some progress. I turn now to a more positive theme. I want to stress those things that Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely right to stress—the things that should unite us across the chamber. First, there is the indivisibility of childcare and education. There is no dubiety about that whatever, and we must ensure that that link is maintained. Secondly, there should be no weakening, throughout the chamber, on the standards of childcare. Thirdly, there should be no weakening on the commitment to continued progress. I wish to correct those Labour members who seemed to indicate that nothing happened after 2007.

In 2007, we moved from 412.5 hours, which was enough for Labour—a Labour member shouts “not enough”, but it was enough for Labour—to 475 hours, and we will now move to 600 hours. There is no weakening on that; indeed, there is unanimity across the chamber that we should continue to make progress. There is also no weakening on the cross-party approach. There is absolutely no weakening on bringing the experts to bear, although Annabel Goldie seemed to imply that that was not happening. There is the early years task force, whose remit is wider than early years, in particular with regard to its subject group on early childhood learning and care, where the remit covers the ages of zero to 14. That group involves not just the politicians who Hugh Henry and, apparently, Annabel Goldie, want to gather round a table, but all the organisations—the real experts. Mary Fee said that there should be a cross-party activity. She should have looked to her right, because next to her is a member of that early years task force—Malcolm Chisholm. The task force indeed involves other members. If members have the expertise that Malcolm Chisholm has displayed in the debate, I will be very happy for them to be involved in the task force. There is no weakening at all on the desire for a cross-party, informed contribution to the debate. I turn to where I think the problem lies. Malcolm Chisholm brought three good ideas to the table, and we will take them away and look at them. We did not hear a single idea in Hugh Henry’s speech, which is regrettable. I want people to come forward with ideas, along with suggestions for how they can be funded; they will then be considered. I give an absolute commitment that the early years task force and the existing structures, which include the real experts, will consider any idea that comes forward. We will do so openly; we are quite happy to consider those ideas openly and to have a public debate. We should know—and we should not be afraid to acknowledge—that there is a better long-term solution. I pay credit to Johann Lamont who, in her conference speech on 21 April, said: “Labour in government had a childcare strategy within months of coming into office ... We introduced child tax credits to supplement child benefit. We introduced paternity and extended maternity leave.” That recognised another indivisibility: that of tax, benefits and labour market regulation.

No, I am not taking an intervention from Mr Findlay, because this is a serious point that needs serious attention. It is the indivisibility between those three things that requires to be considered.

We need the powers in this Parliament to influence those things. The real—[Interruption.]

The real long-term benefit that can come is from having the powers in this Parliament. Those facts are absolutely indisputable. That is the way to make progress. I am, however, entirely willing to accept that we should do as much as we can within our existing powers. That is why we have made the progress that we have made. That is why we want to go on doing so, and why I would welcome the ideas that might come from Hugh Henry and his colleagues. We would look at them very closely. I am also saying that to the Tories and Liberal Democrats: they should bring forward their ideas about how we will fund early years provision and we will look at them very closely indeed. When we have the normal powers of a normal nation, we will be able to do even more. Furthermore—this takes me back to the point with which I started—we will be able to do more than simply mitigate the harm that is being done elsewhere. The figure that I mentioned at the start of my contribution is a stark one: one set of changes in benefit regulations that have been imposed from south of the border is taking away the benefit that will come from the increase in fully-funded early years provision to 600 hours. That is the reality, and doing something about it has to be a key priority in changing childcare. Just in case any Labour members thought that they could be comfortable about this issue, we still have to take action where it is needed. Of course, the alternative Labour Queen’s speech contained no commitment to remove the bedroom tax, for example. While Westminster is still involved in Scotland, we want to see some action, not just the usual words.

The Scottish funding council’s investment in innovation centres will create a range of benefits for the life sciences industries in Scotland. The innovation centres will give life sciences companies access to world-leading research, top-class researchers and state-of-the-art facilities. That will help companies to ensure that the products and processes that are being developed reach their full potential, produce economic and health benefits for Scotland and add to the research and educational infrastructure.

In all the bids that are taking place, I have been struck by the wide range of partners that want to get involved, which speaks volumes for the initiatives that have been taken and for their likely success. The sensor and imaging systems innovation centre has more than 30 partners, including a mix of 16 national and multinational companies, such as IBM, Thales UK, Gas Sensing Solutions, Scottish Sensor Systems, Scottish Water and Octos. A number of public sector partners are also involved, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Canals and Falkirk Council. Of course, there is also the cream of our university science and engineering research talent from across the breadth of the Scottish higher education landscape. That is led by the University of Glasgow but it is testament to the research pooling initiatives that started in Scotland and which have greatly strengthened the co-operation that takes place across all our establishments. I am happy to send the member a full list of all participating companies and partners in the three innovation centres.

I am delighted to open this debate on the principles of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. I thank everyone who has contributed to the development of the bill so far. In particular, I thank the members of Education and Culture Committee for their detailed scrutiny and comprehensive stage 1 report, which I welcome and which we are happy to respond to. I want to go on working with the committee, of course, as we continue to develop and improve the bill. Most of all, I want to thank all the staff, students, colleges, universities, employers and others who have given their views not just during the committee’s evidence gathering, but through the numerous consultations and reviews that have informed and shaped the bill. The Government’s record shows our undoubted commitment to education and delivering better opportunities and outcomes for learners. We have ensured that learners can benefit from a world-class education without the fear of tuition fees, and we have maintained student places in our colleges while promoting full-time, job-focused learning. We have delivered record funding for our universities and introduced the most comprehensive student support package currently available in the United Kingdom. We have delivered a record 25,000 modern apprenticeships and, through opportunities for all, we have acted to prevent the scarring effects of long-term youth unemployment, in which there has been a drop of 34,000 in the past year—the largest annual fall on record. Those achievements are good, especially as they have been delivered during the worst economic climate in living memory, but they do not represent the limit of our ambitions for Scottish education. I believe that our reforms of the post-16 education system will deliver enormous benefits for learners and for Scotland. As the legislative arm of post-16 reform, that is precisely what the bill sets out to achieve. Let me open up the ideas in the bill. The bill reflects our strong belief that access to higher education should be extended to all, especially those in our most deprived communities.

The process of regionalisation will be part of the process of widening the offer. I am glad that the member has raised that issue, because last week, I met the cross-party group on learning disability. I am sure that it would have welcomed you—the member—too. We discussed—and I have discussed this with the charities involved—additional investment that we can put in place to ensure that there are no unintended consequences. I have recently approved two schemes that will attempt to guarantee that, and I will go on attempting to guarantee that with those involved.

I am not really surprised that Mr Findlay is behind Ruth Davidson in raising those points. She raised them some months ago but, unfortunately, she has not come to the chamber to withdraw them as she should have done, given that she discovered that some of those courses had not been withdrawn and that others were available in nearby colleges. [Interruption.]

The process of regionalisation is providing wider opportunities across the college sector and across Glasgow. It is doing precisely that.

There is a guarantee of widening access to higher education in the outcome agreements, and the regionalisation process will ensure better offers for every student. I would have thought that that was axiomatic. I will continue to outline those points as I go through the bill.

Margo MacDonald is, as ever, wise, but the bill is about opening the door and creating the opportunity. Of course, moving people away from poverty in Scotland is important, and she and I agree exactly on how to do that, which is to have independence in Scotland. The bill reflects our strong belief that access to higher education should be extended to all, especially those in our most deprived communities. The bill will end once and for all the perception in those communities that a top-class education is an opportunity that is designed for others. The distinguished Toronto educator, Avis Glaze, says that “poverty is not destiny”. The bill will make yet clearer that in Scotland, post-16 education is for everyone with the ability, drive and ambition to pursue it. The bill will allow us to ensure that Skills Development Scotland has the information that it needs to identify young people who are at risk of dropping out of education. It will allow us to cap tuition fees for students from the rest of the United Kingdom and impose a related condition of grant on the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, which will ensure that such students are not charged more than they can access in fee support from their own administrations. We abhor the monetisation of higher education that has been set in train by the UK Government; unfortunately, that is the reality, and this Parliament has had no alternative but to take action. The bill will substantially improve the governance of both college and university sectors. That is right and proper, and it is commensurate with the assurance and accountability required for public investment of £1.6 billion each year. The bill will establish the structures that are necessary to deliver the full benefits of college regionalisation. As many commentators have observed, a regional system of planning and delivery will allow a much sharper alignment of provision and economic need, which will boost the employability of learners and deliver the skills that are necessary to drive forward the Scottish economy. Finally, the bill will give the SFC an explicit power to initiate a formal review of Scotland’s post-16 educational offer, to ensure that it effectively meets the needs of learners and the economy. I am pleased to say that the evidence presented to the committee has revealed strong support for those principles, which is in stark contrast to the impression created by some Opposition members last week. The clear message that I hear from learners, staff and institutions is that the policy objectives that we have identified are the right ones. To take just one example, on widening access, Robin Parker of National Union of Students Scotland clearly told the committee: “The legislation must happen.” However, that should come as no surprise, because we did not arrive at the bill’s principles on our own. In the early autumn of 2011, we embarked on a process of detailed consultation and engagement. We published “Putting Learners at the Centre” in September that year. With the funding council, we consulted on detailed proposals for college regionalisation in November. Professor von Prondzynski and Professor Griggs consulted widely during their respective, independent, reviews of university and college governance. All that has led to a constructive process full of challenge, discussion and debate, to which we have listened carefully. We have taken that on board and have made improvements, and we will go on listening and looking at those ideas and influences as we progress with the bill. However, I do not claim that there is consensus on the detail of every provision—it would be surprising if there was. Throughout the process, I have been clear that I welcome constructive challenge, and I will go on doing so because my priority is to work with staff, students and institutions—and this Parliament—to produce the best possible bill: one that maximises benefits for learners and for Scotland. Today we are talking about the bill’s general principles—that is our focus. Looking ahead, I encourage all members, whether they are on the Education and Culture Committee or not, to come forward with suggestions that can help us to achieve a better bill. I turn to some of the issues that were highlighted in the committee’s report. I noted with interest the differences that emerged. For example, some of the concerns over the provisions relating to college regionalisation are founded in perceptions of complexity. However, there is broad acceptance that a regional model of planning and delivery will achieve substantial benefits for learners, institutions and employers. It has been suggested that, in allowing for both single and multicollege regions, we are creating an overly complex system. However, the bill allows for those different structures because we want colleges to determine the best model for learners in their region. Ian McKay, a former college lecturer and trade union official who is now regional lead for Edinburgh, put it well in his evidence to the committee when he said: “In a place as diverse as Scotland, it will be necessary to have a degree of variance in the way in which we exercise control over a national structure. It makes sense that there should be such variance.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 2026.] An alternative approach would have meant forcing colleges to merge. We are not going to do that. Those who criticise our plans for regionalisation cannot at the same time oppose the flexibility that the bill allows. Opposition parties have united to call for a delay to the bill, but at every stage we have answered the questions put and have addressed the issues raised, and we will go on doing so. Delaying the bill would be the wrong thing to do because college leaders are already seizing opportunities for post-16 reforms and are delivering the benefits of those reforms at an unprecedented pace.

I am sorry, but I am very short of time. Perhaps I will do so in a moment. It is college leaders who, right across the country, are presiding over the emergence of colleges of scale and distinction. I do not think that delay would serve any purpose at all. I have made clear my intention to listen to any concerns that are raised and to address those at stage 2. Colleges themselves have set timetables for change, and I will back their efforts for learners as strongly as I can. I will also back the development of wider collaborative models. Let me make clear my support for the work that continues between the local authorities and higher education bodies in the unique venture at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. I am looking to the funding council and the institutions involved to ensure that that model and others are recognised in outcome agreements. Widening access is another principle for which there is strong support. Let us discuss how we can get that principle into action. In 1894, John Caird, the then principal of the University of Glasgow, said: “It is the glory of our Scottish universities that they have never been places of education for a class, that no costly arrangements render them possible for only the rich or well to do.” However, 119 years after that remark was delivered, we still have not adequately widened access to our poorest communities—a point that Duncan McNeil just made. Almost everyone in the chamber would agree that widening access is intrinsically good. The question is not whether something should be done, but how best to do it—and, in particular, whether it is necessary to legislate. I believe that the evidence shows that we must. I do not dispute that progress has been made. I applaud the innovative programmes that are being developed. However, there is no getting away from the fact that participation from Scotland’s most deprived areas has increased by just 1 per cent in the past nine years. That is unacceptable. We invest more than £1 billion a year in Scottish universities, and that investment must yield a return for all young Scots who have the ambition and determination to succeed, whatever their background or circumstances. That does not mean that there should be any displacement. We do not want to increase access for one group of learners by restricting opportunities for another. By opening access in the truest sense, we have already created an additional 1,700 places in anticipation of an increase in the number of learners from deprived backgrounds. That is why we provide the Scottish funding council with £29 million every year for those activities.

No. I am sorry, but I am coming to the end of my opening speech. I will genuinely try to take an intervention later in the debate. I turn to the issues that were raised by the committee with regard to governance. The bill will allow ministers to require institutions to comply with principles of governance that appear to constitute good practice. A code is being developed by the chairs of court, who have been consulting. It is appropriate that the committee has a role in scrutinising that code, and I am pleased that there is going to be further evidence on it. Nevertheless, the code is not explicitly referenced in the bill and is not, therefore, a substantive part of the legislation that is under scrutiny. The scrutiny that will take place will be necessary, but it has not impeded the progress of the bill. I have set out the principles of the bill and the benefits that I believe it will deliver for Scotland. It has been suggested by some in the chamber that none of this is necessary and that, although our intentions are laudable, legislation is not necessary or essential for their achievement. However, the bill is necessary and essential. It is necessary and essential for the Scottish businesses that are looking for the skills that they need to grow. It is necessary and essential for the ambitious learners who want to acquire the skills to enter quality employment. Above all, it is necessary and essential for the young people in our deprived communities who dream of a better life. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill.

The member cited Professor von Prondzynski. To be fair, she should not give the impression that Professor von Prondzynski said that everything was fine and that we should leave it at that. Professor von Prondzynski’s report is lengthy and detailed, and it makes many recommendations for improvements in governance. I am sure that the member will wish to acknowledge that.

But change is necessary.

Will John Pentland give way?

Will the member give way?

I have seen the letter and I reassure the member that it is very clear, from the agreement on the structure of UHI, that the further education committee should be central to what is being done. I saw the letter only yesterday. I give Mary Scanlon the reassurance that, if the arrangements in the Highlands and Islands do not match those expectations, it will be possible under the bill to set up alternative arrangements and I will do so because the college needs that help.

I agree with Mary Scanlon—sorry, I mean Liz Smith. I nearly always agree with Mary Scanlon, although not today. I agree with Liz Smith that, by and large, the debate has been productive. I disagree with a great deal that has been said in it—I will come on to that in a moment—but the debate has been interesting. I thank the Education and Culture Committee and its convener for their work and I welcome the convener’s speech. He and other members will be aware that I have responded today to the committee’s stage 1 report in some detail. Some of the questions that members from across the chamber have raised will be addressed in that detail.

I had hoped that the mood of the debate would continue and that I would not be hectored by Mr Findlay. Let us hope that that will happen. Actually, I was going to address one point that Mr Findlay raised. He raised a range of questions that he said I have not answered. The committee convener fairly pointed out my comment in the Official Report when I said that I recognised those questions but Mr Findlay had not asked me them. If he wants to ask me them again, I will answer them, but at an appropriate time.

No—I will answer them at an appropriate time. I have lots to say and I want to make progress. However, I will answer one of those questions now, which is about the code. The member claimed that he knows nothing about the code; that there is nothing about it in the bill; and that, on that basis, the bill cannot proceed. He should know that the code development has continued apace. For example, I met Lord Smith, who has chaired the steering group, again yesterday. The group has had 18 meetings and has consulted 350 people. I believe that Lord Smith will come to the committee to talk about the code. Indeed, the code is not referred to in the bill and I made that point earlier.

No, I really have to make progress. I am sorry, but I have hardly any time. Section 2 of the bill says: “2 Higher education institutions: good governance After section 9 of the 2005 Act insert— ‘9A Higher education institutions: good governance The Scottish Ministers may, under section 9(2), impose a condition that the Council must, when making a payment to a higher education institution under section 12(1), require the institution to comply with any principles of governance or management which appear to the Scottish Ministers to constitute good practice in relation to higher education institutions.’” That is clear. The code is not referred to. A code already exists and it is observed. If there is to be a new code, I am delighted that the Education and Culture Committee will look at it. However, it is not referred to in the bill and it is not part of the bill, and that is very important. The UCU made the argument that it should be in the bill and the committee members could lodge an amendment to that effect.

However, I have to make a point about governance and management, and I suspect that that is the point that Liz Smith would like to make. The phrase “governance and management” to which she took such enormous exception is a phrase from the 2005 act’s fundable bodies criteria. If Liz Smith speaks to Mary Scanlon, who is sitting next to her, she will find that Mary Scanlon voted for the 2005 act with those very words in it. If there is a requirement to change those words, I will be sympathetic to that change. Some members have said, in essence, that the bill’s policy aims and objectives are correct. Mr Bibby and Mr Henry said it, but of course they cannot vote for the bill. Mr Henry mentioned Westminster and there is an old Westminster convention that the vote follows the voice. Stage 1 is about the general principles of the bill. In response to Margo MacDonald, Mr Henry said that the principles of the bill are good—those are the very words that he used—so, if the principles are correct, he must vote for the bill. In the circumstances, those who listed what is good about the bill but then said that they could never vote for it are in a strange position indeed.

No, I am sorry but I will not take any interventions at this stage, especially not from Jenny Marra because she said things that were not true. I hope that she will look at what she said, realise that she made a mistake and come back to correct the record. The code will be available in April and other members said that. I have talked several times about an underpinning statute, which is why Ferdinand von Prondzynski replied in the way that he did. He knows that and other members know it, too.

No—well, for the member I will.

As ever, I am glad that I took Margo MacDonald’s intervention because she talks good sense. I said at the beginning and say again now that I am happy to discuss amendments and improvements to the bill. I suppose that I am done for if I do and done for if I don’t. When I said that at the beginning, Mr Findlay and Mr Pentland seized upon what I had said and said that I was making a desperate attempt to get the bill through. I make the commitment to members that I am keen that we make a collaborative attempt to ensure that the bill passes. That is the heart of the matter and I want members to reflect on that. If the bill does not pass, certain things will happen. We will not get better governance or wider access; I will talk about those points in a moment. That would be very serious indeed, but that is what we are talking about. Mr Henry said in his speech that the bill is a wonderful idea, although he said at times that he is not sure that it is needed. He does not disagree with any of it but he will not back it—I am afraid that that will not wash, because no bill that comes to the Parliament is perfect. That is why we have a clear process for legislation, which allows for the improvement of bills at every stage. The legislation process was agreed by all parties when the Parliament was established and it should be known to every member in the chamber. Members talk about a bill being withdrawn or not proceeding, or something similar happening, but that is not in the process. The procedure says that the Parliament either agrees or disagrees with the general principles of the bill and that is where we are today. What would be achieved if the bill were to be withdrawn? Nothing at all. We cannot achieve anything if there is no bill. Only amendment and progress can change the bill, yet those members who oppose it do not want to amend it and do not want it to progress. We have heard the committee’s intention to take evidence about the code, so if that is the reason for members not supporting the bill, members know that there will be evidence at stage 2, which is possible under the process. Labour members need to remember that further delay would simply mean that the positive proposals in the bill would fail to take effect because the final stage of the bill’s progress would not take place according to the timetable that has already been agreed. Wider access, better governance, more focus on employability, essential improvements in data quality, and regionalisation would not happen. That is clearly, alas, what the Tories want. The sad reality—unfortunately I have become convinced of this today and I was getting convinced of it anyway—is that the Tories do not want the type of open access that there should be in Scotland.

I am sorry, I have to finish—I do not have the time. The member has had her say and I want to have my say now. That view of education is an elitist one; it is one that refuses to take the next step. [Laughter.] I am coming to Labour in a moment. I hope that Labour members will be ready for it. That view insists that universities and colleges cannot change and cannot improve. South of the border, the Tories have been the wreckers of higher education. If they are followed today, they intend to try and wreck it north of the border with fees, more barriers for poorer students, and no change to the unaccountable system of college governance that was put in place by Margaret Thatcher. No one in Scotland will be surprised that those are the Tory attitudes. The surprise will be that Labour will back them. There was a glimmer of hope in the Lib Dems’ position—that is not referring to Mr Rennie, who is always a glimmer of hope. Mr McArthur said that he required to be persuaded. Let me persuade him of one thing: we are open to serious amendment. If he comes forward with good ideas, we will certainly look at them. There could be a collaborative process of change and I would welcome that. The position of the Labour Party is the most extraordinary one. I care a lot about Scottish education; I care about widening access and I care about employability. People do not have to believe in an independent Scotland to see that those issues are important. The vast majority of Labour voters believe that, too. They believe in good education, creating employment opportunities, accountability, and a single national set of terms and conditions. They believe in the general principles and the particular policies in the bill. The NUS and the UCU have pleaded with Labour to back the bill and now the moment of choice has arrived.

Labour cannot wriggle out of it again by abstaining. It cannot abstain on the issue of widening access. It cannot abstain on the issue of employment. [Interruption.]

Labour cannot abstain on issues of better governance. There is a choice between good and bad, and that choice means making the good and necessary step of backing the bill. That is the key decision for the Labour Party today: will it address that issue? Will it put behind it last week’s fence-sitting extravaganza? Will it ignore the fatal political miscalculation of the Labour front-bench members, which has led Labour to this? Will it choose the good move rather than the bad one? I hear Jenny Marra laughing at the prospect of wider access to education. That is a disgrace. Labour has a choice to make in a minute or so—will it let down the lecturers, the support staff, and above all the students, just as it did when it abstained on tuition fees? It is time to make that choice and that choice will tell us a lot about what Labour is today.

Our study showed conclusively that claims that there was a large number of students on so-called college waiting lists were false. The study, which was conducted by working with colleagues in the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, Colleges Scotland and individual institutions, could identify only 500 people who might be seeking a college place. That is a very long way from the misleading claims that some members have made.

That is exactly the case. By the work that was done, which is outlined in the report, it is quite clear that the claims that were made in a survey in October were not true. To be fair to Colleges Scotland, it pointed out at the time that it would not verify its figures, but that was not, of course, a caution that was attended to by Mr Findlay or even Mr Hugh Henry. On 30 January, Mr Findlay said: “In a study that Scotland’s Colleges—not Labour—carried out, more than 21,000 people were estimated to be on waiting lists.”—[Official Report, 30 January 2013; c 16178.] The important word was “estimated”. However, Mr Henry threw caution to the winds. In October, he said: “21,000 students are on college waiting lists”. In January, he was slightly more cautious. He said: “likely more than 13,000 Scots were denied a place at college”. Those things were not true. Let me quote the report. This is from an audit that was carried out. It said: “the processes colleges use for managing applications and waiting lists are not consistent. This means that these lists are not comparable between colleges and cannot be aggregated to obtain an accurate total of those waiting for a place at colleges in Scotland.” The report is accurate and comprehensive. Those people who misled the chamber with the figures that they used last year should now apologise to members.

The disaster will be if Mr Findlay votes with the Tories again when we come to decide on widening access tomorrow. Colleges Scotland welcomed the report, of course. It recognises that there were considerable flaws in its methodology and that the way in which the information was presented was wrong. The report says: “Colleges Scotland’s survey cannot therefore be considered a reliable measure of those waiting for a college place and should not be considered a reliable measure of unmet demand.” The reality, of course, is that that completely destroys the arguments that Mr Findlay, Mr Henry and others have put in the chamber. Moreover, it shows that the figures that were used were wrong. In those circumstance, the right thing to do for any member is to come to the chamber and apologise. I have done that myself on one occasion. The reality is that no Labour member will do that because they are keen to undermine colleges rather than support young people.

Yes. The reforms to the college sector are well overdue and address the years of neglect that the sector has endured at the hands of successive Conservative, Labour and Labour-Lib Dem Governments, which have resulted in the wholesale absence of meaningful reform over a period of nearly 20 years. For the first time, we have a Government that is seriously challenging the past alignment and operation of the sector. The reforms will lead to estimated savings of £50 million a year through the removal of the need to prop up the inefficiencies that accumulated during the tenure of our predecessors. Our recent decision to boost college funding by a further £61 million over our original plans is something that Mr Findlay is now apparently laughing at—let that go on the record after what he has said. He is laughing at £61 million in the college sector. That money will provide a stable funding platform for the sector, despite the swingeing cuts that Westminster continues to make to the Scottish budget, most recently last week.

The report is comprehensive, and I encourage the member to rely on it. I am very glad that she has not fallen into the trap that Labour has fallen into of questioning the methodology that has been used or the work that has been done. The report is comprehensive—it tells us what is taking place. One of the things that it says is that we need a far better admissions system for the colleges. If the member wants to support a better admissions system, I will meet her to discuss the methodology and the definitions. That is a constructive way to take matters forward. She, at least, did not fall into the trap that Labour fell into of using figures in a way that misled the chamber.

Here is the accurate check—the report that was produced. What was Mr Henry’s response when he saw it? He dismissed it out of hand, because it contradicted his words and his misleading of the Parliament and, indeed, of Scotland. I return to the fact that, on 26 October, he said: “over 21,000 students are on college waiting lists”. That was not true. In The Herald, on 25 January, he said that “more than 13,000 Scots were denied a place at college”. Those figures were not true. Mr Henry should have stood up and apologised to the chamber, and the chamber should think less of him because he has not.

What a very Liberal Democrat question. In it, Liam McArthur had neither the guts to do what Labour did—unfortunately, Labour still got it wrong—nor to do what he should have done, which was to say, “We accept the report; now let’s work together to ensure that the college sector works.” The figures are clear and the audit is clear. We need to work together to help the college sector. It is not too late for Opposition members to do that. Tomorrow, when we debate the stage 1 report on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, we will have the opportunity to come together and start the process of developing the bill in a way that I would welcome. That is the opportunity that we will have, and I hope that members will reflect on that overnight.

I advise the member to have a look at the report, to reflect on it, to look at its methodology and then to ask himself whether it would not be far better to support Cumbernauld College instead of constantly trying to undermine it by the way in which he is operating.

If I may, I just want to draw the member’s attention to the important work that has been done on that by Sir Jackie Stewart, who has tried to influence the work of teacher training colleges. The steps that the colleges have taken in recent years have been immensely impressive, but we need to keep spreading that good practice.

We were doing so well until Drew Smith spoke. Unfortunately, the debate sank back into what I suppose I would call a McArthurite approach to the constitution—given what we heard on that from Liam McArthur. I want to see if we can avoid getting into those matters because there are so many things that we could and should agree on. Let me start with an assertion that perhaps even my worst enemies—some of them are in the chamber, apparently, judging by the noise—

I am glad to hear that Jackie Baillie is not one of my worst enemies; she would be doing well if she could spread that kindness and enlightenment to the Labour front benches. The Scottish National Party—individually, collectively, up, down and round about—is against poverty. We are against child poverty and all forms of poverty. We are in favour of equality. We are working for that type of Scotland. We are, indeed, working to have Scotland as the best place to grow up. I think that Labour members and almost every other member believes the same things—that we are against child poverty, that we want to see better services for children, and that we want to have that country that is the best place to grow up. I do not believe that members on the Labour front or back benches support the bedroom tax. I know that they want to, in the words of Neil Bibby, bin it. We all want to bin it. Therefore, the debate is about means, not ends, because we are agreed on the ends. The means by which we achieve those ends are what we must examine. There have been some very good and positive speeches in that regard. Mark Griffin’s speech was very much worth listening to. In essence, he took us to the heart of the matter. The definition of the best country to grow up in is generic as well as particular—it is to do with families and communities, how we are treated, one to another, and the geography in which we live. We should all be concerned that a lottery with regard to poverty and community remains. He was entirely right to remind us about that. Nobody would disagree with it. Annabel Goldie also made that point, although I will go on in a moment to say how profoundly I disagree with some of the things that her party represents. Dennis Robertson used a particularly good word to describe it: wonderful. The concept of wonder while a child is growing up, excitement, discovery and awe—all those are things that we should encourage, feel excited by and seek to inculcate in others. Anne McTaggart’s speech was interesting, too. I think that she wanted to have a positive view of what was taking place this afternoon but was dragged down by the politics of the occasion. She asked what the Scottish Government has done—Mr Henry, as usual, is sneering; I cannot do anything about that although I regret it, because the issue is serious and we could and should debate it seriously. The Scottish Government has contributed £272 million in the early years change fund and £20 million in the early intervention fund. It match funded the Scottish Television and Hunter Foundation child poverty appeal in 2012. It is spending more than £250 million on fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes in 2012-13 and 2014-15. Since 2009, it has invested £2.74 million in innovative advice projects that have generated more than £29 million in financial gains for more than 100,000 households. We could do more. Everybody could do more. Labour could have done more when it was in power. We could all do more, but we can work together and acknowledge what is happening. There is a shared aim, which is to help our young people and to get rid of poverty. However, the means question will always detain us in Scotland. Mr Chisholm and I have been around a long time. We have been through many organisations, such as constitutional organisations that fought for change in Scotland. I feel that we have always butted up against a problem. That problem is that, no matter how much we want to do in Scotland, the argument in the end becomes that we cannot do it because we do not have the powers, but we should just wait until there is a different Government at Westminster. I have stood on platforms in Scotland and heard that said. I have seen genuine people, such as Mr Chisholm, say that it is better to wait for a different Government at Westminster because what we want to do will come along. What do we see today? The figures are stark and I have to say that Annabel Goldie is wrong, because there will be an increase in child poverty in Scotland. The Institute for Fiscal Studies confirms that there will be an increase in child poverty. Although, as she said, the long-term effect of universal credit may be to reduce relative poverty, when other changes such as the switch from the retail prices index and the indexation of means-tested benefits are introduced, they more than offset that impact. We will see, as a result of Westminster Government policies, an increase in child poverty in Scotland. We need to have all the tools at our disposal to deal with that. Anne McTaggart called upon us to tackle the root causes. I entirely agree—we must tackle the root causes—but to do that we need all the tools and implements to get at the root. If we do not have those tools and implements, we cannot get at the root. It is a matter of means and ends. If we are united on the end that we really want to see—and we are united, if we strip out the argy-bargy of politics and the sneering—that unity should drive us towards an inevitable conclusion, which is that, at the very least, the real powers in respect of tax and benefits must be decided upon in Scotland. If our aim is to have a more equal society in Scotland, which it should be, and if our aim is to eliminate poverty in Scotland, which it should be, we need those tools. Members cannot casually dismiss the idea that there is no connection between the constitutional question and progress on those matters. They must look at it head on. Members can come to the conclusion—I am sure that they can—

No, I would like to finish this point. Members can come to the conclusion that the disadvantages outweigh the advantages. That is a legitimate point of view, although I disagree with it, and we should debate it positively. However, they should look at the issue directly; they should not glance away from it, because it exists. The motion talks about quickening the pace of change and high-quality, flexible early learning and childcare. Right across the chamber, we believe that those are the right things to do. Of course it is the role of the Opposition to say that we are not going far enough or fast enough or that they can think of better ways to do it. I have been in that position; I have been in opposition. However, today we should unite on what our ends are: they are about having the country that is the best place to grow up in. We should acknowledge the successes. GIRFEC was not invented by this Government. One of the most profound experiences that I had when I became education secretary was to go to Fort William and see a family centre in the Highland pilot for GIRFEC that was doing a remarkable job for the hardest-to-reach young people. All those things can unite us. Unfortunately, in the country that we live in, we sometimes get absorbed in the minutiae. The amendments to the motion show how that can often go wrong. Instead of unifying us, all three amendments find something to divide us. They say, “My idea is better than your idea”; “Bring a bigger bit of money to the table, which you should spend in this way”; and “Why aren’t you doing enough?” That is a legitimate question.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The right way to tackle the issue is to say that we agree on the ends and want to succeed in achieving them. Therefore, I ask members to support the motion. Let us try to do it, instead of wasting our time on other, much less important things.

The latest figures from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council tell a positive story about what is being achieved in our colleges. We have exceeded our commitment to maintaining full-time equivalent student numbers; retention and attainment are increasing; and record numbers of 16 to 24-year-olds are undertaking full-time, economically relevant courses that will significantly enhance their employment prospects. Those are important indicators of what we are building in the college sector—focused provision leading to improved attainment and creating better life chances. Those achievements should not be obscured by a fixation on head count. I have explained on many occasions that head count is a volatile measure that fails to take any account of the intensity and economic importance of provision. I shall shortly make clear my priorities for the additional £10 million of investment for the academic year 2013-14.

I have been at pains to explain to Mr Findlay the concept of head count and the fact that head count of the type to which he refers does not reflect what is taking place in colleges. It compares unlike with unlike and lists very short courses of limited economic relevance in exactly the same way as it would list full-time courses of economic relevance. If Mr Findlay cared to drill into the figures that have been published, he would see some interesting details. For example, the average number of hours of learning per student has increased by 12 per cent in the past year and by 36 per cent since 2006-07, reflecting the decline in very short programmes and an increase in the number of students studying towards more substantial qualifications. That indicates that the student experience is producing employability as the main issue. That will, inevitably, produce a decline in certain types of short courses and a stability in overall numbers, which is what we have seen.

There is no figure of 120,000 students who are—I use Mr Findlay’s words—“no longer in college”. The numbers reflect the fact that many individuals are now undertaking longer courses. I return to the point that to compare a short course of the type that we are talking about with a full-time or largely full-time course that leads to employability is to compare two things that are unalike. Mr Findlay raises an important issue about those who are furthest from employment and furthest from learning. The purpose of reform is to ensure that everybody is brought closer to employment as a result of involvement in the college system, and that is what is taking place. Where there is need for particular effort through the reforms that are taking place—for example, with those who have learning difficulties—we have worked with and are working with key organisations in that regard. I have discussed with colleges the way in which the money that is being made available now will focus on some of those groups. It is and has been the intention of reform to make employability the key issue, and I am glad that that has been welcomed by Colleges Scotland in its response to the figures.

It squares very well with those figures. I visit colleges on many occasions. Indeed, I have been in three colleges in the past eight days. I meet students, the staff and employers. Everywhere I go, there is a focus on ensuring that learning is appropriate, and the regional nature of provision will allow that to be the case. There is variety in that delivery, but all the employers whom I meet recognise that the changes that we are making will produce a greater emphasis on employability, and they welcome that. I would be happy for the member to accompany me on college visits to meet some of those employers so that she can see at first hand that the changes are the very things that employers need.

A substantial number of part-time opportunities are still available. The suggestion that Mr McArthur should “catch up” probably refers largely to the reforms that are taking place and the positive benefits of those reforms. If Mr McArthur cared to look at the full detail of the figures that were published last week, he would recognise that, for example, college performance indicators are improving year on year. In 2011-12, 64 per cent of full-time students—[Interruption.] I am sorry that Tavish Scott does not want to listen to the figures. They are important to college learners and to Scotland, and they are an important indication of the improvements that are taking place. In 2011-12, 64 per cent of full-time students studying for a recognised further education qualification successfully completed their course, which represents an increase from 62 per cent in the previous year; 69 per cent of full-time students studying for a recognised higher education qualification successfully completed their course, which represents an increase from 67 per cent; 67 per cent of 16 to 19-year-olds successfully completed their course, which represents an increase from 64 per cent; and 68 per cent of 20 to 24-year-olds successfully completed their course, which represents an increase from 67 per cent. [Interruption.] I am very sorry that Tavish Scott still does not want to listen to what are important facts on the changes that are taking place, which are improving college education year on year. If, unfortunately, Liberal Democrats do not wish to listen to information about the improvements, they will be fated to being—as they have been in almost every debate in the Parliament—in the tiny minority of people who will not change and who will not prioritise good things in Scotland, and the electoral tide will overwhelm them yet again.

I have answered that question from Mr Henry and his colleagues on a number of occasions, and I will answer it again in the same way: I have met the organisations that are concerned with those students and have asked them to put forward proposals. I will meet those organisations again shortly, and I am keen that we put their proposals in place. I discuss that issue regularly when I meet colleges. In addition, I hope that the outcome agreements can encompass such issues. I have mentioned all that in previous answers. All those things are happening, and they all express the concerns that we have that the entirety of those people who are served by colleges are well served.

As I think that Richard Lyle knows, it was announced yesterday that Coatbridge College has withdrawn from its proposed merger with Cumbernauld and Motherwell colleges. I regret that and I hope that discussions will resume at a future date. Motherwell and Cumbernauld colleges are proceeding and have yet to submit to me their business case in support of merger, but when they do so I will consider it carefully. I will also consult all those who might have an interest in the prospective merger, including prospective students, before deciding whether to approve it.

I have yet to see the business case and it would be wrong of me to pre-empt the decision on whether to approve the merger, but in general the member is right. All the evidence points to merged colleges being able to offer a wider and stronger curriculum, to the benefit of learners and employers alike. I am sure that that will influence the thinking of all those involved and perhaps those still to be involved.

As Siobhan McMahon knows, merger is a voluntary activity. Indeed, I am often castigated from the Labour benches for being too keen to push the issue of merger. I think that the colleges themselves have to make the decision, which they are making. I encourage them to make it—I think that it is beneficial. Of course, I would do anything—as I am sure the Scottish funding council and others would—to help them if there are difficulties.

Yes; I agree with the member. I do not know the transport links, but in any circumstances in which a merger takes place we want to ensure that there is maximum access. I have still to see the business case, but college mergers are not about closing campuses; they are about offering a better curriculum to learners, which needs to be delivered throughout the area that the college serves.

I believe that the merger proposals are good and that it is up to the parties to come to decisions on them. I will, of course, offer my support to those who intend to merge. I hope that Coatbridge will come back to the table. The only way in which one makes progress is to have negotiation, and I suspect that that will be the sensible thing to happen.

I said in my update to members on 16 January that we would do further analysis. That work is nearing completion and we will publish the final report soon.

I certainly agree that the publication of the figures is keenly anticipated. I should perhaps say to the member that his colleagues around him should not anticipate it with enthusiasm given the things that they have said in the past, which may or may not turn out to be true. [Interruption.]

That is indeed true. It is a good question. [Interruption.]

Indeed, I am surprised that members are shouting out from the Labour benches on that. I would have thought that, in the words of Clement Attlee, a “period of silence” would be in order.

I expect regional colleges to deliver the provision that learners and employers in the area need, and I expect learners—particularly those who wish to take up non-advanced courses—to be able to access appropriate provision locally.

I can give Mr Pearson an absolute assurance that the Government reforms will enhance students’ ability to learn and will enhance provision. I refer him to the evidence that was given to the Education and Culture Committee by Ian McKay, the chair of Edinburgh College, who is a former lecturer and Educational Institute of Scotland official, who talked about how Edinburgh College is providing enhanced opportunities for learning. What the reforms are delivering and will deliver will be beneficial for all in Scotland and particularly, I am sure, for Mr Pearson’s constituents in the South Scotland region.

Through the regional model, the colleges are in a position to deliver courses that are much more tailored to the regional skills needs that exist within their areas. That is one of the purposes of the model and that is one of the benefits.

Mr Malik raises an important point. The skills and experience that are gained through postgraduate study are increasingly important to key parts of our economy, including the energy and life sciences sector. I am therefore extremely pleased that, as announced today, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has been able to fund an additional 850 postgraduate places at Scottish higher education institutions for 2013-14.

I would like to hold up Mr Malik as a model Opposition member—one who is constructive and asks sensible questions. If only he was emulated by some of his colleagues. On the further expansion of places, I explained to the Education and Culture Committee yesterday when giving evidence on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill that the addition of 1,700 places, 1,000 of which are for articulation and 700 of which are essentially for widening access, is a considerable contribution. The work in the bill that focuses on widening access is an important step forward, and it is only by showing the intention to legislate that we have been able to push forward on widening access. I have celebrated and been to visit lots of examples of good practice in universities and elsewhere. There is also an obligation on schools. A considerable amount of work is going on. I hope that the Labour Party will support that work and vote for the legislation that is helping it.

I welcome Christine Grahame back from retirement. [Laughter.] In Scotland we are fortunate to have a wide range of learning opportunities for people of all ages. For those who are seeking to gain or improve employment skills in particular, our colleges offer expert provision. In addition, opportunities are offered through local authority community-based adult learning programmes, as well as through the third sector, institutions such as the Open University, and private learning providers.

Nobody is too old to learn. All of us, as constituency MSPs, have noticed the increasing prevalence of emails from older constituents. Indeed, the use of the internet—the use of computers—is available as a learning experience through colleges and also through private providers, community organisations and the third sector. We are trying to maintain support for that learning experience in difficult times so that people can learn, but of course the most important thing for learning is the desire to learn—the desire to discover and know new things. Provided that that desire exists in an individual, it does not matter how old they are.

We have changed the regulations on individual learning accounts because of the financial pressures that exist, and there are qualifications to the support, including in relation to previous degrees. I think that that is a reasonable thing to have done, given the circumstances that we are in, and I hope that people understand that we have to prioritise the use of our resources in a way that is most effective at this stage, given the difficulties that come to us, largely from Westminster.

I meet college principals regularly, as well as chairs of colleges. This week, I met the new chair of Colleges Scotland, and last week I held one of my regular meetings with regional leads. Next week, I will be visiting at least one college and will meet the principal, staff and students. It is an on-going engagement.

To be fair to North Highland College—which I have visited on two occasions, when I had welcome and good discussions—that quote is only part of the evidence, and there is other evidence as well. I am happy to sit down with Mary Scanlon, if she wants, and go through the provisions in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. In doing so, I will be able to prove to a fair-minded person, such as Mary Scanlon, that the provisions allow for considerable local autonomy, local decision making and local focus, and that the model that is being applied in the Highlands and Islands through the further education structure within the University of the Highlands and Islands is not only the right model but the model that has been agreed by all the colleges. I have chaired two meetings at which the matter has been discussed. The new model for the structure of the University of the Highlands and Islands—a triumvirate structure with a principal and two associate principals, one of whom deals with further education and the other of whom deals with research and specialist institutions—is exactly the model that is needed to balance the forces within the university. Mary Scanlon has considerable experience of the college sector in the Highlands and Islands and knows that that type of resolution was needed to allow everyone to work together and to avoid our having to deal with some of the difficulties that have been experienced in the past. I think that we have a model that works. I would be happy to explain it to Mary Scanlon over a cup of coffee or something stronger.

I was struck by what Paul Sherrington of Banff and Buchan College has said to the Education and Culture Committee during stage 1 of the bill. When challenged directly on the issue, he said that the biggest issue that he had to confront was that of financial stability. He said that it was bigger than reform and that, if that were confronted, he was confident that he could move forward. We have confronted the finance issue. We have created a level playing field in 2013-14 and 2014-15. The colleges know how they can plan and what they can do, and I think that John Henderson’s comments reflect that. His sentiments are echoed by Mandy Exley, the principal of the new Edinburgh College, who wrote in a letter to me: “I really appreciate the position the Government has taken recently with respect to college funding. It is not the amount of money per se, but more the fact that you are as good as your word and open to discussion and willing to listen.” That has been the nature of all the discussions that we have had with the college sector. It will continue to be the nature of our discussions. I hope that the Opposition parties will join in that spirit to ensure that we can make a good bill a better bill, which we can do as we take it forward.

I have made clear on many occasions, and I do so again today, that headcount is an inappropriate way to measure student numbers, whatever the age group, in a sector which is predominantly part-time and where courses vary so widely in length. Headcount is a blunt measure that gives no indication of the economic relevance of a course or the level of teaching resource that a college decides that it is appropriate to apply. The way to make meaningful comparisons between years is by using the measure of full-time equivalent places, which clearly show that, under this Government, college places are being maintained.

That is a good question, I have to say, and the contention that Mr Macintosh makes needs to be considered. When I recently visited Reid Kerr College, I had a conversation with a group of students that covered that issue. I think, or at least hope, that I was able to reassure them that I agree that the policy must be not just about the prioritisation of younger people—although I am glad that Mr Macintosh recognises that we need to do that because of the current difficulties—but about the continued provision of encouragement and support for people of all age groups in college. That is what all colleges are trying to do, and I think that that practice is succeeding and will continue to succeed. Of course, we will look very closely to ensure that we are continuing to encourage the widest use of colleges, which are very important.

That is also a good point. I think that the level is virtually absolute, because colleges decide what takes place within their colleges. Ministers do not set the curriculum or the mix of offers; that is done by colleges, which need to balance what they think is important. I know that in some colleges in Scotland—I am pretty certain that this will be true of the college in the area that Liam McArthur represents—the proportion of older learners available is higher than the proportion of younger learners available because of the demographics of the community. Therefore, such colleges will want to ensure that they address the entire community. Prioritisation does not mean exclusion. Prioritisation of the needs of young learners does not mean that other learners are excluded, and I expect to see—and, indeed, I see—colleges getting that right again and again.

The postgraduate student allowances scheme provides eligible Scotland-domiciled and European Union postgraduate students who are undertaking designated courses with a non means-tested loan of up to £3,400 towards the cost of tuition fees.

A number of other sources of finance are available to postgraduates. I regret that it is not possible for the state to do more than it is doing at present, although it should be noted—I am sure that Rhoda Grant just omitted to note it—that we are doing more for postgraduates than any previous Administration did. I am glad that Mr Malik acknowledged that earlier. If Rhoda Grant would write to me specifically about the courses that she mentioned, I would be happy to write to her to suggest other sources of finance and means of supporting the students. I do that quite often for members who have such concerns.

I met the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability in December and asked it to consider what further initiatives we might support to help students with learning disabilities to participate in further and higher education. My officials met the same representatives last week and I hope to meet them again within the next few weeks in order to move the matter forward with their proposals, which is what I am looking for.

I am aware of that Enable programme. My officials have already spoken to the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability about how we might support the sector to extend the benefits to which Joan McAlpine has referred. I hope shortly to confirm the arrangements in a meeting with the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability and Enable.

Provided that we work with the sector, that we show our intention to work with it and that it works with us, we will be able to put the matter into outcome agreements and move it forward. I have found my discussions with the sector to be positive and helpful. They have certainly not been expressed in the terms that Mr Findlay has just used.

I last met Universities Scotland formally on 22 January 2013, and have met representatives informally since.

I responded to that in answer to a question from the Education and Culture Committee yesterday by saying that I understand that my officials have consulted Universities Scotland. I also placed great stress on the need for us all to work together to widen access. I am sure that it is unintentional, but the Conservatives sometimes sound as if they do not want access to be widened in Scottish universities, but are in fact prepared to accept any reason and any excuse why it should not happen. We need to acknowledge, as I said yesterday, that we are not doing nearly as well as we should on the matter; we need measures to do better. The universities are a key part of the solution, but they are not the only solution. We will make progress by ensuring that we underpin widening access agreements in the bill. I hope that the Scottish Conservatives will support that. Otherwise, what I am sure is inadvertent might begin to look as if it is deliberate.

I do agree. I saw a sign of hope there: Labour members are now groaning when they hear about the cuts commission. If they convert that groan into opposition to some of the things that are being proposed, then clearly we are going to have a better society in Scotland. Perhaps that will also lead them away from the enormous mistake that they made last week of abstaining in the vote on free education in Scotland. That is something on which NUS Scotland will, I am sure, reflect. The Scottish Government believes in access to education that is based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay. We have made a clear promise on that to the people of Scotland; it is a promise that Labour made, too. We will not introduce up-front or back-door tuition fees. I find it astonishing that a group of people who signed a pledge on that a mere two years ago could not actually vote for it when it came to the chamber. [Interruption.] Oh, dear. They should groan at that, too.

The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 makes it clear that educational benefits should be a key consideration when an education authority proposes a significant change to its schools estate. When an education authority proposes a school closure, there is a statutory requirement that it must provide an educational benefits statement, and Education Scotland must provide an independent report on the educational aspects. The Education Scotland report, along with the education authority’s proposal paper, the consultation report and any representations that are received, are all considered when it is determined whether Scottish ministers should call in a school closure proposal, where it appears to them that a council might have failed in a significant regard to comply with statutory requirements, or to take proper account of a material consideration.

Once Education Scotland has submitted a report containing such information, the education authority must explain, in its final consultation report, how it has reviewed its proposal in the light of the Education Scotland report, and of any other representations that it has received. In determining a school closure case, I will of course look closely at the Education Scotland report and the authority’s response to it, along with the other relevant documentation.

Internal consultations are not part of the legislation and so do not form part of the process. The informal consultation that is being undertaken by East Dunbartonshire Council invites views on a number of options. The council has a statutory duty to ensure that there is adequate and efficient provision of school education in its area, and it is accountable for the decisions that it takes. I understand, however, that the council has not taken any firm decision. If East Dunbartonshire Council formally proposes to close a school, the clear statutory process that is in place requires it to undertake a public consultation—as is set out in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. It would not be appropriate for me to comment on any aspect of an informal consultation, given that I might have a statutory role to play in any subsequent process.

The Fife colleges have yet to submit to me their business case in support of merger—to which the colleges declared a commitment last November—but when they do so, I will consider it carefully. I will also consult all those who might have an interest in the prospective merger before I decide whether to approve it.

Mr Rennie should not put words in my mouth. I made it clear that I have not seen the business case. When I have seen it, I will consider it, and of course I will consider representations on it. I will take what I have just heard as a representation on the business case. Of course, colleges should look at the totality of the region in which they are set. That is one of the advantages of regionalisation. I hope that as the colleges come together they will consider serving all those who wish to take up courses in Fife. That will be another benefit of regionalisation, which I am sure will get a warm welcome from all Fife MSPs, including Mr Rennie.

I am grateful for the opportunity to bring this important issue before Parliament. The importance of education can always be seen from the number of debates on education in Parliament and from the attention that is paid to the matter by politicians; indeed, there have this very week been two speeches on education by senior Scottish politicians. When we consider any matter—but especially education—we should proceed from the principles that underpin what we are discussing to the clear objectives and how we deliver the principles. Education is the means by which we can become what we can be; it is the means by which we realise our potential, satisfy our ambition and maximise the contribution that we make to life in Scotland and beyond. Jean Piaget, the Swiss philosopher and educator, in describing the type of education that he wished to see, wrote: “The principal goal of education ... should be creating men and women who are capable of doing new things, not simply repeating what other generations have done; men and women who are creative, inventive and discoverers, who can be critical and verify, and not accept, everything they are offered.” A society of such individuals is something more than a society of individuals; it becomes a questioning and creative society that improves itself and increases its store of ability and expertise. It is the route to national progress and international excellence. It is what Scotland should be. Most of all, the issue is about equity. If members believe, as I do, that potential and ambition are spread equally throughout society, they should be as determined as I am—as we should all be—to ensure that the opportunities that are represented by education are available to all. That is the principle. In order to do that, it is abundantly clear that we must have access to education that is based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay. It is as simple as that. Our history as a nation is based on that principle and on the issues that I have outlined. Scotland is a country that has education in its DNA. It is a learning nation. It has not always lived up to that ambition, but it has always known of it and recognised that it should try. The Government is trying to live up to that and it recognises that access for all has not yet been fully achieved. All barriers must be dismantled: barriers of expectation, of lack of ambition and of cost. The Government has made a clear promise to the people of Scotland that we “will not introduce upfront or backdoor tuition fees.” That says to the people of Scotland that, no matter where you live, what the tradition in your family or community is, what all your friends are aiming for or what some might expect of you, if you have the ambition and the ability, this Government will stand four-square with you and give you the opportunity and the support to be all that you can be.

I would say that they are wrong. I would also say that Liz Smith’s amendment is wrong. It uses the word “discriminatory”, but no legal case has found the Government’s position to be “discriminatory”. It is wrong that an amendment should mislead Parliament in that way and it is utterly wrong to say that the policy is discriminatory, because it is not. Let me get back to the reality of what we are trying to achieve in education. Scotland recognises the importance of free education. To be fair, so does England, I think; it is just that its political parties do not. To argue otherwise is to fail to understand what debt and the prospect of debt really mean to people from our poorest communities. That is why, during the UK general election in 2010, there was a campaign to ask politicians to sign a pledge not to introduce tuition fees and that is why many of us signed it. We did so again for the 2011 Scottish election. The Scottish National Party signed that pledge, and so did Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Unfortunately, despite the clear signs, I think Johann Lamont plans to break that pledge. Labour’s own website—I have a copy of the web page here—still promises “no price tag on education”. The challenge is whether Labour will stick with that promise today.

Oh, Mr Findlay, Mr Findlay. I knew that, at some stage today, we would hear that, so I thought that it would be best to quote Robert Frost to him: “Education is the ability to listen to almost anything without losing your temper or your self-confidence.” Mr Findlay, as ever, tries to mislead because he tries not to address the issue, but to get off the hook that he is now on. I will not let him off that hook.

Not many politicians receive a level of adoration that results in having their portrait installed in the public area of a lobbying organisation, but that honour has been accorded to Nick Clegg. Today, he smiles down from the wall of the NUS Scotland office in Forth Street, proudly holding his signed pledge card. I understand that NUS Scotland is moving. There are many new walls to be decorated in its new premises; there is room for Johann Lamont, Ruth Davidson, Willie Rennie and Mr Findlay. They can be there, too.

No. I want to make some progress. Today, Johann Lamont, Ruth Davidson, Willie Rennie and Mr Findlay face a simple choice. Are they for or against tuition fees? Are they for or against fairness? Today, they face their own Nick Clegg moment. This is about more than personalities and promise breaking. Nick Clegg may be sorry, but so are the universities in England that now struggle to fill their lecture theatres, as they did at the start of 2012-13, with acceptances down 13 per cent. That represents nearly 50,000 fewer students making the most of what the university system has to offer them. In the meantime, over the same period, acceptances in Scotland went in the opposite direction: they were up 1 per cent. The difference is very simple. In England, one needs to find up to £9,000 per year to go to university; in Scotland, one does not. Education is based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay. That is the principle. No doubt we will hear from the Tories—both types of Tory in the chamber—that the need to fund our universities means that those who benefit from them must contribute more. They are right, but that is precisely what happens now. It is estimated that graduates earn around £100,000 more over the course of their working lives than those who do not go to university, and it is all taxable, so it is axiomatic that graduates will pay more over their entire working lives. They often contribute more in other ways, too. What price would members put on the contribution to society that is made by engineers, doctors and teachers, to name but three of the many professions that are made up of university graduates? As health is, education is a public good that should be paid for out of public taxation. The Government understands that, so in the previous spending review and in spite of Westminster cuts, it pledged to increase the funding that is provided to our universities, starting with an additional £75 million in 2012-13 and rising to a total of more than £1 billion in 2014-15. That was strongly welcomed by Universities Scotland, which described it as “a very significant investment in Scotland’s universities and one which will put the sector on a competitive footing for the future.” It is plain to see that we do not need up-front or backdoor tuition fees to fund our universities. We have set our priorities to ensure the future of our universities and the opportunities that they offer. While we are at it, let us give the lie to another calumny. It lies alongside “We’re too poor, too wee or too stupid to do any of this”, and is spread by the same people who say that. It is the calumny that we have, for some elitist reason, preferred universities over colleges. We have not; we have reformed colleges because they needed to be reformed. We have shown that substantial sums could be saved while focusing the work of colleges on employability at the further and higher education levels. I note that almost 25 per cent of our HE is delivered by colleges.

No. I want to make some progress. We have done that in a way that will create complementary sectors. The real elitists in the matter are over there on the Labour benches—the ones who believe that an elite will always exist and that there is no point in encouraging, working for and helping every person to be all that they can be. Robin Parker, the president of NUS Scotland, put it well yesterday, in responding to a speech by Anas Sarwar, Labour’s deputy leader. He said: “It’s extremely disappointing to see the Scottish Labour Party, yet again, seeming to threaten to introduce tuition fees into Scotland ... Their assumption seems to be that many of our poorest people don’t currently have the talent or potential to make it to university. That’s not just offensive, it’s wrong, and it plays to the worst of many right-wing commentators.” Let me repeat that line. It is Robin Parker’s line, not mine. “That’s not just offensive, it’s wrong, and it plays to the worst of many right-wing commentators.” The real elitists in the chamber are those who want the status quo to continue forever because it keeps them in power—the “better together” elitists who are, in the truest sense, the conservatives, for they want to conserve Scottish society as it is, rather than change it to what it should be. Thank goodness that that is going to change. [Interruption.]

Of course, in further and higher education, fees represent only part of the picture. Free tuition in Scotland gives our students 9,000 fewer things to worry about each year, but it does not help them with living costs, so—in addition to free tuition—this Government, working with the NUS, also made a promise to introduce for students a minimum income of £7,000 a year. I am pleased to say that, from the start of the academic year 2013-14, that promise will become a reality and will deliver a support package of £7,250—which is above our target—for the poorest students. That has been recognised by students themselves as “the best support package in the whole of the UK”. Taken with tuition that is paid for by the state, the package is a big incentive to study in Scotland and should encourage wider participation. We would be failing to do our best if we were to accept—and to go on accepting—that only 11 per cent of those in our universities will come from the 20 per cent poorest neighbourhoods. “Poverty is not destiny,” says the Ontario educator Avis Glaze. There is talent and potential aplenty in every postcode in Scotland. Widening access in the context of higher education is about more than money, although money is important. It is also about changing our education system to ensure that it can encourage, support and lift every individual. Wider access is achieved by looking at potential students in context; it is not just about looking at what they have achieved so far in their young lives against some national benchmark, but about what they have achieved compared with their peers who have been educated in a similar environment. Those who excel, wherever they are, should be given the opportunity to be all that they can be. That is not a threat to other students; it is a promise to all students. In conclusion, that is what education is. It is a promise from one generation to another—a promise that contains the opportunity for constant improvement, the gift of growing wisdom and the blessing of deeper understanding. GK Chesterton called it “the soul of a society”. We cannot buy or sell the soul of a society. Indeed, it should never be put up for sale. Scotland has known that for generations. All that I ask Parliament to do today is to confirm the obvious truth in clear and simple terms. No fees—not now, not ever. I move, That the Parliament believes that access to higher education should be based on ability to learn, not ability to pay and will not introduce upfront or backdoor tuition fees.

In a league table of shameful spectacles, where would voting against £61 million for colleges come? Surely that is more shameful. That is what Labour did.

Will Liz Smith give way?

There is a simple solution to the problem, and I am sure that the universities would welcome it. If the UK Government were willing to pay the fees for their students to come here, the problem would be solved. The problem is that it is not willing to do so. It is the Tory-controlled UK Government’s problem—no one else’s—and it was started by Labour.

Will the member give way?

Is the member proposing that there should be grants rather than loans? Will he clarify whether he is proposing that there should be student loans? Then we would get a clear picture. At the moment, we are getting a lot of condemnation but no picture of what is being proposed.

Will the member take an intervention?

I just want to point out a conundrum. South of the border, the party that the member represents, which is in government, is reducing funding on universities and it is also reducing funding on colleges in a far greater way than the Scottish Government has done. If there is an equation between the two, it does not appear to apply south of the border for the member’s party, but it apparently applies north of the border. There is no such equation, and I would have hoped that the Tories would support reform in the college sector rather than oppose progress.

One rarely hears a speech in this chamber that is so mired in right-wing ideology. [Laughter.] Sorry—they are occasionally heard from members of the Labour Party, who are now specialists in right-wing ideology. Murdo Fraser has made a right-wing speech, based entirely on a market view of education that the Scots have rejected.

I am happy to do so briefly because it is my colleague who is summing up. The universities had already established a number of mechanisms to look at greater efficiency. Those mechanisms included a Universities Scotland committee, which has reported and continues to look at the savings. The technical working group was supported by all the parties, but its conclusions were accepted by Labour, the SNP and the Liberals. It is important to put that on the record.

Joan McAlpine did not say that.

I will always support the level of taxation set by the Parliament. I am sure that all members would agree that that is the right thing to do.

If it is Liz Smith’s contention that we need to explain the figures, it is important that she tells us what the level of tuition fee would be in Scotland and who would pay it. If that is her solution, she needs to tell us where the level lies.

I have been looking forward immensely to this afternoon’s debate, after the sudden change of subject that Labour brought about on Sunday afternoon—that was strange timing. I have to say that Mr Henry’s ex-militant-tendency classic analysis of the situation did not disappoint me. I will stick to the facts this afternoon—[Interruption.] Labour members might laugh, but I think that they will find the facts somewhat unpalatable. The facts will prove to Labour members that I fully understand why they brought the debate this afternoon. They had to have the debate before the final report of the audit of so-called waiting lists is published next month.

I suspect that Mr Henry and his Conservative allies, who are sounding from their benches, are becoming increasingly uneasy about what the audit will reveal. I suspect that Mr Henry fears—as he should do—that it will expose as nonsense the highly exaggerated claims that we have heard about the number of people who are, allegedly, currently waiting for a college place. Mr Henry is right to be concerned about what the evidence will say about his pronouncements on the issue. As he looks to wriggle his way out of the spot he has got himself into, I note that his latest blog has stopped quoting any numbers at all. I will say more about that in a moment. However, it would be quite unfair to single out only Mr Henry. He has been ably supported by Messrs Findlay and Bibby—an odd concept, I know—in particular in his quest to use internal college so-called waiting lists as some kind of measure of the number of Scots who are genuinely waiting on a college place. In an effort not to be outdone, Liam McArthur—the Lib Dems being opportunists, as ever—has outbid even Hugh Henry’s most ambitious exaggeration. Nor have the Conservatives, alas, been able to resist getting what seemed like a piece of the publicity action.

No, I will not take interventions, because I have a lot of facts to get through and I want to get through them. Let us start by looking at some of the most extraordinary claims that Mr Henry has made. In the Daily Record on 11 September, Mr Henry told the world that, for “at least 10,000 Scots”, the colleges have “slammed the door shut”. Let us be absolutely clear about what Mr Henry was telling us. He was not referring to students who might have been unsuccessful in gaining a place on their first choice of course but were then offered a place on another course. He was not referring to students who make multiple applications, as many do, and so appear on several so-called waiting lists. No, he was telling us that 10,000 Scots had had the door slammed shut on them by our colleges. In so doing, he was sending a false and deceiving message to prospective students, at a time when places were available. A few days later, on 17 September, Mr Henry turned up in The Herald, this time claiming that 10,000 Scots had been “turned away from colleges”. Colleges had not just slammed shut their doors but physically turned people away. However, that was not enough for Mr Henry. By 26 October, he was adamant that 21,000 Scots had been—in another ramping up of the rhetoric—“denied the opportunity” to “improve their education”. Shortly afterwards he reduced the figure to 20,000 on his website, presumably in the interests of accuracy. Mr McArthur, not to be out done by Labour, came in with a figure of 21,280, although he qualified that later by saying that the number of would-be students on waiting lists—that is his concept—was thousands. That was nonsense. As I have said repeatedly in the chamber, colleges keep what are described as “waiting lists” to manage their application process. [Interruption.] Labour is unable to learn, which is why it repeats its mistake. It should ashamed of how it has operated. Those lists are not in order to provide a running total of people waiting for a place at any given moment. That is a fact, which our audit has revealed.

No. That is why the claims of 21,000 Scots “sat waiting for a college place” are utter nonsense. To tally up what are termed waiting lists in each of our colleges, and to represent—as members from other parties have done—that that total is the number of people waiting for a specific course, is inappropriate, inaccurate, misleading and wrong. It simply will not do for our opponents to claim that those are the figures produced by the college sector. Colleges Scotland has never claimed that the figures that it has released represent the total number of people awaiting a college place; it has never claimed that there are no multiple entries; and it has never denied that people on one waiting list can end up on another course. Therefore, we are talking about false concepts. When we are talking about giving apologies, any queue to do so should be headed by Mr Henry and Mr McArthur, and they should be joined by Mr Bibby and Mr Findlay because they are the people, unfortunately, who have misled not only the chamber but Scotland’s prospective students. That is unforgivable. It is also unforgivable that Liz Smith has joined that bandwagon—a bandwagon that is rolling quickly towards a cliff. The final results of our audit will be published next month. I would be happy to debate the figures again because I believe that they will confirm what I have said. The Labour, Liberal and Conservative parties have presented a false concept to mislead Scotland and Scottish students. That is utterly wrong in regards to what students expect. I will briefly mention student numbers. Hand in hand with the claims about the numbers waiting for a college place go equally inaccurate accusations about commitments to maintaining student numbers. The fact is that we provide funding in a way that maintains student numbers. For reasons that I have explained before, head count on its own can never be a true measure of activity in a sector in which the majority of students are part-time. Head count has always been a volatile measure, capable of varying between years for reasons that have nothing to do with funding. The only way to iron out inconsistencies between years is to express student numbers as full-time equivalents. It is absolutely clear that those are being maintained. Colleges are responding to the needs of the economy by targeting resources more intensively among students.

It is right that colleges have the freedom to deliver courses in the best way. It is simply wrong to measure college activity in a way that makes no distinction between a short course of limited economic relevance compared with, for example, a year-long intensive course that delivers high-level engineering skills—just ask any employer.

Presiding Officer, I think that you are the one who tells me whether my time is up, not Mr Findlay.

That was a point worth making, in case Mr Findlay thinks that he is running the chamber. [Interruption.]

In conclusion, let me say that the neglect of the college sector by the previous Administration was disgraceful. It cut the benefit to learners, but we are providing greater benefit to learners. Scotland deserves better than the approach that Mr Henry has taken.

I finish by moving the amendment in my name, which contains the facts. I move amendment S4M-05506.1, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “congratulates the Scottish Government on its decision to undertake an audit of college “waiting lists” to better understand the application and “waiting list” process in colleges and the reliability of recently quoted figures; notes that the preliminary findings have exposed as wildly exaggerated many of the claims made about the number of people who are waiting for a course; notes that the quoted figures do not give any accurate indication of unmet need; further notes that under no previous administration has anyone had an entitlement to their first choice of college or university place; welcomes the current administration’s efforts in going further than any of its predecessors through the Opportunities for All guarantee; recognises the efforts made by colleges in redirecting applicants to oversubscribed courses toward other courses; welcomes the fact that the college sector is being funded in a way that is ensuring that student numbers are being maintained; recognises that the college reform programme is creating more efficient colleges of scale with, as proposed in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, improved governance and accountability, and welcomes the intention of the reform programme to create colleges that can better address economic need and consequently boost the employability of learners.”

I do not think that the debate has been good, alas. I regret that the tone was set in a somewhat poisonous way by Mr Henry. I am reconciled to the fact that he and Mr Findlay do not like me; I can certainly live with that. However, it is regrettable that, instead of debating the facts, members have set that tone—we should not do that. Taking part in the debate has not been pleasant for anybody; the experience—particularly of Labour speeches—has been unpleasant. The debate explains something in Scottish politics—it explains why the poll at the weekend showed that, if an election was held tomorrow, our majority in the Parliament would be the same as it was in 2011. The bitter together approach, if I may put it that way, does not work, so I suggest another approach. Mr Henry and I will never be friends but, in the remorseless search for the positive—I am trying to search for the positive and find a way forward—I would be happy to discuss the final audit with Opposition spokespeople after it is published. If they want to approach me, we will have that meeting and get officials into the discussion.

I am sorry, but that is exactly where we started and exactly the type of so-called cleverness that Mr Henry thinks is politics. The reality is that the way in which the issue has been presented by Labour, which has been, alas, aided and abetted by the Tories and the Lib Dems, has been wrong. Labour has presented false concepts and has tried to prove something that is untrue. I regret that, but I will return to the positive, because I want to keep trying, despite Mr Henry’s intervention Once the audit is published, if Opposition lead spokespeople wish to discuss it with me and my officials, the door will be open for them to do so. We can then address all the definitions, such as the one that Liz Smith raised; exactly what the figures mean; and why the concept is false. We are working hard to ensure that young people and others in Scotland are entitled to every opportunity that we can give them. For example, the opportunities for all guarantee is a guarantee and is being observed. That in itself should have made Opposition members a bit cautious. Some things in the debate were extraordinary. Liam McArthur said in an open and very Liberal Democrat way that he was of course entitled to question things and that the figures might be questionable. Is that why he published a press release that said that there were 21,280 people on the list, accepting that figure as if it was the case beyond peradventure. There have been a lot of those things. Let us try to make progress. I regret that we will not agree on the need for college reform, because college reform is long overdue and must happen. However, I would be happy to sit down and discuss the detail, which is available. When we see the final audit, the detail will be even clearer than it is in the interim audit. The detail tells us that a lot of figures that were untrue were quoted last year. The people who quoted those figures were the Opposition spokespeople, so they should have pause for thought. They were dealing in false concepts and they were telling potential students in Scotland that no places were available to Scottish students when places were available to Scottish students. To be blunt, I regard that as unforgivable. However, I would be prepared to forgive that if we could have a sensible conversation about how to take forward change in Scotland’s colleges. Such change is unavoidable; indeed, it is highly desirable. That change will focus and is focusing Scotland’s colleges on the economic opportunities that exist.

Not at all. I am sorry, but I entirely disagree with Liz Smith. The debate has been called by Labour for a political reason and, alas, the bitter together parties are determined to be part of it. I regret that, because it is important that we work with Scotland’s young people and older people for colleges. We can do so, and it would be good if we sat down and tried to do so. I make the invitation for the third time that I would be happy to sit down and have that conversation in such a way that we could all agree on where we are with this, because I repeat that waiting lists of that nature—those are exactly the words that I used—do not exist and the figures cannot be used to aggregate demand. There is no doubt about it. It is extraordinary that, in the course of the debate, Hugh Henry not only disagreed with that—he is entitled to disagree when he wants—but essentially said that the audit was rigged, which is a nonsensical accusation.

The audit was neither partial nor rigged. It will produce the full results. I am open to discussion—I make that invitation and I am interested to see who takes it up.

The Government’s key consideration has been to fund colleges in a way that allows the sector to continue to maintain student numbers. We are doing so. I welcome the commitment of Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College to merge, which will provide even better opportunities to plan the delivery of learning on a regional basis and to identify where there is unnecessary duplication or waste.

I expect that the effect of regionalisation will be to enhance the funding of Scotland’s colleges according to need. Indeed, I would be surprised if any member in the chamber was arguing for a funding formula that did not reflect the needs of colleges. My letter of instruction to the Scottish funding council over a long period of time since I have been minister has always stressed the importance of recognising where need exists. I personally have always argued strongly with the funding council and others for recognition of rurality. If those are the key issues that are worrying Alison McInnes, I am happy to set her mind at rest about them. I hope that she is not proposing to spend money that is not required or to reward inefficiency. I am very pleased that the boards of Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College have recognised the strength of merger and of what will arise from merger, and the need for regionalisation.

Colleges serving rural areas have always been treated on a level playing field and have been treated supportively. Indeed, I am pleased by the enthusiasm that Angus College, for example, is showing for its merger with Dundee College. I say as gently as I can to the member that the Tories’ new-found enthusiasm for backing college funding is very much at odds both with their record south of the border and with their approach to education, which has been luddite in the extreme in my view.

I think that we are all very pleased with the progress that is being made. A new regional structure for the college sector has now been established. Most colleges have opted to merge, and we anticipate better opportunities to plan the delivery of learning, to the ultimate benefit of the learner, and for significant efficiencies. In the minority of regions where there will continue to be more than one college, we expect the creation of college federations to deliver similar benefits.

We have always recognised that merging colleges will incur exceptional and transitional costs. Colleges will need support to manage those costs, although they have substantial reserves that can and should be applied in such circumstances. We are providing £15 million to the college transformation fund and, of course, I will look sympathetically and closely at any bid for resources that might be required to support decisions to merge. Decisions to merge benefit learners in particular, but they also benefit staff. The regionalisation process will lead to a single set of terms and conditions across the sector, and will, in almost all circumstances—and I want to see in all circumstances—mean a guarantee of no compulsory redundancy. That is very valuable and worth a lot to hard-working staff in colleges.

When the process is completed.

I will be glad to do so because there are some very good examples. The principal of the City of Glasgow College has indicated that the college has achieved considerable economies of scale and been able to do things that it would otherwise not have done. I have spoken comparatively recently to the principal of the newly created Edinburgh College, and she told me that it finds itself in a much stronger position and is better able to deliver right across the board for students and learning in this city. Colleges that have previously had experience of merger, such as Forth Valley College, show the great strengths that have emerged from such mergers. I am glad that we have had the courage and determination to implement the merger programme in consultation with the college sector. It is producing and will produce great benefits.

This is a very important area. Raising the educational attainment of pupils from the poorest backgrounds is a key priority, and curriculum for excellence is the major tool for such improvement. Last year, the raising attainment group, which comprises a number of experienced headteachers, provided me and the wider audience of every teacher in Scotland with expert advice in the area that was based on their successes in raising attainment in their schools. Their evidence, coupled with the work being developed by the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland and Education Scotland, identifies the key actions that are needed to successfully raise the attainment of all children, including the most deprived. We are delivering the conditions for raising the educational attainment of all young people, including those from the poorest backgrounds, through implementation of the curriculum for excellence and investment in teaching and leadership, which is vital in this area, through the work of the national partnership group.

I can do better than that; I can refer the member to the report of the attainment group, and I will be happy to provide him with a copy of it if he has not seen it. It is very simple. It is a series of questions about teaching practice and work within schools, and it seeks to ensure that every teacher is involved in the activity. The difference is made when schools, teachers and leaders in schools recognise that the attainment of pupils from the poorest backgrounds is a key issue and ensure that their school is focused on it. When we look at the work of a variety of schools in Scotland, we see that, in the words of Avis Glaze, the Ontario educator, “poverty is not destiny”. Some very good schools are servicing areas of multiple deprivation and are making enormous progress. The issue is why other schools in the same area are not doing so, and making sure that best practice in one area can transfer to another area. That was a key issue for the attainment group, which has continued to develop work on that issue. I will also continue to do so through curriculum for excellence and in other ways.

An update for members of the Scottish Parliament on the work has been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre today. It shows that in a large number of cases people who appear on so-called waiting lists are not, in fact, waiting for a course at all, because they have taken up another course, failed to gain the entrance qualification, moved into employment or chosen some other option. Moreover, a significant number of people appear on more than one waiting list. We are currently verifying final figures with the colleges that are participating in the audit and we will publish the full report shortly.

I tried to indicate to the member that he should be very careful. I have tried that so often in the Parliament. For example, I made it clear to Mr Findlay in October that the figures need to be treated with great caution. I have said the same thing to Liz Smith, to Liam McArthur and to other Labour members. However, members were determined not to listen, for reasons that are political and have nothing to do with education. If the member turns to the audit of college waiting lists update for MSPs that is in SPICe, he will learn some interesting facts. For example he will learn that “Different processes for applications and waiting lists means”— this is the result of audit and analysis— “that waiting lists are not comparable between colleges and cannot be aggregated”, and that “there is duplication of applicants ... and that the majority of those on a waiting list had in fact enrolled at a college”. Indeed, paragraph 8 says: “The analysis also took into account a follow-up survey by one college in the sample. This college contacted every individual on the waiting list to ascertain their continued interest in a place at the college: less than 5% of the original total indicated they remained interested.” Of course, there is still work to be done—I am not being uncautious about that. The chart in the update also indicates that, even on an initial analysis, waiting lists were able to be reduced by 72 per cent. One of the conclusions—and further work is required—is that it will be necessary to “make recommendations for improving the application and waiting list process and overall data handling” of colleges. I know how desperate members are to weigh in on this matter because they think that, somehow, they are going to get a political advantage, but I would say to them that they should be very careful. I have said from the beginning that the figures are not reliable, and now we have an audit that says that that is the case.

We know that Mr Findlay’s stock-in-trade is that sort of glib rudeness—[Laughter.]

It also fulfils the classic definition of tragedy, which is something that is funny and then is no longer funny. However, the reality of the situation—as I keep telling Mr Findlay, although he refuses to be warned—is that he has to be extremely careful with his figures, because the figures that he has been quoting are not true.

Mr Findlay prefers to shout, he prefers to bawl and he prefers to use those figures. It would be quite useful if one day Mr Findlay learned something about education.

Our universities are already making progress around widening access. However, most agree that there is scope to do more. I have been encouraged by the level of engagement that has been shown by universities with the work that has been led by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council on outcome agreements, which include widening access objectives. On 18 December we announced support for a further 1,020 articulation places, which traditionally appeal to students from poorer backgrounds. With the proposals that are set out in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, I am confident that our universities will continue to work with us to deliver a better deal for students from deprived backgrounds.

Our universities should widen their doors as far as they will go, but young people need the ambition and the aspiration that are required to walk through them. They also need encouragement—they do not need to be put off. In that regard, I noted some headlines this morning that were provoked by Liam McArthur and which would, essentially, put young people off wanting to go to university. The comments that motivated those headlines were very foolish. If that is liberal democracy, I am glad that it is in its death throes. The reality is that widening access should be a job that we are all engaged in. We should all be talking strongly about why it is important that young people’s aspirations are as high as possible. We should be working with the National Union of Students and others to ensure that we encourage entrants to university, and we should, of course, be providing students with guidance and support.

It is the policy of the Scottish Government that there will be no tuition fees. That has been a major factor in ensuring that, on average, student debt in Scotland is a fraction of that accrued by students elsewhere in these islands. In 2011, the average student loan debt for a Scottish student was £6,480, compared with £17,240 in England. In addition to student loans that are offered with preferential terms, we also provide bursaries to those from the lowest-income households, which will more than meet our commitment to a minimum income of £7,000. The new student support package for 2013-14 for Scottish students is generally regarded as the best on offer.

They are absolutely and utterly wrong to do so, and I am pleased that, today, the First Minister raised the issue that a right to a free education might be seen as a basic human right and enshrined in a written constitution for Scotland. That would be a tremendous thing to do. [Laughter.] I cannot understand why two of the Tory members present are laughing at that. To laugh at basic human rights is a very strange thing to do.

The Scottish Government has no formal role in the decisions that the University of London has made about the future of the university marine biological station Millport. However, I have spoken to the vice chancellor of the University of London to emphasise our concern about the impact of the closure decision on the community of Cumbrae, and will meet stakeholders tomorrow.

Yes. I pay tribute to the local member, who has worked hard on the matter and has been in regular touch with me. It is not a matter for Neil Findlay or any other Labour member to jeer at. The local member’s work has been, and continues to be, significant. The Scottish Government recognises the importance of the jobs and the economic benefit that the station provides. I am fully aware of the fact that many academics and students in Scottish universities and schools place the marine station at Millport high on their list of priorities and have used it wisely. Indeed, I have seen the petition about the matter and the work of many people on it. However, the decision is being made by the University of London and the Higher Education Funding Council for England. The institution is owned by the University of London—it is not in Scottish ownership—and the failure of the owning organisation to make significant investment in its infrastructure is a major feature in the issue. I am keen to find a solution for Cumbrae, the Scottish academic community and those who use the station, but it will not be easy to do so because of the lack of investment. However, I look forward to tomorrow’s meeting. There will be a good discussion about what is possible and we will move forward from there.

I do not agree that the Millport station is unique, because I do not think that it is unique, but I agree that it is valuable—one should not be inaccurate. The existence of SAMS at Dunstaffnage is important. There were discussions between the two institutions some years ago that did not result in a final outcome; I know that many people regret that. The University of the Highlands and Islands is one of the players in the matter. It is regrettable that no Scottish university has stepped forward to say that it wants to take responsibility for the station. However, I am keen for us to have a wide-ranging discussion and to involve the key stakeholders, including the University of London. I will therefore keep my thoughts and my options open, and we will see what transpires.

As the member knows, participation is a complex issue that starts in early years and involves working with teachers and parents to encourage ambition. That ambition can then be realised in a system of further and higher education in which access is based on the ability to learn rather than the ability to pay. The Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill will implement our manifesto commitment to introduce statutory widening access agreements, which will deliver more opportunities for those from poorer backgrounds.

It would be utterly perverse to represent the best funding package in these islands as a cut of any sort. Only the Labour Party could do that in the present circumstances—no, perhaps the Tories could do that, too, as they are gifted in such misrepresentation. This is the best funding package in the whole of these islands. It is supported without reservation by the National Union of Students. It will encourage wider participation, as will the reforms to the college sector and the work that we are doing in higher education. A generous member—I am sure that Patricia Ferguson would want to see herself in that way—would welcome the hard work that is being done and would want to back it rather than cavil about it.

As I said in answer to the first question, the Government’s key aim has been to fund the college sector in a way that allows it to maintain student numbers. I am pleased to say that we are doing so, to the benefit of all learners including those who are disabled. The regional outcome agreements that are developed between the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and colleges will not only safeguard but promote better educational outcomes for learners with additional needs. I believe that to be a robust approach that will ensure that the interests of that group of learners are met.

Yes. Responsibility for a student with a disability can be and often is shared between health, social work and the education provider. It involves medical, living and teaching needs. It is in the interests of the public purse and, vitally, of the student that there is a growing together of those statutory responsibilities and that organisations work together and co-operate in a co-ordinated manner to deliver the best possible service for the person who matters, which is the learner. I would be more than happy to consider any cases in which it is felt that that is not happening and to use my good offices to try to assist.

This Government’s key aim is to fund the college sector in a way that allows it to maintain all student numbers and access and I am pleased to say that we are doing so to the benefit of all learners. The regional outcome agreements developed between the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and colleges will not only safeguard but promote better educational outcomes for learners with additional needs. I believe that this robust approach will ensure that the interests of this group of learners are met.

Perhaps the member should have checked with the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability before asking that question. At my meeting with the SCLD director, Lisa Curtice, and the Enable Scotland chief executive, Peter Scott, on 6 December, I talked to them about what we require to do—that was not the first meeting that I have had with them. As I indicated in my answer, both those organisations are engaging in the outcome agreement process and are ensuring that students have an opportunity to influence provision. I asked both of them to bring forward new approaches to deliver opportunities for students with learning disabilities so that this key sector is protected, and they will come back to me with those proposals. Let us unite in supporting those students, rather than divide in the way that Mr Macintosh invited us to do.

Will the member take an intervention?

Now you are scaremongering.

The Scottish Government is providing £1 million to the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland for the purchase of musical instruments. The conservatoire will consult local authorities to ensure that instruments are allocated to areas of greatest need. That will enable many more aspiring young musicians in schools to learn to play musical instruments. The Government is also setting up an instrumental music group to look at issues to do with delivering instrumental music tuition in schools, including the question of charges for pupils who are sitting Scottish Qualifications Authority music exams. The Government believes that the shared ambitions and good will that now exist on those issues will result in a solution.

I pay tribute to the Scotland on Sunday newspaper and its let the children play campaign, which has been instrumental in drawing attention to a wide range of issues in that regard. The group that I mentioned will have a remit to look at a range of issues. The remit is being discussed with its chair who—I can announce—is David Green, who is a former leader of the Highland Council. One of the issues is charges for pupils who are sitting SQA music exams. I have made it clear in questioning at the Education and Culture Committee, for example, that that development, which exists in five local authorities, is undesirable but not illegal. I therefore have no power to impose any new situation on those authorities. I hope that the group, with the discussions that are taking place—including this type of discussion—the presence of the fund and the Royal Conservatoire’s work with local authorities, will move those local authorities to adopt the position that the other local authorities take so that they do not charge for such things. The sooner they make that decision, the happier we all will be.

Music trusts are a separate issue, but I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs is working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on such issues. I would be happy to ensure that the two developments communicate and feed off each other. The core aim is to ensure that young people get the chance to learn to play music, and to enjoy and be involved in it. We all want that to happen. If there are barriers to that, I hope that the group, working with others, will overcome them.

I do not intend that the positive announcement should penalise anybody, and I encourage Patricia Ferguson to be positive about the development—it is good news. I hope that there will be no diminution of provision in any local authority that currently does things well and that authorities that have a different approach will look at that provision and discuss it with us, as some are already doing, and with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—the people who run the fund and the instrumental music group. I hope that common sense will prevail. The announcement is not intended to diminish anybody’s opportunity, but to increase opportunity.

I can see absolutely no reason why that should not be the case, and I am happy to say that the intention is to be as broad as possible. Music is life affirming for every child, and every child should have the opportunity to learn it.

Virtue is its own reward. Authorities that are doing tuition well and properly will be able to continue to do so and there is nothing in the announcement that will threaten that. The situation is quite the reverse; we are encouraging other councils to come to the table and to be as positive as Orkney Islands Council.

Or students.

My speaking notes start with the following observation: “We all make decisions every day. Those decisions are based on what we know and what we think we know.” What I did not know, even half an hour ago, was that I was going to open the debate. Dr Alasdair Allan sends his apologies to the chamber. He has been delayed by the failure of an aircraft on the way from Stornoway but will be here to sum up the debate. I offer my apologies to the chamber for that.

I am happy to say that it is not postponed and the member is now late for it. My officials are leading that meeting and, with the permission of the chamber, I hope to join it at some stage, if Dr Allan arrives. When we do not know, we ask someone else—there is a sense of irony in my speaking notes, but we will get to the facts in a moment—often someone whose opinion we trust and value. If we do not agree with an opinion, we debate it in order to change minds or have our opinions informed. There are many types of evidence—statistical, economic and social, to name but a few. Although public policy decisions must take a range of different factors into account, it is clear that where good-quality evidence exits, it can have—and should have—considerable influence and importance in public decision making. Since Alasdair Allan has become responsible for the science portfolio he has become acutely aware—as I have—of the importance of science, engineering and technology to the Government’s goals. Both he and I have had the privilege of seeing first hand some of the wonderful scientific achievements of the university sector, for example. However, although research undertaken in the university sector is helpful—and sometimes vital—in informing policy, the Scottish Government has more than 300 directly employed scientists and engineers whose work feeds directly into the policy process. For example, scientists in Marine Scotland undertake research and provide scientific and technical advice in support of the Scottish Government’s vision of marine and coastal environments that are clean, health, safe, productive and biologically diverse. Last year, they produced “Scotland’s Marine Atlas”, a scientific assessment of the conditions of Scotland’s seas that is considered a world-leader of its kind. It is an incredible document that I commend to those who have not yet seen it. Marine Scotland’s scientists are perhaps most influential in relation to their science input into policy when it comes to the vexed issue of fish stocks and quotas. The work includes the collation of data and stock assessments for international and European scientific advisory bodies, as well as participation in discussions to formulate advice. The guiding principle in negotiating and setting fisheries quotas is always to follow the scientific advice. That policy is showing results: many of Scotland’s stocks are now being fished at—or close to—sustainable rates, and discard rates are falling. To take another example, the work of science and advice for Scottish agriculture—SASA—helps to ensure quality, safety and security of Scotland’s food supply, and contributes to the overall quality of the environment.

I very much agree with Liam McArthur. As the environment minister, I dealt with aspects of the fisheries portfolio, and he puts his finger on a key issue: although science provides information, it is not absolute. Of course, time, cultural connections and other issues need to be taken into account. SASA is important for Scotland’s international reputation as a producer of high-quality seed potatoes, for example, which is a business that is worth £100 million to the Scottish economy. Scientists from SASA co-led negotiations in Brussels during the formation of the new European Union directive on potato cyst nematode. SASA negotiated an agreement to reduce sampling rates in fields where there was a low risk of finding PCN. That led to a threefold increase in the quantity of soil to be sampled and tested, instead of the proposed tenfold increase, the cost of which would have been simply unacceptable and probably impossible to bear. Those are just two examples of where we have highly qualified research scientists and engineers working in-house to support Government policy. There are others, of course, in a wide range of public bodies across a swathe of disciplines, including Historic Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage, Transport Scotland, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the Forestry Commission Scotland and Health Scotland, to name but a few. The Government cannot have researchers in all areas, and some of the scientific evidence needed to support policy inevitably must come from elsewhere. Scientific endeavour, by its very nature, can be inherently uncertain. The progression of scientific thinking and understanding relies on open and honest debate about what the results appear to show. In such cases, we need advice on how to interpret the evidence and explain what the degree of uncertainty means. That scientific advice comes from many sources. We have four eminent independent advisers in the Scottish Government with whom I and Alasdair Allan meet regularly: Dr Harry Burns, the chief medical officer; Professor Andrew Morris, the chief scientist for health; Professor Louise Heathwaite, the chief scientific adviser for rural affairs and the environment; and Professor Muffy Calder, the chief scientific adviser for Scotland. Their role is not only to advise but to challenge, and they complement the roles of other advisers, such as the chief researcher, the chief economist and the chief statistician. Many specialist science advisers in Government work alongside economists, statisticians and social researchers to feed evidence directly into the policy process. We also have three virtual centres of expertise—on climate change, water and animal disease outbreaks—which bring together expertise across the publicly funded research sector to provide the best available scientific advice and inform Government policy in an efficient, accessible and streamlined way. That innovative approach aligns research with the main research providers and with the wider policy agenda, drawing resources from across Scotland, including from people who can contribute in our universities. The Scottish science advisory council, Scotland’s highest-level science advisory body, provides independent advice and recommendations on science strategy, policy and priorities. The SSAC is a broad-based group that includes practitioners and users of scientific innovation. There is £37.5 million investment across the United Kingdom in the delivering assisted living lifestyles at scale—DALLAS—programme. A Scottish consortium, living it up, won the opportunity to implement the programme across Scotland and is establishing work that will reach 55,000 people by summer 2015. The approach comes from assisted living work that is being done by Scottish scientists, working with the Government. Science has a strong role to play in policy making. It also has a role to play in enabling us to assess critical evidence and material considerations. Particularly in relation to complex or contentious policy issues, the public often has strong views on what the associated science reveals about the benefits, risks and ethical and moral considerations. Those views need to be heard, respected and fed into the policy process—that is an issue of democracy, trust and good governance. Obtaining the public’s views in an open and meaningful way requires rather more than traditional consultation; it requires a two-way dialogue, in which members of the public have the opportunity to interact with scientists, stakeholders and policy makers as they deliberate on issues that are likely to be important.

The member makes an important point. I was just about to talk about the sciencewise expert resource centre for public dialogue in science and innovation, which is a UK-wide initiative and has knowledge and experience of running public dialogues on science and technology-related issues. On the member’s specific point about press and public perceptions being set against scientific information, advice and fact, we cannot change things overnight throughout society, but we can change things by a process of education and information. Projects such as sciencewise, which hopes to educate a range of people through dialogue, enable us to touch even hard-to-reach places such as the press, so that people understand science and technology-related issues. We are involved in steering sciencewise’s work. The civil service reform plan and the office of the chief scientific adviser are also focused on making information about policy making open and accessible to all. We are taking a lead role in the EU-funded places project—a pan-European initiative that is exploring best practice in relation to the concept of cities of scientific culture. By ensuring that we have a pro-science culture and an understanding of science, we will address the point that Dr Simpson made, but the point must also be addressed in Government. All sides of politics must be devoted to, interested in and supportive of science-based policy making. Science centres and festivals offer other ways in which we can influence the public’s view. The Government has supported such initiatives, which have helped to connect citizens with the science-related policy process and scientific issues. Science centres and festivals provide venues and exciting opportunities for people of all ages to discover things about science and learn about the importance of science in our lives. This year we allocated £3.5 million to support science centres, festivals and other initiatives. Scottish Government scientists play an important role in such events. I am keen to see—and I am glad that I always do see—Government scientists out there engaging with people. I was glad, for example, that Professor Muffy Calder took on the chairmanship of the information technology excellence group within my portfolio so that she could engage with IT users and develop the right ideas for the continuation of IT excellence in Scotland. Talking of education, we have to ensure that science is at the heart of what we do in the classroom. Government scientists go into schools to bring real-life relevance to science lessons. They play a role in supporting extra-curricular activities such as science, technology, engineering and mathematics clubs, and they act as role models, telling their own stories about the range of careers in science that are open to young people. Thousands of scientists, engineers and technologists in both the public and private sectors in Scotland also undertake those tasks, with many of them working through the excellent STEM ambassadors programme. SASA staff organise school visits, as do many others, and Marine Scotland organised its first glow meet for 1,700 pupils earlier this year. Engaging scientists with policy making, engaging the public with science and ensuring that the ideas of science, the enthusiasm for science and the opportunities of science are made known through our schools and through our society are all very important, as is increasing opportunities to study science. I am pleased that, year on year, we have been able to continue to support STEM projects that do those things, encouraging others to come into science, including young women, who have often been deterred from going into science. The work that is being done on that is important, as indeed are things such as the Primary Engineer awards, which I will be involved in later this week. Politics and science are not separate. They are intertwined. The idea that politics and policy making somehow stand aside from other things in society is plain wrong. The role of science in encouraging policy making in Scotland is clear, and I am glad that Dr Allan decided to bring the subject to the chamber for debate. When he comes in and contributes to it, I am sure that his enthusiasm will shine through. [Interruption.] As Mr Findlay says from a sedentary position, we will all be delighted.

It was not Mr Findlay, apparently. He is unable to decide whose evidence he can support: mine or that which is still to come from Dr Allan. I am sure that Mr Findlay will take a scientific view. I am sorry that I am unable to repay the compliment, because I have to say that Mr Findlay’s amendment is far from scientific. It shows that curious obsession with the constitution that the Labour Party now has. It is most regrettable. Labour should take a much broader view of the world. It should try to engage with really important issues, as we are doing in this debate. We are therefore unable to support the Labour amendment. However, we are able to support the Tory amendment, because it simply exhorts us to try harder. Members: Oh! The objections from Labour members to support for the Tory amendment are quite extraordinary. The evidence base shows that they always support the Tory party, whatever it does in this country, much to our regret. I commend Dr Allan’s motion to the Parliament. The results that we see from science-based policy making in Scotland are important and they are there to be observed. I welcome Dr Allan to the chamber. I am profoundly glad to see him. [Laughter.] I move, That the Parliament recognises the important role that scientific evidence plays in informing decision making; recognises the contribution made by scientists and engineers in the Scottish Government, its agencies and delivery partners to the international reputation of Scotland through the provision of evidence and advice; supports the Scottish Government’s efforts to increase the policy impact of publicly funded scientific research; notes the valuable work of the Scottish Science Advisory Council, and recognises the importance of engaging with the public in relation to the science that underpins policy.

No.

When college is the right choice of learning for students with learning difficulties, our reforms will place greater emphasis on equipping them with the skills that they need for life and work. We will engage with groups representing the interests of those learners to ensure that we make progress.

As I have pointed out, colleges are providing courses for those for whom college is the right choice of learning. Colleges are required to set out in their outcome agreements how they will ensure access to entry-level courses. The Scottish Government, working with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and Scotland’s Colleges, is updating its guidance on support for students with profound and complex needs. That has led to the creation of a network of specialist regional advisers who are helping colleges to plan provision for that group. That is the reality of what is taking place.

For the year 2012-13, colleges have been asked to ensure that access to entry-level courses—courses that are of primary importance to that student group—is set as widely as possible. From 2013-14, the number of students with additional support needs enrolled on accredited learning will be measured as part of next year’s college outcome agreements. The Scottish funding council will negotiate with colleges to ensure that they are responding appropriately to regional need. I had a very productive meeting with the cross-party group on learning disability, at which the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability was represented. I would be delighted to meet the consortium to explain where things currently are, and I understand that such a meeting has been arranged after I committed to it last week.

From the academic year 2013-14 onwards, students in higher education with a family income of less than £17,000 will have access to an annual income of £7,250 through a combination of bursaries and loans. That minimum annual income is part of a package of changes to student support that, together with our commitment to free tuition fees, will provide the best overall package of support in these islands. We will maintain the college student support budget at over £95 million for 2013-14. Additionally, we are maintaining education maintenance allowances, investing a total of £31.6 million in 2013-14, so that students from poorer backgrounds have the support that they need to access learning.

I think that it is quite obvious why we would change the basis of it: so that we can get, if I may be frank, more bangs for our buck. We are getting that with the co-operation and, indeed, the help and support of the National Union of Students, which believes that the progress that we are making is the right progress for students in Scotland. I was pleased that Robin Parker of the NUS took part with me in the media event at the University of Glasgow to launch these changes. I do not think that anybody would accept that there has been any diminution of our support to students. It is quite the reverse—we have the best student support package and access to education based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. That means that we are investing in our higher education system. There are, of course, different approaches, but I am pleased that the representative body for students strongly supports what we are endeavouring to do.

What I can confirm is that this change is warmly welcomed by the vast majority of students and the NUS—[Interruption.]

It has been designed with their support in mind. We are endeavouring to ensure that, in times of difficulty, we can support our students and our further and higher education systems. If members in the chamber have other prescriptions that they would like to bring into place, they should bring them to debate and to a policy discussion, and we will discuss them. I am very happy to stand four-square behind these proposals.

It is interesting that Labour members laugh at the idea of tuition fees. If Labour members wish to bring forward a policy that supports tuition fees, they are quite entitled to do so, but they should do so openly and honestly. For my part, I have to say to the member that, unlike the United Kingdom Government, we believe that education opportunities should be based on the ability to learn and not on the ability to pay. That underpins our policy that provides free tuition to full-time students in both colleges and universities. It is why around 177,000 college students had their fees waived or met by SAAS in 2010-11. A policy of charging students would impinge on college students as well. It is important that that is remembered across the chamber.

Opportunities for all is an explicit commitment by this Government to an offer of a place in learning or training to every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland who is not engaged in employment, education or training. It is being delivered across Scotland by local authorities and their partners, including Skills Development Scotland, colleges, third sector providers and Jobcentre Plus. This year, local authorities in the West Scotland region received £599,241 specifically to support the delivery of opportunities for all, including 16+ learning choices and activity agreements. Additionally, North Ayrshire Council and Renfrewshire Council, both of which are in the West Scotland region, are receiving £1.6 million of the extra £9 million funding available this year to support youth employment. Those authorities are also benefiting from £19.8 million of funding from the European social fund until September 2013 and £4.3 million of funding from the European regional development fund until July 2014.

I am sorry to croak, Presiding Officer, but my voice is slowly giving way. [Interruption.]

Under opportunities for all, all 16 to 19-year-olds are guaranteed an offer of a place in learning or training if they are not already in education or a job. Achieving the policy’s aims will involve a contribution from all parts of the post-16 system; as colleges will be an important part of that, we have prioritised places for 16 to 19-year-olds. The regionalisation of our colleges will encourage a far closer alignment with economic need and the delivery of skills that will indeed lead to longer-term and stable employment. I also note that the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, which takes us a step closer to that ambition, has been published today.

That is a very good question. A variety of people are involved in verifying and ensuring a constant standard for college courses. However, certain college courses spread among a number of different colleges are of a different grade and standard. This morning, I had a very interesting discussion with the chairs of the Lanarkshire colleges, and one of the issues that they are looking at in their federation proposal is a means of ensuring a common standard across the colleges in precisely the sort of course that the member has highlighted. Indeed, another benefit of the regionalisation proposal is that it provides a way of driving up standards.

As the member will be aware, the funding allocated for colleges for 2013-14 and for 2014-15 is set out in the relevant Scottish Government spending review and budget documents.

Drew Smith makes a very good point. Indeed, I draw attention to the additional resource that has been provided in West Lothian, for example, where the Vion closure has created conditions in which further investment in the college sector is required to meet immediate need. In those circumstances, one immediate need was English for those for whom it is not a first language. When such events occur, we need to respond well and promptly through the partnership action for continuing employment initiative and other activities. I know that the member has been very active on the issue and assure him that the Scottish Government, too, will be active on it.

The member is right to say that the issue has been raised; indeed, the National Union of Students Scotland has done so. I have made it clear that there are differences in the way in which courses are delivered and in the cost bases that apply to them. In particular, the cost base of a four-year university course is often much higher. I have argued sometimes that there may be an opportunity for the higher cost base to be reduced rather than the other way round, but I understand the issue and the point that Liam McArthur makes. It is not easy to see how we could balance those differences out, but the matter needs continued debate and I am happy to continue to discuss it.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will allocate funding in support of new and continuing estate development projects in colleges and higher education institutions. For example, projects at Glasgow School of Art and Coatbridge College are on-going, as well as preparatory work on the three non-profit-distributing projects in Glasgow, Kilmarnock and Inverness, each of which includes elements that are part funded via capital. The funding council will also provide capital maintenance of around £22 million to the college sector. Each of the three NPD projects—major projects of renewal of the estate—is due to move into construction during the academic year 2013-14 and will provide new, high-quality college facilities that are fit for the 21st century, as exist throughout Scotland. Indeed, I was pleased to be at Forth Valley College in Stirling yesterday to see its wonderful new campus and the tremendous work and enthusiasm within it.

Colleges are required to balance a range of priorities in the difficult financial climate, not least of which is the need to offer economically relevant courses to young people who are at risk of unemployment. Nevertheless, many colleges continue to provide significant opportunities for school pupils through skills for work courses and in other ways. Ultimately—I am sure that Lewis Macdonald recognises this—colleges themselves are responsible for whom they enrol and the courses that they offer, based on their own assessments of local economic need.

I am keen that as many young people as possible benefit from the interaction between the school stage and the college stage. Indeed, there are good examples of that all over the country. The number of school students aged 15 to 18 getting college experience in 2010-11—the latest figures—was broadly the same as in 2007-08. There is no question but that college experience can benefit school pupils, but there is a need to ensure that colleges and local authorities are able to afford those things. As I said earlier, I was at Forth Valley College yesterday, where 800 young people from schools are enrolled in a range of academic, transitional and vocational provision. Good things are happening. I want to encourage them to continue to happen despite the financial pressures.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning (Michael Russell): As I have said in the chamber several times, the extent to which waiting lists are an accurate measure of demand is a matter that we are investigating with colleges. That said, we are funding colleges to deliver the same volume of learning as in 2010-11, and our opportunities for all programme means that every 16 to 19-year-old who is not in education or employment will get an appropriate offer of learning.

I have made it clear that not every entry on what are called waiting lists equates to a learner who has been—in a phrase that some members have used—“turned away”. Some people apply for more than one course. That is not a way to measure demand. So-called waiting lists were never intended to do that. To be fair, we are working on an audit so that everybody is clear about what so-called waiting lists are and show. They do not mean that no alternative places are available. Indeed, some colleges have continued to advertise vacancies. The underpinning truth is this: the opportunities for all programme ensures an offer of a suitable place in learning or training for every 16 to 19-year-old who is not otherwise in education or employment. I hope that that is clear enough.

The Scottish Government has invested record levels of funding in our universities to ensure that the sector remains internationally competitive and a highly attractive destination for students and researchers. In addition, specific support for research pooling and the development of innovation centres builds on the willingness of Scottish researchers to collaborate within Scotland and with leading researchers wherever they may be located.

In the interests of brevity, I say “Yes”.

Given that funding for research depends primarily—and, indeed, overwhelmingly—on the quality of the research, I can see no reason why the quality of our research should diminish. Therefore, I am sure that Mr Bibby would not want to be a scaremonger. and, If he thinks his way clearly and laser-like through the issue, he will realise that research funding will follow research excellence, and the excellence of Scottish research is absolutely guaranteed. I hope that that leaves the member in no doubt at all.

On the basis of data from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the number of college staff, expressed as full-time equivalent, fell by 396 from 12,687 in 2009-10 to 12,291 in 2010-11, which is the latest year for which published figures are available. That represents a reduction of 3 per cent.

Yes. That has been my position and remains my position. I cannot enforce it because of the previous Labour Administration’s decision to remove that power, but I am happy to say—indeed, I have said so on another platform where Jenny Marra raised the question—that the answer is, again, yes.

The acquisition of language skills starts long before our young people reach university, and we are taking steps to radically improve the learning of languages in schools by creating conditions that will allow children to learn two languages. In higher education, student demand is a key driver in the decisions that universities make on the courses that they offer. The demand for languages remains strong and, on the whole, Scotland is well supplied with modern language provision at degree level. In a broader package of support for outward mobility of students, our outward mobility fund provides students with help to study overseas. All those steps will help our children and young people to prepare for the globalised and multilingual world in which we now live.

Yes. The languages for all programme at the University of Edinburgh is a superb opportunity to add to the learning experience and to improve language skills for the market and for wider reasons. More than 2,000 students have already taken part in the programme, and I know that student interest in it continues. Many of our excellent universities are improving their language provision. Some already offer language study as a credit-bearing part of their degree programmes. For example, the modular first-year course at the University of Aberdeen has had a big increase in language study. I am pleased that that is taking place. The outcome agreements that have been negotiated between the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the universities highlight the broad language opportunities that exist.

We have no plans to amend the current legal position that allows universities to set their own tuition fee levels for non-EU international students. However, we recognise the importance of certainty around costs in difficult financial times, and we therefore support the move by the University of Edinburgh in particular to fixed or pre-announced stepped fees for international students.

Marco Biagi is right: in the case of non-EU international students, there is merit in making the costs of study for the whole of the degree programme open and transparent at the time that the student applies. That would certainly be a great help to international students in managing their finances. I am sure—knowing how they work—that other universities are well aware of the lead that the University of Edinburgh has taken, and that they will be thinking about what they can do to match or even exceed that good example.

It is right that colleges can make their own decisions about that, and not have them imposed. However, charging whatever fees they like would not be precisely what they would want because there is, to be blunt, competition between colleges, and anybody who was completely out of line would not get students to attend. I agree that there needs to be openness and transparency at the time of application. Sudden changes to the amounts that are charged—in the midst of a course—are unacceptable. That is bad practice. I hope that, in future, all those who charge international students recognise that and, as I say, follow the University of Edinburgh’s lead.

Based on the previous significant figures received from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service on applications to higher education courses in academic year 2012-13, the number of applicants to higher education institutions in Scotland increased by 0.1 per cent. The number of applicants to higher education institutions in England decreased by 8.6 per cent, compared with a 9.9 per cent decrease for institutions in Wales, and a 0.3 per cent increase for institutions in Northern Ireland.

My good friend and Argyll neighbour Mike MacKenzie will not be surprised to hear that I agree whole-heartedly with him. He is absolutely right on that issue. Scotland is one of the few countries in Europe that is investing more in higher education. That is the foundation of our long-standing success, and it is one of the reasons for the world-class quality of what we deliver. Education should be available to people based on their ability to learn, not their ability to pay. By so doing, we are investing in the future of our entire society.

Alistair Darling?

Assuming that the member means the west college region, which includes those communities that are currently covered by Reid Kerr College in Paisley, Clydebank College and the Inverclyde campus of James Watt College, the number of female students expressed as a full-time equivalent has declined by 0.2 per cent between 2006-07 and 2010-11, the latest year for which published figures are available. That represents a reduction of 16, again expressed as a full-time equivalent.

I have just given the member the figure of 0.2 per cent between 2006-07 and 2010-11—a reduction of 16. I agreed with the good point that was made by Alison Johnstone last week that we need to be eternally vigilant on this matter and do everything that we can to ensure that women continue to be—and they are—a majority of college students. Those are the facts, but we will always work hard to continue to ensure the best opportunities for everybody, particularly for women who may be disadvantaged.

There has been a considerable improvement in that matter over recent years and I hope that there will continue to be so. Skills Development Scotland publishes management information on the modern apprenticeship programme on its website, broken down by framework, age of apprentice and gender. In 2011-12, I am pleased to say that 43 per cent of modern apprentices supported by the Scottish Government through SDS were female.

On Tuesday, I apologised to the chamber for the answer that I gave to Mr Malik on 28 June. I repeat that apology now. The mistake should not have happened and I take full responsibility for it, but I do not believe that it should be allowed to distract us from the real issues facing our young people and our further education sector. Larry Flanagan of the Educational Institute of Scotland suggested last weekend that all of us should move on to discuss those issues. That was a wise suggestion then and it is even wiser now. According to the BBC’s Seonag Mackinnon, a similar point was made by Unison when it asked that the debate focus on “places and college services rather than a political bunfight over who said what to whom.” Today, I want to talk about the continuing achievements of colleges in providing the economically relevant learning and training that people need to get a job, to prosper and to contribute to the future of our country. That is what the post-16 reform programme will achieve.

Could I just make a little bit of progress? I want to encourage a genuine dialogue that seeks to intensify our national focus on meeting the genuine needs of our learners.

I do, and I shall explain that in my speech. I thank the member for his intervention. In having the type of debate that we have to have, we must start by recognising that the current context is one that certainly makes change difficult, but also makes it essential. Such change is taking place throughout these islands; indeed, I note from today’s Irish Independent the headline “No extra cash for colleges without reform”, which is a quote from the Irish Minister for Education and Skills, Ruairi Quinn. There will be different solutions in different places but the problems are very similar. However, this debate—and I—must also be mindful of the events of the past fortnight in this place and elsewhere. I accept the point made by Liam McArthur during the week that this renewed focus on further education should give the Government and the Parliament an opportunity to consider our approach afresh, to assure ourselves that our aims are capable of being met and to look at changes of style or substance as required. That is why I was keen to agree to having a debate today, as suggested originally by Mr McArthur. As minister, I have engaged closely with the college sector over the past year—that has been crucial in delivering the reforms that have taken place so far—but I want to scale up that effort and to listen even more as we go forward. Let us start with priorities. My priority is education and opportunity based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. Liz Smith is entirely entitled to argue, as she did in the debate last week, that extra funding should be found for colleges by charging university students for their education. I profoundly disagree with that position and I think that the evidence from south of the border bears out the contention that such an approach drives out the poorest students and those least likely to go to university. Applications to study at university are down by more than 20 per cent in parts of the United Kingdom, with a drop of 10,000 in the number of young people applying from the north-east of England. Applications from Scottish students, meanwhile, are marginally up. However, there is a another strong reason why I do not believe that this is an appropriate approach for Scotland and Scotland’s college sector. The illustration is this—the National Union of Students correctly highlights that from next year, those in England aged 24 or over who want to take a level 3 apprenticeship can look forward to the prospect of having to take out a loan to go to work. That is not a situation that I want to see imported into Scotland. Here, our fee waiver and tuition fee support regime make the situation vastly preferable, to the benefit of tens of thousands of our college students. Indeed, figures from the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills make it clear that budgets for FE in England were projected to fall by £200 million between 2011-12 and 2012-13. That is a projected fall of 5 per cent, compared with the actual fall in Scotland of 1.7 per cent.

Can I just make some progress, please? I have a lot to say and I will bring the member in. Yes, funding is tight and decisions are hard, so how we react to them is crucial. We have to ensure that college funding is able to support the tasks that we really need to be done in Scotland. I will briefly outline those tasks. In last week’s debate, I identified five areas in which college reform was needed. First, reform has to help young people. We need to focus our system much more closely on employability and we need more courses that are fully focused on employment as the outcome—that is demanded by the economic circumstances that we are in. The sector therefore needs to help employers more. They require courses and students who are better prepared for, and ready to undertake, actual work. We must also be mindful of those who work in the sector. There is presently a complete Balkanisation of terms and conditions, with at least 42 different sets. I am keen to continue my dialogue with trade unions on those matters, and I commit myself to that. I think that the reforms will ultimately benefit staff; I know that many of them, while disagreeing with some or all aspects of change, concur with that view. For a start, staff will have the right to representation on boards and there should be a national set of terms and conditions—two things that are long overdue. Our present system, established by the Tories 20 years ago, also excludes local authority employees and elected members from chairing boards, and precludes those over 70 from appointment. It creates circumstances in which boards can become self-perpetuating, sometimes because they just cannot find new blood. We need to open them up to much wider influences. Finally, that also means taking a wider strategic view. The college sector must serve communities and regions and be mindful of the need for joined-up provision.

The strategy, as ever, is to continue to deliver for the young people of Scotland; that is my focus, and it will continue to be my focus. Within that context, though, there is much that needs to change. I recognise the difficulties caused by reform taking place at a time of budget pressure, which is a point that has been made. Despite the difficult financial position that we face over the spending review, the Scottish Government has added to the baseline budget for the sector: in 2011-12, we found an additional £11 million; in 2012-13, there was a further £39.5 million; and for 2013-14, we have already provided £17 million. Overall, we have improved the situation by returning to college budgets some £67.5 million over those three years. That is £67.5 million that we have managed to avoid cutting. I intend to continue with those efforts into 2014-15, if I can.

I think that I have laid out those figures to the best of my ability—[Interruption.]

As I said, I laid out those figures to the best of my ability. Answers were given to members by the First Minister today, and I am endeavouring to ensure that we understand the objectives that we have and how we are trying to pay for them. I say to Mr Brown that that is what I am trying to do. The approach of seeking in-year revision to try to assist differentiates the Scottish National Party Government from its predecessors, which ran up huge underspends in a time of plenty. We are faced with a situation in which every penny of public money must be put to good use in times of dearth. We must retain our focus on the reform programme and the improvements that it will bring.

It is sometimes hard to remember, because there were so many crises under Labour. I point out that reform is essential. I would have thought, given the fondness of Labour for a reform agenda, that it might have seen that. However, let me carry on. The first key measure that the college sector must look at is the volume of learning, not the headcount, important though that can be, because it varies from year to year for many reasons. Together with innovative, employer-facing provision delivered through Skills Development Scotland, we are maintaining the overall volume of learning, but of course the detail of delivery will change from place to place. I know that that task has required huge effort from college staff and management. However, in a sector that has been largely unreformed for two decades, we have found the capacity to maintain the overall volume of learning, despite the budget reductions.

No, I am sorry. I must make some progress. The colleges have achieved what they have—and I pay tribute to them—because, as the Auditor General for Scotland’s report shows, they have a record level of reserves, which was over £200 million at the end of 2010-11. I have been gratified that so many of those who lead and govern the sector have understood and respected our decisions and have used their own resources to move forward, even though they may have disagreed with aspects of what was being proposed. College sector reform—I repeat this—is therefore not only necessary, but possible. There is and there remains a compelling case for change. However, I accept that no Government, whatever its majority and its hue, can inspire sustainable change without dialogue with and the ability to work alongside those who lead, who govern, who teach and who study. Regionalisation, which is at the very heart of our changes, is about improving the prospects for those who study, who teach and who lead, and it is driven most of all not by geography but by the need to deliver for all communities. I mentioned the volume of learning as the key measure of performance, but there is another key measure, and that is the quality and economic relevance of what is delivered. Let me paint two quick scenarios. In the first scenario, colleges see the need to use their resources to deliver a high volume of short or part-time courses that respond to particular social, cultural or economic demands. In the second scenario, which is the relevant one during a recession, colleges decide that the priority for both the learner and the economy is to use the resource more intensively by offering a higher proportion of full-time courses to meet a strategic employment imperative. We have moved, in a number of years, from the first scenario to the second. Those who are preoccupied solely with headcount fail to understand that. Of course colleges should be inclusive; they should work with those who are furthest from the labour market—and I have seen that clearly at John Wheatley College. Colleges should ensure that those with learning and other difficulties are assisted. I discussed that matter with the cross-party group on learning disability and I am keen to see the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council take it forward in outcome agreements. There are other bodies and schemes that deliver training, and my colleague Angela Constance is deeply involved with those. There are ways in which we need to bring together those schemes with the third sector, private training providers, colleges and SDS. Above it all, and surrounding it all, is the opportunities for all initiative, through which we strive to ensure that every young person is offered a place in education or training if they are not in work. That is a unique offer that is being made by this Government. I will touch briefly on two other issues. On mergers, I will approve no merger unless I am satisfied that the legitimate interests of all those affected—learners, employers, staff and the community—have been taken into account. The mergers that are being explored are the results of decisions by the governing body of each institution. They do produce significant benefits. According to the SFC, the savings will exceed £50 million by the academic year 2014-15. They bring overdue efficiency to a sector that retained its former configuration for too long. We have seen that at the City of Glasgow College and I am confident that we will see the same following the merger of the rural colleges and the creation of the new multi-campus Edinburgh college. The Government has been challenged to reform our public services to meet the demands of the future. The independent budget review, which now guides the policy of the Labour Party, highlighted the number of colleges across Scotland and challenged us across the public sector to “encourage progressive changes and joint action between public bodies to produce new and more effective service delivery models.” That is precisely what we are doing. I also want to touch on the reform and renewal of the college estate, because there has been a transformation. When we came into office in 2007, a number of redevelopments were under way. I am glad that they were undertaken by our predecessors, and we have carried on that good work. However, that good work, be it in Dundee, Fraserburgh, Thurso, Glasgow, Inverness or Kilmarnock, will also have an effect on how services are delivered. I want to mention one more thing that we can do. In his review of college governance, Professor Russel Griggs asked us to establish a strategic forum in the sector. I am going to put that into practice. The initial membership of the forum will be the chairs and regional leads, and I will meet them shortly to listen to their views of how the Scottish Government should take forward the programme of reform—yes, in the light of the issues that have been raised in recent weeks. I hope, in time, to expand the forum, listening to those people and bringing in other views and voices. Indeed, if the Opposition spokespeople want to meet the forum at any stage for discussion, I will be happy to facilitate that once it is up and running. Presiding Officer, I do not claim, and you know that I do not claim, to be a shrinking violet or a model of perfection. I am committed to getting the best for the students, young people, learners, staff and others in all the sectors for which I am responsible. The joint amendment from Labour, the Tories and the Lib Dems has some positive aspects. The proposers might have found me willing to accept it if it were it not for the political pejoratives within it. I am passionate about education and about working with others who share the same passion. Education changes lives, transforms prospects, opens up opportunities and creates new worlds. Our college sector is achieving much, but it can achieve more. Change is challenging, but it is essential. In moving my motion, I say this to the other parties, to the Parliament, to the sector, to students and to Scotland: I want to ensure that we do the best by every learner. I ask everyone in the chamber and in the sector to be part of that. I will listen to them and work with them to achieve such progress. Let us not be distracted from that aim. I move, That the Parliament recognises the key role that colleges and their staff play in supporting Scotland’s young people, communities and the economy; further recognises their substantial commitment to regionalisation, including the mergers in Edinburgh and Lothians and Scotland’s rural colleges; further recognises that college provision is being prioritised to better address economic needs and support young people at risk of unemployment; welcomes the commitment of the Scottish Government to maintaining both the volume of teaching and full-time equivalent student numbers, including through in-year additional budget support; further welcomes the continuing renewal of the college estate, demonstrated in new facilities delivered or planned at Stirling, Dundee, Alloa, Fraserburgh, Inverness, Kilmarnock and Glasgow, and supports the protection of the college student support budget in 2012-13.

I also said in reply to the tweet that, if the college emailed me, I would give it a fuller account. I am still happy to do so. I made the point in last week’s debate and I have said several times—possibly even in committee—that there is a difference between full-time equivalent numbers and head count. We cannot simply go by head count—we must deal with full-time equivalents. I am happy to explain that again, and I will do so.

I think that, among people who have watched this afternoon’s debate at home, the commonest view will be that the debate has been unpleasant, not just for me but for the Parliament, the sector and the country. It has been unpleasant for the Parliament because people watching from the outside did not get—except from SNP members—the focus on places, colleges and services that Unison, for example, wanted; instead, what they got from the Opposition parties was the political bun fight that they said they did not want. It has been unpleasant for the sector because of substantial misrepresentation—for political purposes—of what is taking place. I have had a substantial number of letters and phone calls from people in the sector in the past couple of weeks. I have not made anything of it, because I stand by my decisions. I have not asked the permission of people to quote them but I will quote two without their permission. I will not name them; perhaps later they will want to stand up. One letter says: “You and I have had a number of, from my perspective, valuable discussions which I hope, have in part, formed your thinking. I am sure you will agree it is always valuable to have such constructive and challenging views.” Another says: “If it is any small comfort to you as someone who is leading that change process, there are a number of leaders within the sector who are supporters of reform, who understand the need and crucially how to enact sustainable positive change. It is deeply regretful that given the behaviour and attitudes of a few, changes in legislation may be the only way forward.” I appreciate those views—

No, I am not giving way—and I give notice that I will not give way in this speech because I want to cover a lot of ground. A lot of ground has already been covered in the debate. More widely, there is substantial support for change within the system. I was intrigued to hear Liam McArthur quote the chair of Angus College; indeed, I was even more intrigued to hear Jenny Marra’s assertion of what is being thought in Angus College about change. On 14 August 2012, the principal of Angus College said, on his own website: “I am delighted the past year has proven to be our most successful year to date but we are approaching a new era and our over-riding aim is to build on our strengths and deliver the best service to our communities. We will continue to improve lives by realising our aspirations and by achieving excellence in learning, facilities and leadership. We look to the future with ambition in our eyes.” Despite what we have heard, that is the view of Angus College. This has also been a disappointing debate for the country, because the people looking at this will be saying: “Is that it? Is that all the Scottish Parliament can do?” After the Scottish Parliament heard full and comprehensive apologies not just from me but from the First Minister, what we have seen actually dishonours the whole process. [Interruption.]

As the First Minister rightly pointed out today, this is I think the only Parliament in the world that would not take and accept an apology but would endeavour to carry on with the process for what are entirely political reasons. If the Opposition parties in this Parliament wish to have a dialectic or debate that is intolerant of every error of fact, they had better start looking at their own contributions this very day. I am not just talking about the contribution from the leader of the Tories regarding all those courses that apparently no longer exist—but which, of course, do exist. We also need to look at some other issues that have arisen today. If members want a purely factual debate, I suggest that a number who have made contributions in this chamber should check the Official Report very carefully indeed. I draw Gavin Brown’s attention to last week’s Official Report, in which he talks about “a 6 per cent real-terms cut to the Scottish DEL budget”.—[Official Report, 14 November 2012; c 13469.] He will want to check whether in actual fact he said the same thing today. I am also extremely keen to see Mr Kelly justify his assertions about the number and cost of spin doctors. Fortunately, the chamber knows the means by which corrections can be made. Members can follow the lead of SNP members in being sure to make corrections, and I hope that that they will do just that. The key moment in this debate—[Interruption.]

The key moment in this debate was not simply the repetition of my own apology; it was not even my invitation for others to join in. The key moment was this: I announced in my speech a new strategic forum, indicated how I would start it off and expand it and invited the Opposition spokespeople to meet with it to find a means by which we could learn from the processes of the past few weeks. Not a single response came from a Opposition spokesperson—not one. There were many protestations of support for change but, when the opportunity existed to take part in that process and, indeed, possibly, in their own terms to correct it, answer came there none. When I heard those protestations of support for change, I was reminded of the words of the late Donnie Stewart, who talked about giving assistance short of actual help. There is no support for reform in this chamber apart from on these benches, and that was obvious today. There were one or two deeply unpleasant moments. I have to say that the worst of them, which was pointed out by my colleagues to my right, came when Mr Colin Beattie raised the issue of Westminster cuts. What happened—and I hope that the record shows it—was that Mr Findlay and the Labour front benches found it immensely amusing, almost as amusing as the Tories found it. So we know that Labour’s attitude to Westminster cuts is to laugh at them with the Tories. That tells us so much. [Laughter.] Go on and laugh at it.

Go on and laugh at it—[Interruption.]

Something else happened in today’s debate that was significant in respect of the Labour Party: today gave the absolute lie to Labour being a party of honest reform. This was its chance to step up to the plate, to say, “Yes, as the independent budget review said, it is right to look at the issue of colleges. Let’s work together to make the necessary change.” That would have been the honest thing to do. However, Labour is without courage and without honesty. Today’s debate also gave the lie to the Tory passion for colleges, because there are cuts south of the border and there are fees south of the border. I admire Liz Smith—I have worked well with her on a whole range of education issues—and I was disappointed by the personal nature of her speech, which put politics before education. Inevitably, I was also disappointed by the Lib Dem speeches—particularly by the tone of Liam McArthur’s speech. If he reads my opening speech, he will realise that I accepted issues that he had raised. He did not seem to accept a single issue that I raised. People say that he is a reasonable man; we did not see much sign of that reasonableness today. I hope that on reflection he will realise that the way forward is to work as a chamber to make sure that we get this right, rather than to score points. I want to deal with one or two substantive points as I conclude. In-year revisions have added £67.5 million, and that is real help for the sector. There was no acknowledgement at all from Opposition members that that is money that is helping the sector. There are benefits for staff from the reorganisations: representation is being guaranteed for the first time as well as a single set of terms and conditions. I indicated in my opening speech a willingness to continue to discuss that and I want to do so. Mr Findlay never even mentioned it. There is a focus on student support and I am disappointed that the Tories have criticised it, because the NUS has argued strongly and cogently for exactly the system that we are putting in place. On the issue of learning disability, at least I have met the group. Mr Findlay made a whole series of assertions and I hope that he feels foolish after the intervention of Joan McAlpine, who spoke from real experience of the subject. I want to thank Alison Johnstone, who made a sensible suggestion and is passionate about the issue of women’s education. I am happy to work with her and I think that she is a reasonable person who will want to work with me to make sure that this takes place, because her speech was one of the more reasonable ones. The debate was about young people and about progress for young people, yet the word cloud for today’s debate—particularly from Labour members—will tell you something. Mentions of me or of “cabinet secretary” or of who I am that were made: by Neil Bibby, 17; Patricia Ferguson, 15; James Kelly, 10; John Pentland, 11; and Jenny Marra, 6. That tells you what Labour is about: Labour is not about young people; it is about the politics of this and trying to score political points. As I said at the beginning, people watching the debate at home will have said to themselves—quite justifiably, given the nature of the debate—“What on earth is going on?” [Laughter.] Yes—[Interruption.]

“What on earth is going on?” they will have said, and they will have watched what just happened and said it again. I will tell you what is going on. First of all, I am going on. This Government is going on. The process of reform is going on. The work to increase opportunity in Scotland is going on. The fight against Westminster cuts is going on and I believe that the more the Opposition behaves as it has done this afternoon, the more the cause of independence goes on.

Presiding Officer, with your permission, I first wish to apologise to the whole chamber for the answer that I gave to Mr Malik on 28 June. I said that there was no reduction in funding for colleges in the financial year 2012-13. However, when all the budget revisions are included, the revised 2012-13 budget is £9.3 million lower than the budget for the previous year. I should have immediately recognised that the answer that I gave was not right. I did not—I apologise for that to the whole chamber and, in particular, to Mr Malik. Turning to Mr Henry’s question, as members know, I wrote to the convener of the Education and Culture Committee on 18 October setting out the accurate budget figures, including all revisions. That, I hope, reassures members that my answer to Mr Malik was a genuine mistake. The figures for college budgets that were originally published as part of the spending review in September 2011 have, of course, been revised at various points since then as a result of budget decisions by this Parliament. Those revisions have sought to help the college sector by adding additional funding to the baseline budget in 2011-12 and in 2012-13. I shall go on seeking ways to help in-year as I always have. As the First Minister has set out, last week’s inaccurate information was based not on an overstatement of spending in 2012-13 but on an understatement of spending in 2011-12. However, let me be clear: even after the additional funding is added in, the revised revenue budget is still falling. I acknowledged that in my evidence to the Education and Culture Committee on 23 October and in the debate last week, and I do so here again today. At the weekend, Larry Flanagan of the Educational Institute of Scotland encouraged all of us to focus on the substantive issues that are facing colleges, including funding. On that basis, I welcome the proposed debate this Thursday on Scotland’s colleges and the regionalisation process that is currently under way. I make it clear again that my apology is full and unreserved. It is to the whole chamber, including to Mr Henry. It should not have happened.

In response to Mr Henry’s request for a statement, I have indicated not only that I am responding to his question and issuing a full and unreserved apology, but that there will also be a full debate at the request of the Liberal Democrats on Thursday, in which we will have the opportunity to debate all the issues surrounding college funding and regionalisation. I shall be entirely open in that debate, as I am now. Matters of the ministerial code are not for me but for the First Minister.

The answer that I gave on 28 June was given in good faith. I have apologised for that answer, as it was erroneous. I have apologised twice for that answer in this statement, and I apologise again for that answer. It was certainly given in good faith. In terms of the debate and discussion of this issue, I made it clear last week—I said so in my statement—and in my evidence on 23 October, and I make it clear again, that I have always acknowledged that the budget would fall over the spending review period. That is what I said, and it is why I have worked so hard to get in-year additions within the budget. Those in-year revisions have been designed to help the situation, and I will continue to seek them.

I can confirm the first part of that, which is to say that the figure is correct. However, I would also say—I indicated this in my statement and do so again now—that there have been in-year revisions. For example, the figure in the following year was raised by, I think, £39.5 million, and revisions will continue to take place for next year. Indeed, those are indicated in the figures issued to the Education and Culture Committee. It is also indicated that there remain sums that have not yet been allocated but which I hope to allocate to the college sector after discussion. I am happy to confirm that the figure of £555 million is accurate—I think that it is £555.7 million—but I continue to seek in-year revisions as I have always done in order to ensure that as much as possible is spent on the college sector.

As I made clear in my answer, last week’s inaccurate information was based not on an overstatement of spending in 2012-13 but on an understatement of spending in 2011-12. That understatement of spending was, I think, of the nature of £9.3 million. The figure is at the root of this matter, and it is an understatement of what we actually spent on the college sector. I continue to offer my sincere apologies, particularly to Mr Malik. However, I think that that places a context for those figures that at least needs to be understood.

I can only say to Mr Bibby what I have said to the whole chamber, which I repeat: my mistake was a genuine one, for which I apologise. I am sorry that, as yet, that apology has not been accepted by members of the Labour Party, but it is meant for them as well as for everyone else in the chamber.

I shall certainly consider that matter, Presiding Officer. [Interruption.]

I am grateful that the member has acknowledged the apology that I have made to him and to the whole chamber; I hope that he will recognise that it was a genuine mistake that I made. I am entirely happy to take part in the debate that he has called for. During that debate, we will have the chance to discuss a range of issues to do with regionalisation. I remind Mr McArthur, along with the rest of the chamber, of the words of Larry Flanagan of the EIS, who encouraged all of us to focus on the substantive issues that colleges face. I believe that that is what we should do, and that is what I will try to do.

I provided the member, along with all other members of the Education and Culture Committee, with the accurate figures—they were provided in a letter dated 18 October. I acknowledged the fact that the funding was falling over the spending review period in my evidence to that committee. I have reread that evidence, and it is quite clear that I was—as I remain—at pains to have a full discussion of the issues of college funding and the way in which we can take forward what are necessary but difficult reforms in the sector. I apologise for that mistake; I also apologise for the effect that it will have on debating the issue, which Larry Flanagan has drawn attention to. I am very keen that we continue to debate seriously the changes that must take place in Scotland’s college sector so that we can focus on the needs of and the opportunities for young people.

Mr Brown must recognise that, in dealing with the college and university sectors, there is a difference between academic years and financial years. That is reflected in the figures, but the figures as provided are accurate.

I am informed by the Student Awards Agency for Scotland that there were 26,335 students studying HE-level courses at colleges in 2011-12. They are the ones who would be adversely affected by any change in the fee regime.

Apart from the last minute of the speech by Liz Smith, I commend her for bringing the motion to the chamber. The measured tone in which she addressed the issue was entirely appropriate. I have profound differences with her on the issue, which I will outline, along with the strong reasons why we needed reform in the sector and the strong reasons why that reform is producing and will produce the results that we need. I regret that Liz Smith lapsed into the negativity that she did in her last minute. I expect a great deal of negativity from Labour members—indeed, I woke up this morning to hear some extraordinary negativity on the radio and to read it in the newspapers. An astonishing accusation was made. I do not know whether members know this, but according to Claire Baker it is a Scottish Government minister who is responsible for the ash dieback disease. I have looked it up and I discover that it is actually caused by a fungus on fruited bodies, that infected trees die and that it is spread on clothing, on footwear or by vehicles from Europe. However, according to Labour it is the Scottish National Party’s fault. Let us focus on the realities of college funding and delivery and then we might make progress, because there is a debate to be had. I believe that the college sector should deliver for Scotland—the college sector that we inherited did not deliver for Scotland. The college sector failed five groups of people and it is important to recognise that. First, it failed employers because the outcomes of the courses were not focused on employment. There were, bluntly, too many hobby courses and far too few courses were focused on employment. The sector failed those who worked in the college sector because the balkanisation of the sector, with 42 different sets of terms and conditions, allowed division. It requires a single set of terms and conditions. It failed local authorities that wanted to join up with the college sector and were not allowed to do so—indeed, in some areas they were not allowed to do so by a statute that was put in place in 1992. It failed communities because many of the college boards were self-perpetuating. There was no fresh blood in them and those boards were not reflective of the wider communities. Finally—most important of all—the sector failed students. It was not meeting the objectives that students had; it was not providing the learner journey that they needed; it was not producing clear progression routes; and it was not producing better links to schools, universities and employers. We needed a reform that produced colleges of scale and efficiency, focusing on the needs of the economy. That is what I said a year ago when I introduced the reform process, that is what we are focused on now and that is what we have had overwhelming support for in the college sector. I find it a surprising argument from a Conservative to say that we should have continued with a sector in which there was clear evidence of duplication and of inefficiency and waste. That is the argument that I have heard, and it is utterly wrong.

No. I want to make progress, Mr Findlay, please. The sector could perform better and it will perform better. It can have confident learners leaving college with the right qualifications. We need, and we have had already, a 9 per cent increase in full-time learners at advanced level. We have more intensive full-time courses delivering high-level skills. Completion rates are now rising—they were unacceptably low—because we have undertaken these reforms and we are in the process of creating one of the most responsive college sectors in the world. Scotland is a hotbed— Liz Smith rose— One moment, please. Scotland is a hotbed of potential and talent and the changes will allow that talent to thrive. I accept that access is of key importance and I welcome scrutiny on access. Colleges are open to all, regardless of background, as indeed is the whole of Scottish education—although proposals from the Tories and indeed from Labour would stop that happening, as we know from evidence south of the border. We have kept the student support budget at a record £95.6 million for the second year running.

I have made it clear in my discussions with the sector, as has the Scottish funding council, that we want to ensure that the widest range of students is retained, and the outcome agreements can take care of that. I will come on to that in a moment. We have kept the student support budget at a record level. Unfortunately, access has been subjected to meaningless statements and baseless assertions. Saying that there is no room for young people in Scottish education is a false message to them, but that message is going out from some members. I will say why. Let us start with headcount. We must understand that headcount statistics are volatile. Headcount is a very poor measure. It fluctuates, depending not on funding, but on how colleges spread teaching activity because of their local focus. The most accurate measure is and always has been full-time equivalent student numbers. Unlike in universities or schools, around three quarters of college students were, until recently, part time. If we consider full-time equivalent numbers expressed in that way, we have maintained student numbers. We have also maintained the volume of teaching. The fixation on headcount has another problem, as it says that quality is not relevant, and job prospects and key employment skills are not the priority—rather, it is just about keeping numbers high. That is a never-mind-the-quality-feel-the-width approach. My opponents appear unconcerned about the type of head that is counted. They put together someone on an intensive full-time engineering course, which is one head, and someone on a short recreational course, which is another head. A college’s value cannot be determined by the speed with which it wheels large numbers in and large numbers out. We have to end that merry-go-round. That is what employers and others have told me, and that is what we are trying to do.

No, I do not accept that. I said to Liz Smith in the committee when she asked me that question that the figures are quite clear on where we are. Where we are is quite clear from the baseline figures, and the additional money that we have added in every single year is quite clear. We are going through a complex process of change, but we are focused on getting the maximum value for public money. I would have thought that we would have support for that activity across the chamber.

I am very fond of Mary Scanlon, but she really should have been at the meeting at which that matter was discussed. It was quite clear that we are taking forward the answers to those very questions, as the sector is. There are real answers to those questions in the outcome agreement. If Mary Scanlon would like to meet me to discuss the college sector, I would be delighted to discuss that with her. We cannot focus on “facts” that are not true or misleading statistics, but we can focus on what colleges are doing. That is why the outcome agreements are so important. We are not only putting in place a reformed sector; we are putting in place a very clear understanding of what that sector does. It delivers for the whole of Scotland. The message to young people is that opportunity exists for them. Young people have many opportunities, and young people are in the opportunities for all scheme. I want to conclude on that issue, as it is very significant. The debate is being handled as if colleges are the only thing for young people across Scotland. That is another fallacy that is being peddled. I am very proud of the fact that the Government has put in place the opportunities for all scheme, which says that every young person will have a job, a place in education or a place in training. That gives the lie to almost everything that we will hear from Opposition parties this afternoon. There is an opportunity for every young person. That has never been guaranteed in Scotland before. We have made the offer of an opportunity for every young person during the worst economic crisis in living memory and the cuts that Labour started and Liberals and the Tories have progressed. We are delivering it in a variety of ways through Skills Development Scotland and the colleges, and through a reformed college sector, which is the sector that will deliver for the future of Scotland—that is absolutely essential. During the process of the past year, I had hoped that people would read the documentation, look at what is taking place, see the enthusiasm in the sector for constructive change and go with that change. Regrettably and unfortunately, all that the Opposition parties can do is resist change. That is true conservatism from the Conservatives and true conservatism, as ever, from Labour in Scotland. The reality is that we are delivering the change that is needed in Scotland. I hope that members might one day wake up and back that. I move amendment S4M-04787.2, to leave out from “extending” to end and insert: “the Scottish Government’s proposals for the reform of a college sector that has been neglected for far too long by previous administrations; welcomes in particular the regionalisation of the sector, leading to the creation of new institutions of significant scale, reputation and efficiency that are better able to identify and address the skills needs of the regional economy, and further recognises the guarantee, unique in these islands, that the Scottish Government has given to every 16 to 19-year-old not already in education, employment or training, of an offer of a place in learning or training.”

That is what you do.

I do not recognise the allegation that I said that there was no waiting list. I said that waiting list figures could not be relied on because they do not tell us—[Interruption.] If I could continue, Presiding Officer—the figures do not reflect what is taking place. The member should also note that The Herald said that the 21,000 figure could not be relied on, so she should be cautious about using it. That is in The Herald story.

It is. [Interruption.]

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Let me put this as gently as I can: the member knows that south of the border 25,000 university places have been lost because of the fees that have been imposed, and the evidence is also clear that the majority of the people deterred are from the lowest-income groups. His proposal would narrow access to education.

Not culture.

Will the member give way?

I take the opportunity to say that I have never said that there were no cuts, so the member has misrepresented me. There have been cuts, and they were necessary because of the financial pressure that was started by Labour and continued by the Tories and Lib Dems. However, despite what the member is saying, we will end up with a better sector.

A point that I made at the beginning of my speech and which a number of members raised in the debate—and which I now make again seriously—is that when we look at college numbers we have to look not at headcount but at full-time equivalents. Only when we look at full-time equivalents do we get a figure for those who are going to college. A failure to do that completely distorts the figures.

The Scottish Government believes that, like any other sector, the college sector needs to be led and governed by people of the highest quality and standards. Chief among their attributes must always be mutual trust and respect. The Scottish Government expect all those who lead and govern our colleges to conduct themselves consistently with that approach.

The issue is that, in a meeting of chairs and principals, a recording was made with a surreptitious device. Alas, nobody was told that the meeting was being recorded and no permission was sought from anybody who was present. That has led to a breakdown in the relationship that should exist between the individual concerned and not just me but many of his colleagues.

I am glad to say that the meeting in question was very positive, as are most of my meetings with the college sector. We are engaged in a process of radical reform in which it is important that all parts of the sector debate and discuss what should take place. Anything that diminishes those debates, such as surreptitious and secret recording, is to be regretted. Having said that, I am gratified by the messages of support and encouragement that I have had in recent days from principals, chairs and many others in the sector. I am confident that the collaborative efforts that we are making to change the college sector for the good—not for individuals but for young people in the sector—is on course.

There is no dispute between the cabinet secretary, the Government or anybody else and Stow College or its staff, students or board. The matter relates to the conduct of one individual—that is where the dispute occurred.

I have no dispute with any college or board. As I have indicated, my dispute is with an individual. It would therefore have been inappropriate for me to meet the board to discuss the issue. I met the chair. I also point out that I have no power to demand any individuals’ resignation. I pointed out to the individual concerned that the relationship of trust between us had broken down, and I asked him to reflect on that. I have no power to remove anybody from any position in the college sector. Indeed, all power of direction to the college sector was removed by a Labour minister some years ago.

I welcome Anne McTaggart’s question, because my firm hope is that all members will come to understand that waiting lists, which are maintained by colleges for administrative and course-specific purposes, were never intended to and cannot constitute a national means of determining sector-wide demand for places. Many people will appear on more than one list and some lists might contain people who have taken up another place in education or employment or who might otherwise have lost interest. The idea that one can measure demand simply by aggregating such diverse lists in every subject in every college is wholly misleading. That said, I hope that Anne McTaggart and I can agree on the importance of clearly understanding the process used by colleges in handling applications for places and moving towards the collection of much better quality data on college applications. With that in mind, I intend to undertake an audit of the whole process of college applications, including a detailed examination of Scotland’s Colleges’s data and methodology, to ensure that it delivers maximum benefit for Scotland’s young people.

I am sorry that the member did not listen to my answer. It is always a mistake to write the supplementary before hearing the answer. I repeat what I said, which is that some lists may contain people who have taken up another place in education or employment or have otherwise lost interest. The idea that you can measure demand simply by aggregating diverse lists on every subject in every college is wholly misleading. To be fair to The Herald story and to be fair to the statistics that Scotland’s Colleges sent to The Herald, even those involved acknowledged the problems and said that they did not believe that 21,280 people were on waiting lists. That is why—I said this in my original answer, but I am happy to say it again—I intend to undertake an audit of college applications and a detailed examination of the methodology and the data used by Scotland’s Colleges, because we need to ensure that what we are doing is serving Scotland’s young people, not trying to use very doubtful data for political purposes, which is what we have just heard.

There has been considerable discussion with colleges over many years about how they improve their data collection and their processes for application. We need to balance local measures and the local method of application with much greater clarity about what the national data is. I therefore welcome the member’s suggestion. I intend to remove the scope for confusion by means of the work that we plan with colleges, which I have just outlined. I hope that that will lead to an agreement across the college sector—the reformed college sector, the college sector much in need of reform—that its members will work more closely together to have a better system, just as the member mentioned.

I add my voice to the welcome to Humza Yousaf in his new role. He paid tribute to his cabinet secretary for having performed a one-woman role. I have performed a similar one-man role, and I know that Humza Yousaf’s appointment is an important sign of progress in the Scottish Government towards fulfilling our many aims for international development and international relations. His enthusiasm and—I even echo Mr Stevenson in saying this—his youth are important in driving forward our desire for a better world. Humza Yousaf’s announcement today that the new funding round for Malawi is now open will be followed with enormous interest in Malawi, as the debate will be. I spoke about the debate to a number of people whom I met last week, including Her Excellency the President, and all were interested in the work that we are doing. The debate has been excellent. As Sarah Boyack said, it has shown the Parliament at its best. Members have paid warm tribute to those who started the work that has been undertaken. Members have talked about those who are not with us for one reason or another, including Karen Gillon, who took the work forward. The debate has involved the whole Parliament and its experience in looking at and deciding how we should move forward. I think that all of us will reflect on this afternoon as one of the better afternoons that we have spent in the chamber. I want to answer as many of the specific points that were raised in the debate as I can but, before I do that, let me give three snapshots from the recent visit that I made to Malawi. I regard myself as incredibly fortunate to have visited Malawi. It was also the first time that I had visited Africa, and everybody I met in Malawi said, “How wonderful—you have chosen to come here first.” I have to say that I cannot imagine going anywhere else now, so great was the experience in the warm heart of Africa. My first snapshot is of sitting in a field by a school in the Dedza highlands surrounded by the whole school and most of the local community. The school has a couple of brick-built buildings, but most of its classrooms are made from straw and reeds, with straw-and-reed roofs, and the floors are mud, upon which most of the children sit for their lessons. It was the most exciting demonstration of a school that I have seen in a long time. In addition to the mothers who sang, we heard a mock debate by some of the pupils. The subject that they debated was an extraordinary one, and one that I had not even thought of. They debated whether children who dropped out of school should be allowed to come back. They did that because the drop-out rate is enormous: the proportion of children who finish primary school is less than 35 per cent, and it is well below that for girls alone. They said that there has to be a cost involved in dropping out, but that there has to be an opportunity for every child to learn. It was a wonderfully well-balanced debate. There was a programme that listed the people who would contribute. I did not know that I was meant to say something until I saw the programme five minutes before I sat down. When I got up to speak, I did something simple. I told the story of Bruce and the spider, because the culture is based on story, legend and tradition. The purpose of doing that was to talk about the determination of each child in that school to come to school every day and the determination of the community to hold that school to itself. I have scarcely ever been as impressed as I was by the desire to learn and to drive forward in that school. Sitting among those pupils and that community and looking at the mountains around me, I realised how much people want to move forward. My second snapshot is the meeting that I had with Her Excellency Joyce Banda. She has quite a set of problems to solve. I remind members that the population of Malawi is growing exponentially. It is 15.5 million now and it will reach 23 million by 2025 and perhaps 37 million by 2050 if families continue to have, on average, six children. Poverty has increased in the past decades, and 20 per cent of people are at risk of suffering multiple deprivation. Malawi is number 171 out of the 187 countries in the world in terms of development. Its income per capita is $750 and the Government has just £80 per person to spend on all services. Maternal mortality remains very high. Some 3 million people have no access to clean drinking water and only 7 per cent of people have access to electricity. As I said, only 35 per cent of children finish primary school and less than 10 per cent go to secondary school. The rate of university access is 0.4 per cent, which is the lowest rate in Africa and the second lowest in the world. In the face of that, I met a president and her ministers who are absolutely focused on and enthused by the job that they have to do. She was utterly passionate about the issues of gender and particularly the issue of female education, and we talked about it for a great deal of our time. She wants to see progress on early years education. She is keen on the Livingstone bicentenary and on celebrating the links that we have. She was utterly intrigued by the concept of village-level renewables and how those would be taken forward. She recommended to me a book called “The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind”, which some members will know. It features the story of William Kamkwamba, who invented a windmill in his community in order to light it. It tells us a great deal about the nature of the society, but also a great deal about individual passion. My third snapshot is the story of Mary’s Meals, which Mr McGrigor mentioned, and the wonderful work that that charity is doing throughout the country. As Patricia Ferguson said, the act of feeding children each day works miracles. It makes them want to go to school because they will be fed. It makes them able to study and to do better, and it retains them in school because they are not so hungry that they have to leave school and go somewhere else to find food. It is a wonderful thing that is being done efficiently by a Scottish charity based in Argyll; indeed, Martha Payne, who has done so much for it, has been shortlisted for the Herald campaigner of the year award. I could have talked about the absolutely inspirational permaculture project that I visited, which is teaching people how to grow crops two or three times a year in a country that still thinks there is only one annual harvest; the education round table; my visit to the University of Malawi; and my discussions with agencies about the potential of renewables. However, what I want to mention is the joint permanent commission, which met in Zomba at the end of the week and which I co-chaired with the Malawian foreign minister the Hon Ephraim Chiume. I felt very much at home in Zomba—the mist was so thick, it reminded me of Tighnabruaich. However, despite the mist that came down on the hills, our discussions had incredible focus and clarity. We talked about the same web of relationships that members have been talking about this afternoon and the range of organisations that are working together: not just the Scottish Government—although that is a catalyst—but Scottish Water, Education Scotland, the Scottish Prison Service, the Scottish Police College, National Museums Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland, Historic Scotland and, as Patricia Ferguson mentioned, the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Malawi is a country that has only one psychiatrist who is licensed to practice and provide such assistance. Of course, we must not forget the work of charities and NGOs, the inspirational work by Ann Gloag among others, and the contributions made by ordinary people in Scotland. As the Official Report will show, almost everyone who spoke in this debate mentioned a charity, church or school in their constituency that has links with Malawi. The idea, after all, is to link together two nations and create a web of relationships in order to support each other. We have huge opportunities and responsibilities, and this afternoon we have all talked about how we take up those opportunities and meet those responsibilities. I want briefly to touch on some of the important points that have been raised. The issue of tourism, which was raised by Patricia Ferguson, is certainly important, and the work that Historic Scotland is carrying out with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Culture might assist in that respect. However, a great deal of infrastructure needs to be built. Patricia Ferguson also mentioned the Scottish Prison Service, which is actively considering the support that it can provide the Malawi prison service. Through its grants programme, the Scottish Government supports the Venture Trust, which is doing amazing work in Kachere juvenile prison, where the experience is exactly as members, particularly Siobhan McMahon, described. People can simply be abandoned for ever in the system. Maureen Watt highlighted the issue of mobile phone applications. It sounds counterintuitive but when, as is currently happening, apps are used on iPads in schools they can provide teaching and a consistent standard of education either where there are no teachers or where the pupil to teacher ratio might be, and is, 90 or 100:1. Maureen Watt also talked about the use of modern technology. I understand that when the first mobile phones reached Kenya 20 years ago they were regarded as ridiculous and people believed that they would never catch on. However, I have to say that the mobile phone reception in Blantyre is better than it is in mid-Argyll. Sometimes we need to leap over existing technological barriers if we are going to do things. Many members mentioned David Livingstone and the fondness with which he is regarded in the country. We should remember that the remarkable things that he did in Malawi and Africa have not been forgotten, as we will make clear in the joint celebrations that we will have next year. However, we have to build on his work and ensure that that relationship continues to grow. Many other issues were highlighted in the debate. Clare Adamson, for example, mentioned modern capacity building. In response to Claudia Beamish, I am sorry that I do not have the time to fill out what the President said about gender issues, but I can say that she and her Government are very focused on them. Secondees from the Scottish Government are working in renewables, and the climate change fund is regarded as one of the great innovations that we have introduced both in that country and in our work. The most profound speech this afternoon came from my friend Bruce Crawford, who when he talked about the relationship between the two countries mentioned, first of all, the Malawian flag. Of course, the flag has three strands, including black for the population of Malawi and red for work and struggle, with the sun rising on it, too. It is the sun rising in Malawi that matters. At the end of his speech, Mr Crawford said that we should keep trying for Malawi. The opening of the co-operation agreement between Malawi and Scotland says that we “have a long history of collaboration ... Both countries share a wish to build upon this history ... This is a reciprocal partnership based upon sharing experiences and skills. It is an opportunity to learn from each other”. Those are the words of the co-operation agreement, and they describe the nature of this debate. It has been wonderful to see Parliament and the Government united in taking forward that approach.

The Student Awards Agency for Scotland has processed approximately 150,000 applications, including the 105,405 students who applied by the guarantee date, which is 99 per cent of applications received so far. Applications continue to arrive from students who are seeking support for year 2012-13. Indeed, the Student Awards Agency anticipates about a further 7,000 late applications between now and March 2013. As of this morning, 1,272 late applications were waiting to be processed, with more applications arriving at the rate of around 50 a day. In order to clear outstanding applications, the Student Awards Agency is utilising overtime working, the contact centre opening hours have been extended and staff have been redeployed to help in the effort.

I did, indeed, announce a new and simplified student support system on 22 August, which will come into effect from next year. That will replace with just four levels of award the literally dozens of confusing combinations of bursaries and loans that are currently available. It will also, by providing non-income-assessed support, remove the need for approximately 20,000 students to provide evidence of their household income. Meanwhile, David Wallace, who is the deputy chief executive of the Student Loans Company, will at the invitation of SAAS work with it to review the processes for dealing with late and incomplete applications, with a view to further improving those improvements.

That is absolutely crucial. Mr Adam is right to identify the guarantee date and late applications as key issues. The introduction of the guarantee date, which ensures that students’ applications are processed before their course begins, is a significant improvement. More than 100,000 students have taken advantage of that innovation—as I said earlier, that number is 105,405 students. However, it is also true that in September—a matter of weeks before courses start—new applications were still arriving at SAAS at the rate of 600 to 700 a day. The guarantee date has operated for three years. We give it wide publicity on the SAAS website, in documentation and in the 300-plus visits that the Student Awards Agency undertakes to schools and other institutions. We will go on encouraging students to get their applications in in good time. I am always happy to look at what more we can do to ensure that that takes place.

That was not a question, Presiding Officer, but let me deal with the facts that Mr Henry raised. First, every university and college has discretionary and emergency funds, which should be accessed by any student who makes a late application or who has difficulty. Secondly, when members write to me about individuals—I do not recall Mr Henry raising those cases with me—I ensure that immediate action is taken. The issue is always that the application form is received in time and, if it comes late, that it is complete. In the case of complex applications, further information is sometimes required. The two key points are these: first, that discretionary and emergency funds exist; and secondly, that when members raise issues with me—or indeed, when individuals raise issues with me, as happens more often as a result of the rise of social media—matters are attended to quickly. That will always be what I require of the Student Awards Agency for Scotland and it will always be what SAAS does.

That was a helpful question from Liz Smith. I am determined to ensure that SAAS has the maximum resource available to it, within the current restrictions that exist throughout the public sector. As I said to George Adam, we are utilising overtime working and the contact centre’s opening hours have been extended. In addition, the review that SAAS has requested from David Wallace of the Student Loans Company will consider issues such as Liz Smith raised. It is important that we acknowledge that there have been difficulties in the past. I draw attention to the worst difficulty that arose in the matter of student loans, in October 1997, when there was a backlog of 40,000 applications. Then, of course, the education minister—one Brian Wilson—had to order a review.

As ever, Mr Findlay misrepresents what has been said. I do not know whether he does not hear it clearly or simply wants to misrepresent it. The message is that timely application is most important, that the guarantee date helps students and that this year the Student Awards Agency for Scotland has dealt with a record number of applications in record time. Where there are difficulties, I insist that they are dealt with. Where systems can be improved, they should be improved. That is the message. I hope that it was heard clearly and that Mr Findlay will repeat it to his constituents.

The support of David Wallace constitutes a review, so that we can get the system working better. That is what we need to do. I am pleased that Robin Parker of NUS Scotland said that the steps that are being taken are good steps. They are good steps. I am not blaming anyone; I am trying to ensure that the system works as well as it can do. I am trying to show the flexibility of this Government when matters are drawn to its attention, in that when people need help, they get help from this Government. I would have thought that that is something that the whole of Scotland would welcome; that is, the whole of Scotland except—as usual—members on the Labour seats.

You look well.

The reform of colleges is predicated on producing a sector that is more sharply attuned to the Government’s priorities of jobs and growth. In order to measure better the sector’s contribution to Government priorities, we have introduced new outcome agreements for colleges and universities, the negotiation and monitoring of which are the responsibility of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Outcome agreements have recently been concluded for each new region. The SFC is working closely with the sector to develop the new outcomes-based approach, recognising the ground-breaking change that it represents to our relationship with those institutions. To that end, the SFC has published guidance on outcome agreements for 2013-14, including a robust framework for measuring impacts. The next stage is to set up joint working groups with the sector to further develop the approach.

I suppose that I should say: “It’s the way he tells them.” I agree with Chic Brodie. That is why we are developing a framework that clarifies what we will measure consistently across Scotland to demonstrate the sector’s impact, and why we are trying to identify other measures to enable colleges to demonstrate a wider range of outcomes. The reality is that we are moving forward positively and progressively with reform. In Ayrshire, for example—as Chic Brodie will know—the new regional lead, Steve Brannagan, is taking a very proactive role in ensuring that the colleges come together. Yesterday, I had a very productive discussion with Derek Little, who chairs James Watt College and is involved with the Kilwinning campus. A positive set of steps and reforms is being enthusiastically implemented, and I think that the stakeholders are excited by what lies ahead.

I am absolutely certain that that process will, by ensuring that there is openness and transparency in the process of delivery, after the reforms are completed ensure that we have a more focused and targeted sector that is better able to deliver for Scotland’s young people. This is about young people, not institutions, and I am confident—as many people in the colleges are—that what is being done is exactly what was required and, indeed, that it should have been done some time ago.

Hugh Henry raises a good and important issue. I, too, have been contacted by those students and am absolutely clear that the outcome agreements should address access issues. Those issues will be addressed as the outcome agreements develop. In any reorganisation of colleges, how to make it as easy as possible for people to access courses should be considered. There are imaginative solutions in many places in Scotland; Angus College, for example, already runs a system in which it transports students to the college for a variety of courses. I am absolutely certain that the reforms will benefit students—not hinder them.

I hope that I can put an end once and for all to the inaccurate and misleading claims that every single application that does not lead to a college place somehow amounts to a person being denied a learning opportunity. The facts of the matter are that many people who take up a college place make more than one course application, so it is quite wrong to claim that applications that do not proceed are automatically added to a waiting list. We continue to fund colleges in a way that ensures that the level of teaching activity and the consequent number of full-time-equivalent college places that are on offer are being maintained. That is a significant achievement in the face of the swingeing reductions being made to Scotland’s block grant by the Liberal and Tory United Kingdom Government cuts that were planned by the Labour Government.

I have explained it to Mr Bibby on several occasions, but he does not wish to understand. I regret that, because he is creating a false view of what is happening. The suggestion that every learner who appears on a waiting list equates to one who has been turned away is palpably and completely false. Many successful applicants appear on waiting lists for other courses simply because they have made more than one application. Some courses are always popular; it has never been the case that every applicant is guaranteed their first choice. That does not mean that no alternative places are available. Indeed—this is a highly significant fact—some colleges are still advertising vacancies. I therefore appeal to the member and those around him who are cheering his flagging efforts on the matter to look at the facts and not to scaremonger, for our young people. Opportunities for all is a wonderful way of creating opportunities for all. It should be talked up and not talked down, as the Opposition always does.

I have explained to the Labour members, and I am happy to say it again to the other half of the unholy alliance that exists to talk down Scotland’s young people. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am happy to explain again that the concept of waiting lists as presented by Neil Bibby and Liz Smith is utterly false. Opportunities for all is providing an offer of a suitable place in learning and training for every 16 to 19-year-old who cannot otherwise find education or employment. That is what is being done and it is very important. A fair-minded person would look at that and say that it is a major step forward. A fair-minded person would also look at the Scottish Government’s budget and say that it is fantastic that we are doing so well when Liberals and Tories are slashing that budget and being aided and abetted by the Labour Party.

The concept that Neil Findlay raises is a false concept and a false construct. There are no waiting lists of that nature. The reality is that places are still available in Scotland’s colleges. That is a fact. Yesterday, at the Education and Culture Committee, Neil Findlay talked about the reality in which he lives. The reality that I live in is that there are places in Scotland’s colleges, that there are opportunities for young people, and that the enemy of opportunity is now the Labour Party, because it is attempting to scare young people out of training opportunities while backing Thatcherite reforms to the college sector that divided colleges, set them against each other, and Balkanised pay and conditions. That is the reality of the modern Labour Party.

Colleges exist to help people towards employment and we have made it clear that that should include all people—whatever their background, needs or circumstances. Our colleges have a very strong record in that regard. The Scottish Government is supporting colleges by ensuring that they are funded in a way that allows them to maintain their overall level of teaching activity and, consequently, the number of full-time-equivalent student places. Ultimately, colleges take the decisions on which courses to offer and whom to enrol.

I welcome Siobhan McMahon’s confirmation that the equality statement says that the changes in Scotland’s colleges—the regionalisation—should be undertaken carefully. She will therefore be assured—and reassured for all the people she speaks for—that it is being undertaken very carefully and thoughtfully in order to produce the results that we have set out to produce. I am glad that she welcomes that.

The Government is fully committed to providing financial assistance to Dumfries and Galloway Council, through the third phase of the schools for the future programme, for its proposed new senior phase school at the Crichton campus. We support the council and its partners in exploring the opportunity to create a learning town in Dumfries by integrating on one site senior-phase schooling, further and higher education and research. However, the provision of funding under the programme is subject to a positive outcome to any statutory consultation that may be required for the project. That is a matter for the council and its local partners.

Of course I can make that commitment, which is exactly what is required under the law. I appeal to Elaine Murray, who—this might be the kiss of death—I regard as a friend, following the work that we have done together in Dumfries, to take a progressive rather than a partisan view of the issue. She is, after all, the Labour MSP with the highest majority in Scotland. That shows her good sense in judging such things. It is important to have a debate about how the Crichton campus can serve the whole town—indeed, the whole region—in a unique and new way. Although I do not take a position on any of the individual options, they are progressive options. It is regrettable that one or two forces in Dumfries—certainly much less mature political forces than Elaine Murray—are treating this as an excuse to hit the Scottish National Party rather than as an opportunity to think about how this progressive and positive set of proposals can be worked through by the whole community. I appeal to everyone to consider the options and the ideas and to be ambitious rather than simply to retreat into a political laager and attempt to attack others for thinking new thoughts.

I welcome the opportunity to respond to Duncan McNeil. We are the first ever Scottish Administration to ensure that every 16 to 19-year-old is guaranteed an offer of a suitable place in education or training through the opportunities for all scheme. I can think of no better way in which to ensure access to further education for young people throughout our country. Further, in the current academic year, we are funding the same volume of teaching activity as we did in 2011-12, and our draft budget makes provision for the same volume in 2013-14.

I would be shocked and horrified if any college in Scotland did not wish to have and did not succeed in having the widest reach, to ensure that everyone who needs help, support and access gets that. To suggest anything other than that would be to defame the college sector, and I am sure that the member would not wish to do that. The member raises the Audit Scotland report, which is entirely clear. I welcome the suggestion from Audit Scotland that there should continue to be complete openness and transparency in the process of change. I also welcome the fact that it sees the need for a strategic view of the delivery of further education, for the benefit not of institutions but of learners, whom I know Duncan McNeil will want to support.

Discussions on widening access are a regular feature of the Scottish Government’s formal and informal engagements with NUS Scotland, which because of the student perspective it offers on this important topic is an important contributor in widening access to universities. That is why it is represented on the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s access and inclusion committee, of which the Scottish Government is also a member, and why it has actively engaged with the Scottish funding council and universities on the development of widening access outcome agreements.

I am familiar with LEAPS, which I think is a very good scheme; indeed, good schemes are operating in other universities. For example, I visited the University of Glasgow’s scheme some weeks ago, and I met two students from the St Andrews scheme at the Scottish National Party conference, where they were speaking at a Universities Scotland fringe event. I agree with the member and confirm my intention to use the post-16 education reform bill to further this important work and implement the commitment in our manifesto to give widening access agreements statutory force. The proposals will be designed to allow Scottish ministers to require compliance with funding conditions on universities relating to any socioeconomic group that we reasonably consider to be underrepresented. That will be an important step forward. Of course, the situation will vary from university to university because, as LEAPS illustrates, many universities are already at work on the matter. Some are having greater success than others.

As I said in my answer to Duncan McNeil, our commitment to young people through opportunities for all and to the college sector by continuing to fund the same volume of learning as we did in 2011-12 demonstrates this Government’s strong commitment to promoting access to college places, despite the swingeing cuts being imposed on us from London.

It is tempting to respond to that question in the way that I feel it should be responded to by pointing out that there is no crisis in waiting lists and that the definition of Mr Kelly as a “fair-minded person” would stretch credibility. Not only is the college sector safe in this Government’s hands, but it is being reformed to focus on young people. Unfortunately, the Labour Party continues to defend the Thatcherite Michael Forsyth reforms of the college sector that have been so destructive to Scotland and the prospects of Scotland’s young people. That is the reality of James Kelly and his colleagues.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council identifies that the average teaching resource for an undergraduate medical degree is £8,416 per year in the first two years of the course and £16,734 per year for the final three, clinical years.

My understanding is that clinical costs are met for all students by the national health service, just as when Scots students are south of the border the English NHS meets the costs. I would call that a useful and helpful reciprocal arrangement. No Scottish student is refused entry to any faculty of any university because there is a preference for a fee-paying student. That does not happen, and the system does not allow it to happen, so it would not happen. Medicine is the most competitive course for university entrance. It requires not just a certain number of passes but the passing of a number of other tests, including the personal statement and the clinical aptitude test. The decision about admission lies with the university, and universities make the decision based on qualifications and all the other criteria. I absolutely assure the member that I would not tolerate a system that preferred fee-paying students to Scottish students. It does not happen, it is not happening, and it will not happen.

I thank the member for raising my sales again. I am more than prepared to say today that my experience of the recession and of the loss of 25,000 university places south of the border makes me believe that I was wrong. [Interruption.]

That is the generous contribution to the debate that I will make. Will Ms Lamont now admit that she is wrong to victimise Scotland’s young people?

I have raised the matter of a management fee with the European commissioner, most recently at the Bologna conference of higher education ministers, where I also discussed the issue with the appropriate Austrian minister, who has similar issues. We are considering how the management fee might work in Scotland in the context of European law.

I have to say that there is a very simple solution to the issue and that I would welcome the opportunity for rest-of-UK students to be treated as EU students. The simple answer is independence. With independence we can resolve the issue once and for all, and I look forward to doing so.

Widening access is a priority for this Government. We are determined to encourage aspiration and promote ambition so that students from all sections of society can reap the benefit of higher education. The National Union of Students has been extremely helpful in assisting us to develop our policy, and I expect that to continue as we introduce statutory widening access agreements as part of the post-16 bill. I regard “Unlocking Scotland’s Potential: Promoting fairer access to higher education” as yet another helpful and supportive contribution to the debate.

I have no difficulty with that. The Scottish Government recognises that we have a diverse universities sector and a diverse education sector. The contribution to widening access will vary across the sector. Equality of access is fundamental, so we have to start with that issue and with the importance of student retention. We must learn from projects such as the University of Glasgow project, which shows that those who are admitted through special schemes can do better at university than others. Widening access is not a quick fix; it is important that the agreements that we are putting in place also support activity with schools to build aspiration, achievement and long-term success.

As Mr Bibby will be aware, the process of finalising the outcome agreements with Scotland’s universities continues. There will be clear commitments within those agreements, but it is not a one-size-fits-all commitment. Each university will approach the issue differently. They will have to be encouraged to move in the right direction. Some have already moved much further than others. Rather than set an overall global target in Scotland, we must ensure that the performance of every university is improved and that universities that are the poorest performers have the biggest improvement. That is what we are seeking to do through the outcome agreements.

One just has to look at the University of Glasgow scheme, which I visited some weeks ago, to see that although nobody wants to say that the bar should be set less high, because academic achievement is very important, some flexibility within the system is important too. Indeed, the University of Glasgow scheme allows students to drop a grade in one or two subjects if their performance in the scheme has been such that the university believes that they can make a success of going to the university. This is about judging young people in the round and on the richer basis of attainment rather than on a single set of examination results. All of us, across the chamber, would probably agree with that approach. It is about the young person’s achievement and what they can go on to achieve rather than a single set of results, but nobody is talking about reducing the bar and certainly nobody is talking about reducing the quality of those who go to university.

In line with the shift to regionalisation, our plan is for college funding to be based on the needs of a region in future. Our policy paper, “Putting Learners at the Centre”, set out the principles of a simpler, needs-based system. We shall consult on those proposals soon.

I welcome Mr Macdonald as a trailblazer in his party, because he has got exactly the point about college regionalisation and college change that I have made to his colleagues for some time. He sees precisely that we must focus the outcomes of further education on a region’s employment needs. I saw the report, which justifies the process that we are going through. I very much welcome Mr Macdonald’s support for that, which I hope will spread quickly among his less enlightened colleagues.

Absolutely. I have made it clear throughout the regionalisation process that all learners’ needs must be taken into account. Often, we need to consider most intensely the needs of those who are furthest from the labour market. I really welcome the fact that Mr McNeil is moving close to Mr Macdonald. Others should follow that route.

Colleges are responsible for taking their own spending decisions, for which they are held to account. It is therefore not possible to predict how much they will spend on information and communications technology systems in 2012-13. However, there is a strong commitment in the sector to secure efficiencies in the use of ICT and to improve existing processes. For example, colleges contributed actively to the McClelland review of ICT infrastructure in the public sector, which reported in June 2011, and they are taking forward its recommendations. Current and future college mergers will create the opportunity to develop common systems and deliver important financial savings.

Given the detailed nature of those questions about exactly how many systems there are and how much they cost, I think that they would be better addressed to the colleges themselves. As I said in my initial answer, colleges are responsible for making their own spending decisions. Nevertheless, I would like to be helpful to Mr Brodie, so I will ask the chief executive of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to write to him about those issues and to see whether we can provide more information.

Given the current uncertainty regarding the outstanding judicial appeal of the case between Scottish ministers and Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, and given the resulting delay of the report from the commission on the delivery of rural education, the Scottish Government fully supports the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which has asked councils to use their best judgment and to avoid consulting on closures while the commission finalises its report for publication.

Yes, I warmly agree with that. We have seen case after case in which, with the right approach and the right policies, the size of a rural primary school that is under threat has been increased. One of the many purposes of setting up the commission on the delivery of rural education was to share good practice and find out how that could be done. The closure of a rural school should always be regarded as a last resort. In coming to its decision, a local authority must be able to demonstrate that it has considered all viable alternatives first. That is a key part of the policy that underpins the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 and will remain very much in my mind as we determine how we should move forward. Mr Robertson will be aware that, in the case of Logie Coldstone, ministers last year refused to grant consent for Aberdeenshire Council to close the school. Consequently, the school remains open and I understand that its roll is increasing.

I am delighted that Margaret Burgess will be joining the ministerial team. It is always great to see a former election agent of mine do well—she has gone on to reach much greater heights. I am delighted to say that last week I laid before the Parliament two separate orders that will have the effect of merging two groups of colleges. First, the Scottish Agricultural College will join our three land-based further education colleges to form a single institution on 1 October. On the same date, Stevenson College, Telford College and Jewel & Esk College will combine to form the new Edinburgh college. Both those ventures are the product of considerable vision and commitment by the partners involved. Subject to the approval of Parliament, we will see in each case the creation a new institution of scale and distinction on Scotland’s educational landscape. The majority of colleges are looking at merger, creating the scope as early as next August for single colleges in Ayrshire, the lower Clyde, Fife and the north and south of Glasgow. Those mergers are being driven by the belief that learners derive the maximum benefit from provision that closely matches the needs of the economy—as Lewis Macdonald has rightly pointed out this afternoon—and which eliminates waste and needless duplication.

I will be delighted to come to Kilwinning with the member; indeed, it will not be the first time that I have visited the Kilwinning campus of James Watt College. However, I assure the member that all mergers should entered into on the basis of equality and parity of treatment. Kilwinning will be one of three partners making up the Ayrshire college, and I am absolutely certain that it will bring to the Ayrshire college very considerable advantages and distinctions in learning and teaching. I hope that the three partners will go forward on that basis, and I am very happy to encourage them to do so.

I will meet Michael Foxley again tomorrow. The group’s remit is to take the outline agreement that I secured from the colleges and the University of the Highlands and Islands about how they will restructure in the new era, in which they have title and are forming a further education and a higher education institution, into a final organisational structure. The group is working on that. I took advantage of my visit last week to Shetland and Orkney to meet both colleges—they are the only two unincorporated colleges in Scotland—and we had very productive discussions. They have an enormous amount to contribute to the regionalisation of education in the Highlands and Islands while at the same time maintaining exactly the kind of very strong local focus on, for example, local employability that Mr Macdonald—I am going to repeat what he said all day—highlighted earlier. In those circumstances, I look forward to their doing so and will work closely with them and the constituency members.

As Mr Findlay knows—because he was there—I have met some of those staff and students. At that stage, considerable changes still had to be made to the final arrangements. I do not regard the move as a takeover; it is a true and honest merger and I will do everything I can to ensure that the various parts come together—as they have done—in a constructive and equal way. Given that, in such circumstances, it is very important to encourage and be quite straightforward about change, we need to tell those involved the truth about these matters and ensure that they are encouraged to put their all into ensuring that these moves happen. I am happy to do that; indeed, if Mr Findlay invites me to take part in further discussions to help matters, I will always be happy to do so.

The information is not currently available. Although students were encouraged to apply for support from April this year, the official closing date for applications for the 2012-13 session is not until 31 March 2013.

The description of the issue as a problem is misguided. There are regulations that exist. It would be helpful if we could charge a fee to European Union students and I would like to be able to do so, but there are many obstacles and we are trying to negotiate our way through them. However, I repeat what I have said before: I would happily try to move forward on the issue on the basis of independence, because that would be the right basis on which to run Scotland’s education system. We are lucky in Scotland to have such a strong education system—and in particular such a strong university system. The system is based very strongly on the right of access to education and on the tradition of free access to education. I hope that Hugh Henry and his colleagues will remain honest to that. If they do, I think that the opportunities for Scottish education remain great.

Applications are still being processed, but the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service statistics show that by 22 August 2012, the number of Scotland-domiciled students accepted to study higher education in Scotland in 2012-13 stood at 25,945.

Our record investment in the higher education sector over this spending review period and the steps that we took to ensure that funding was focused on Scottish students will ensure that we continue to protect places at Scottish universities for Scottish students. By also taking steps to support widening access, we will support school leavers from all parts of Scotland to access higher education opportunities. We should remember that a record number of Scottish young people are studying at Scottish universities—opportunities have never been greater. We should celebrate that across this chamber.

I also welcome Mr Wheelhouse to the ministerial team and a job that I was fond of performing myself. I am sure that he will enjoy it greatly The Scottish funding council has identified Ayrshire, the Borders, central, Dumfries and Galloway, the Highlands and Islands and Lanarkshire as the college regions with a significant gap between need and current provision. To bridge that gap, the council has allocated £8 million in the academic year 2012-13 to fund additional student places in those regions. We shall shortly consult on proposals to move to a simpler, needs-based system across Scotland.

I will be happy to meet the member. I commend the actions of Dumfries and Galloway Council’s new administration, for example, which decided last week to increase funding for the Crichton campus. That will allow the ambitious developments proposed for the Crichton to grow there, and will encourage further access. That is a positive step forward.

I am not aware of any discussions. Universities are independent, autonomous institutions and, as such, the Scottish Government does not intervene in institutional matters such as decisions regarding their estates strategies.

Yes, I am keen that the indissoluble link between universities and the communities that they serve is recognised. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council requires colleges and universities to seek its prior approval for the disposal of publicly funded property when the proceeds are likely to exceed £3 million. As part of the approval process, the Scottish funding council requires colleges and universities to demonstrate that they have obtained an appropriate professional valuation from a reputable property agent. I will ask the council’s chief executive to write to the member to reassure him on this matter, and I will be happy to meet him as well.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting all students to realise their ambitions. Many postgraduates will have already received direct support as undergraduates. Under the postgraduate student allowances scheme, postgraduates might also be eligible for a loan of up to £3,400 to help pay some of or all their tuition fees. Further information is available from the Student Awards Agency for Scotland.

Arrangements were in place for the training of educational psychologists, but we have tried to standardise the arrangements for postgraduate support because that means that we can support more postgraduates to achieve more. I have to point out that this is the first Scottish Government that has moved to support postgraduates. It is one of my ambitions to expand support for postgraduate education. Prior to the current academic year, the postgraduate student allowances scheme provided some money. We now have a much better scheme that has been substantially expanded. I hope that, rather than seeing a half-empty glass, the member might see a glass that is certainly filling up and allowing us to support Scottish students in their ambitions to contribute everything that they can.

That information is not available at present as the closing date for applications is 31 March 2013. I can say, however, that because the loan is not means tested, all students can apply for the maximum loan, although some may choose not to do so.

I will use a set of figures that show the rationale. In 2011-12, 300 funded DLP places were available at Scottish institutions on a discretionary basis. The move to tuition fee loans allows us to expand support, meaning that 700 students will be funded this year. That action addresses previous concerns about the selection process at institutions for access to places with funding support and will allow more young people to move forward in their careers and to get support in postgraduate education. As I said earlier, that is something this Government is very keen to encourage. Professional and career development loans are available for all those students—deferred-payment bank loans that help to pay for vocational training leading to employment in the United Kingdom or in the European Union. Therefore, support is available. However, if we are to continue to support young people moving from undergraduate to postgraduate work, we need to support the tuition fee element. We are able to do so for more students, which I think should be welcomed across the chamber.

The commission has taken evidence on a wide range of issues affecting the delivery of rural education, including school transport. Local authorities have a duty under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 to make such arrangements as they consider necessary for the transport between home and school of pupils residing and attending schools in their area. Rural authorities provide free transport for pupils who live more than the statutory walking distance from the school, which is 2 miles for children aged under eight years or 3 miles for children aged eight or more.

Yes, the Government is always happy to work with local authorities. However, I stress that, as the member knows, responsibility for the provision of school transport rests with local authorities. They are best placed to know what should and what should not be supported in their own areas. That includes working within the safe routes to schools project, through which we ensure that every child is safe on their way to and from education.

I thank Parliament for that warm welcome. Programme for government debates are very much ritual theatrical occasions. I have sat through many of them. I missed those from 2003 to 2007, but it was a pleasure to return to see them, as a minister. I am reminded of a poster that I used to have on the wall of my room at university. It was a historic Pan Am poster that showed a cartoon figure pointing over its shoulder, and the caption said, “The real world’s not in here—it’s out there.” That is the reality of the debate. Such debates may be theatrical occasions and may have great ritual. The Opposition says that not enough is being done. Murdo Fraser said that “the country is ‘on pause’”, but the legislative programme is some pause. The reality is that an enormous amount of hard work is in the document and that each of us will have to do that work, because bill after bill will require the scrutiny, care and support of the Parliament. My plea to the Opposition, in undertaking its ritual, is not to talk down the achievements that we must all make for the people of Scotland in the next year; let us put our shoulders to the wheel and make them. Of course, the debate this year has a sharper edge, because another theme has come up again and again. Jackie Baillie just said: “I believe in powers for a purpose”. In the debate yesterday, Hugh Henry—I shall return to his speech—said: “tackling poverty and injustice is central to what we do.”—[Official Report, 4 September 2012; c 10951.] At the heart of the programme is a bill to tackle poverty and injustice; at the heart of the programme is a bill that will do what each of us in the Scottish Parliament should do, which is make a better Scotland for everyone who lives here. That bill is not an end, but a means to the end that we should all share. That means to an end is a referendum leading to independence. Part of this ritual, however, is something else that we need to pause to consider. I have found, over the years, that the angrier the Opposition is, the bigger is the vacuum in its own proposals; the angrier the Opposition is, the bigger is its fear of what is being done by the Government. This debate has been starkly illustrative of that. I will start with the opening of the debate, but will pass over the speech of the leader of the Tories, who has just arrived in the chamber. She had beside her a lean—no, not lean, but hungry-looking—Mr Carlaw. I suspect that his time might be coming, on the back of his performance yesterday. I say to Mr Rennie that his speech was the best speech that I have heard him make. It was a speech from the heart, although I did not agree with all of it. It is a pity that he has so few followers, because it was a speech worth listening to. The real problem in the debate came from the leader of the Labour Party, whose speech was not worthy of her or her party. It was a speech of the most astonishing negativity and pure anger. It was not anger for change in Scotland or anger to ensure that we get that change, but an anger that had its roots—it still has, and regrettably it is taking Labour a long time to get over it—in Labour’s failure to achieve office in 2007 and again in 2011. It was an anger born of the sense of entitlement that Labour still shows in this chamber, although that entitlement has gone completely. A party needs to have ideas to earn office, but hers was a speech that was devoid of ideas. We have heard in the speeches from Labour members yesterday and today great fear and anger—in the knowledge that there is no policy backing what is taking place, but just recognition that they are as far from office as they could possibly be. We have also heard the conflict in those speeches. I will mention two, in particular, because I think that they are significant. I did not disagree much with what Neil Findlay said. He is attempting to be the new Tommy Sheridan, and his sense of anger at some of the things that people in Scotland are suffering is undoubtedly correct, but how conflicted his statement was. He has spent the summer in his red collective, arguing for change in Scotland, but when he gets to the point of what that change should be, he cannot face reality. The logic of what Mr Findlay said was undeniable: the logic is that there must be full constitutional change in Scotland with full powers for this Parliament, then we can act and persuade others to act. Until that happens, Mr Findlay cannot achieve any of his ambitions. Neither can Mr Hugh Henry achieve his ambitions. I listened with some interest to Mr Henry yesterday. I do not think that any member should—from what one might call the Militant school of rhetoric—lecture us on a variety of issues but refuse to debate. [Interruption.] I am happy to accept if he wants to intervene, but he does not want to intervene. One has to go through a speech like that and point out when the “facts” that have been given might not be facts. I have here 10 points that I want to draw to Mr Henry’s attention—10 things that we need to know about what is happening in Scottish education and in Scotland generally. Let us start with poverty. Mr Henry made assertions about poverty, but in reality the percentage of people in relative poverty fell in 2009-10 and in 2010-11. That was an achievement of the Government against the most appalling economic circumstances and without the full powers that we need. Mr Henry also accused the Scottish Government of allowing better-off people to flourish and allowing the poor and marginalised to suffer. Between 2009-10 and 2010-11, the proportion of working-age adults in relative poverty fell by 70,000. Could we do better? Yes, we could do better. How could we do better? By having independence. Nevertheless, that figure fell. It did not rise. Mr Henry then talked about teacher numbers. Circumstances have changed—I will give him that—and we are now in difficult times. Cuts have come that have—as the First Minister said, quite effectively quoting a former Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer—been “deeper” than Thatcher’s.

“Tougher” than Thatcher’s. I am sorry to have misquoted the First Minister.

“Deeper and tougher” than Thatcher’s. I have got it right now. The First Minister is always a great assistance to me. However, here is a fact: even in such circumstances, not only have we met our class targets, but we have done better. In 2006—when, I think, Mr Henry was the Minister for Education and Young People—the average primary 1 class size was 23.1. According to the latest census, it is 20.5. In 2006—when, I think, Mr Henry was education minister—there were 16,845 pupils in primary 1 classes of 26 or more. According to the latest census, that figure has been reduced to 609 pupils, which is a 96 per cent reduction. Also, teacher unemployment in Scotland is now lower than anywhere else in the UK. Mr Henry also dealt with unemployment and, indeed, unemployment amongst women. According to the latest data that have been produced by the Office of National Statistics, unemployment among women has increased—the figure is too high—but we also know that the work programmes are being effective. If Mr Henry had an ounce of fairness in him, he would have reflected that work and the work of the first Minister for Youth Employment in all these islands. Mr Henry’s next subject was college budgets, which we have heard a great deal about over the past two days. However, what we have not heard about is the reform agenda that we are pursuing in colleges—except earlier this afternoon. I very much welcome Lewis Macdonald’s question on that matter at question time, because he highlighted what is actually taking place: the focusing of colleges on employment need. Our colleges have responded to the challenge. We have the best higher education student support package, colleges are prioritising young learners and the opportunities for all programme is, for the first time ever in these islands, providing education, training or a job to every young person. Lewis Macdonald rose— Can Mr Macdonald surpass his earlier contribution?

I see that the thumbscrews have been applied in the course of the afternoon. Mr Macdonald’s earlier helpful contribution has been clawed back. Core educational opportunities are not being reduced; instead, those colleges are focusing on employers’ real needs. We are also—which Mr McNeil asked about earlier this afternoon—ensuring that we bring together those who need work and training, and that they get both through our college system. Mr Macdonald will want to encourage—not discourage—his local colleges in those activities. Let us move on to modern apprenticeships. I note that I am on only point seven of 10, and am conscious that time is passing. Despite Labour’s claims, modern apprenticeships have always been open to those who are seeking employment and to those who are in employment. Indeed, under the previous Administration, the balance was tipped further towards training for those who are already in employment. In 2006—was not Mr Henry the education minister at that time?—49 per cent of modern apprenticeship starts aged 16 to 24 had been in employment for more than six months; however, by last year, that figure had fallen to 23 per cent.

I am glad that Kezia Dugdale recognises that times have changed. That was not what Mr Henry did yesterday. We have changed with the times.

Excuse me, Presiding Officer, but I am about to tell the member how things have changed. How many modern apprenticeships do we have now? Last year, we had 26,000—10,000 more than existed back then. We have risen to the challenge. The basic fact remains that the point that was made about modern apprenticeships and training was not accurate. I am on my last two points—for Mr Henry, at least. In 2007—when Mr Henry ceased to be education minister, I believe—the entitlement to pre-school education was 412.5 hours. We raised it to 475 hours and we are raising it to 600 hours. That is an achievement.

That is because we have an education system in which local authorities make those decisions, as Margo MacDonald knows. However, I am glad to say that even in the current adverse circumstances, we have made more progress towards the target of PE hours in schools in Scotland than any of our predecessors, and we will go on doing so. Indeed, my colleague, the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport, has recently allocated resources to finish that task. That is an achievement. My final point for Mr Henry is on his question about involving teachers. He asked me directly—and then refused to take an intervention when I was ready to answer him—whether I would involve teachers in the decision making about taking forward the teaching profession, particularly on the issue of nursery teachers. Of course I will. We always involve teachers. Indeed, it was this Government that overruled the decision of a previous Government—in which, I believe, Mr Henry was the education minister. In those circumstances, we managed to put teachers and then parents on the planning board for the curriculum for excellence. We will always involve all the stakeholders in making decisions on education. I am glad that I have been of assistance to the chamber and to Mr Henry in putting my points, but I will go back to the core issue that we are debating. I want to say a word or two about Margo MacDonald’s speech, because she was absolutely right. She appealed to both sides of the argument on the referendum to talk about the positives, and for each side to tell people what it wants to see. There is an obligation on every single one of us to talk about our plans for change, and to talk about them in ways that show our vision of what we want to achieve, because what we are trying to do is to change Scotland for good. We have a positive vision. The members on this side of the chamber were elected last year on three things. We were elected, first, on the team that we had, which is a team that constantly develops and builds and improves; secondly, on our record in Government, which the people of Scotland judged and judged favourably; and, thirdly, on our vision. It is our vision of the future of Scotland that should be contended and debated. It is a vision that says that there are things that need to be changed. It is a vision that says that we need to have a post-16 reform bill because we have more to do. It is a vision that says that there is more to do with regard to children and with regard to kinship care. It is a vision that says that changes in procurement need to take place. It is a vision that says that our criminal justice system continues to need to change. Those are all visions, but wrapped around them—the real vision—is the vision of what this country can become. The Deputy First Minister said in her opening speech that she has supported the idea of independence all her adult life. Well, I regret that I went wrong; for a brief period while at university, I was a member of the Labour Party. I publicly repent at this moment, because I believe in social progress. I believe in a change for the better in Scottish society, I believe in empowerment and I believe in eliminating poverty. That leads me inexorably to the view that the only change that we can have in Scotland that will achieve all that, the only change that will produce the Scotland that we want to see, the only change that will be honest to the traditions of the Labour Party as well as to the traditions of every other party—the only change—is to achieve independence. I am very pleased to be a member of a Government that will give the people of Scotland that choice. Let each of us here, at the conclusion of the debate, make a pledge: we will debate vision, we will debate what we want to achieve and we will give up on the negativity, the anger, the angst and we will, in particular, give up on trying to present things that are not true. I am pleased to conclude the debate.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you also reflect on the fact that people who know that tweets have been sent must have been reading an electronic device or informed by such a device? I presume that your ruling will cover both parts of the equation.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member take an intervention—

Will the member give way?

That will not be hard.

Only nine months ago, I announced our plans for significant reform of Scotland’s post-16 learning system. My objective was to promote jobs and growth, in order to improve our citizens’ life chances. I was—and I remain—confident that we can deliver on those ambitions. Today, I will report on the excellent progress that the whole college sector has made. College regionalisation lies at the heart of our reforms. Change of that nature and scale is inevitably complex and challenging, but I congratulate college leaders in every part of the sector—chairs, boards, principals, lecturers, support staff, students, people in unions and others—on recognising the opportunities and applying their expertise and influence. The results are already clear. In the Highlands and Islands region, we have negotiated a new structure for the University of the Highlands and Islands, with a single outcome agreement, a single fundable body and a further education regional board under the UHI court that will, although it is part of the UHI’s structure, have autonomy in its decisions. The merger of the Scottish Agricultural College, Oatridge College, Barony College and Elmwood College is progressing well and will create Scotland’s first such tertiary institution. Subject to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s advice, I am pleased to announce that I will shortly propose an order that will, if approved by the Parliament, create the new college on 1 October. The Edinburgh colleges are in the vanguard of change, and I will shortly approve their plan to merge the three existing colleges in October. I am delighted that John Wheatley College, North Glasgow College and Stow College are to merge in Glasgow. That means that a college of considerable scale will take its place alongside the City of Glasgow College and the new college that will be created by a merger of Anniesland College, Cardonald College and Langside College. The three new colleges—from the seven that now exist and the nine just two years ago—will combine to form a new region that will be a tremendous driver of skills and learning for Scotland’s biggest city. Plans for new merged regional colleges are also progressing in Fife and the west. Both regions aim for vesting days in August 2013. In Ayrshire, a joint partnership board has been established and is committed to working towards a single college outcome agreement in a region that will include Kilwinning, which is currently part of James Watt College’s area. In the Tayside region, a joint memorandum of understanding has been signed, and the colleges have commissioned an options appraisal to consider the respective merits of merger and federation. The Lanarkshire colleges have agreed a four-way federation. I share their view that that is the best thing for them, and the progress that they have recently made is enormously encouraging. The two colleges in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire signed a federation agreement last October. They are already planning provision on a regional basis. Work is well under way in regions that already have only one college—Dumfries and Galloway, the Borders, Forth valley and West Lothian. There—as elsewhere—the common focus is on developing outcome agreements that will deliver excellent and efficient provision. With colleagues in the Scottish funding council, we are supporting that work and the innovative solutions that are helping to drive it forward, not least through our £15 million college transformation fund. At the same time, we are protecting college places by providing additional opportunities through the new college learning programme, which Skills Development Scotland manages and funds. All that represents an unprecedented level of change in the sector—change that is being delivered by the colleges themselves. However, the reform is not simply about structures. We are making similarly excellent progress towards developing a robust set of regional outcome agreements. Endorsed by the Scottish Government as the basis on which our relationships with colleges should be built, outcome agreements provide a way to better meet the needs of learners and employers in every region. Outcome agreements also provide the focus for our shared priorities with the higher education sector. Russel Griggs’s premise in his report on college governance was that every region—other than the Highlands and Islands—would have one college. When possible, that is what I want. However, I believe firmly that it is for colleges to come together of their own volition in learners’ best interests, so the governance arrangements will allow for some regions to have more than one college. Nonetheless, I propose in each region a single body that concludes a regional outcome agreement with the SFC, receives funding for the region and is held to account for delivery. In single-college regions, the regional body will be the college. In the Highlands and Islands, it will be the University of the Highlands and Islands. In other multicollege regions, it will be the new statutory regional board. That would see existing incorporated colleges reformed into two types: regional colleges and—in multicollege regions—local colleges. Regional college boards will have new duties to plan, collaborate and consult, and they will be larger than existing boards because of their new strategic role. Local college boards will be much smaller and leaner, focusing on the day-to-day operational management of the college. College governance arrangements need greater public accountability. Therefore, my intention is that the Scottish ministers will appoint new boards to local and regional colleges only when those colleges are first re-formed. Subsequently, Scottish ministers will appoint only chairs of regional boards, but there will be key criteria for a broad membership including staff and students, involving local authorities and making key links with the community planning process. Statutory appointments will be subject to the normal public appointments principles. I shall introduce legislation at the earliest opportunity to make the necessary changes, using, where possible, existing powers to make secondary legislation to expedite the process of reform. In the meantime, we need to maintain pace and momentum. I have invited Ian McKay and Henry McLeish to lead the Edinburgh and Glasgow college regions respectively. Today, I am announcing all but one of the other people whom I have invited to lead regional planning, and I have notified the Education and Culture Committee of those details. I am grateful to Professor Griggs and his colleagues for their thorough report. Today, I have also published my detailed response to each of the recommendations, which has been considered against the backdrop of the plans that I have outlined and the need for a legal framework that sets out the relationship between different links in the accountability chain. In my previous statement to Parliament, I welcomed the recommendations of Professor von Prondzynski’s thoroughly considered review of higher education governance, and I said that I would consider the findings with the sector. Since then, I have discussed the review’s findings with a broad range of stakeholders. I will continue to do so, but I have accepted virtually all Professor von Prondzynski’s recommendations. The most effective approach to implementing the recommendations is to do so in three distinct ways: first, by engaging key sector stakeholders as implementing partners; secondly, by engaging the sector itself in implementing the recommendations by agreement and adapting them as necessary to reflect existing good practice; and, thirdly, by employing legislation as required. As previously announced, a bill will be introduced at the earliest opportunity, although the key issue of an underpinning statute will require a second bill, which we hope to introduce within the lifetime of this Parliament. I can announce today that the recommendation to establish an advisory forum will be taken forward by the Scottish funding council. I accept Professor von Prondzynski’s proposal that the advisory forum should help to consider Government and sector interests in relation to strategic decisions and I have asked that it be convened in time to inform my next guidance letter to the Scottish funding council. I can also announce that, subject to agreement on membership, I have asked the committee of the Scottish chairs of higher education institutions to lead a group to develop a new Scottish code of good higher education governance. Membership of the committee that does that must include the voices of students, staff and the small specialist institutions. In the midst of all this change, we must keep in mind our priority of putting learners at the centre. We have been clear from the start on the importance of fair and transparent student support in encouraging participation, progression and retention. That is why we have given an undertaking to legislate to introduce statutory widening access agreements. We have made some progress on widening access in recent years, but that progress has been too slow and we need to step it up. In addition, progression to postgraduate study levels is important if we are to ensure that Scotland is internationally competitive. Tuition fees for taught postgraduate courses are a potential barrier to progress and we have moved, by introducing tuition fee loans, to increase the number of supported places that are available to approximately 5,000 from this autumn. Since publishing “Putting Learners at the Centre: Delivering Our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”, we have worked closely with the National Union of Students Scotland to explore ways in which we could simplify the system for current and prospective higher education students. That work also sought to meet our commitment to offer a £7,000 minimum income for students from the lowest-income households, and I am pleased that we will be able to announce in August a package of student support for the academic year 2013-14 to meet that commitment. The Government has also been clear in its ambition to protect and enhance life chances. In April, Angela Constance launched opportunities for all, offering every 16 to 19-year-old who is not in work or learning a place in education or training. To that end, staff across our partner agencies are providing advice and support to young people to help them to access opportunities. We are also reaching out to young people and their families to tell them about opportunities for all. We must reach out to those who stand to gain—or to lose—the most. Underpinning all this change is a need for our skills provision to support our central ambition of driving growth and employment in Scotland. I am pleased—as the whole chamber will be—to note today’s publication by the Higher Education Statistics Agency, which shows that, at 90.4 per cent, more graduates in Scotland are in employment or further study than anywhere else in these islands. However, we cannot be complacent. We must continue to listen and respond to what employers need, building on existing good practice within the new, strong framework of regional outcome agreements. My statement has covered a wide range of changes to various parts of our post-16 learning system, but, of course, there is more. Some of the changes are structural in their focus, but the purpose behind the reforms is what counts. In January 1885, Lord Reay, then rector of St Andrews University, told his students: “The chief wealth of Scotland consists in the natural resources of Scottish brains. The development of brain-power on a wide scale is what Scotland has to look to.” I endorse that statement. Scotland’s learners are our greatest chief natural resource. This Scottish Government will continue to lead our ambitious efforts with their needs at the forefront of our concerns.

I express my gratitude to Hugh Henry, who has generously accepted that the process of reform is one that is now supported by Labour. I welcome that conversion, and I am pleased that we have Labour’s support to progress changes that have been long anticipated in the sector. The appointments are of chairs of shadow boards, which are the bodies that will be involved in setting up the structure. Any appointments to statutory boards will, as I confirmed in my statement, go through the public appointments process, as they must. I also indicated that the only ministerial involvement will be to nominate chairs. I am glad to set that matter to rest. I have made clear in this and previous statements that the recommendations on higher education will work their way into legislation, and I have indicated how that will happen and how we will build on it. The timing of student support is determined, of course, by the timing of the application round. It is important that the student support arrangements are in place when the new application round opens at the beginning of September. The arrangements are complicated and it is taking a great deal of time to put them in place. I am sure that Hugh Henry will welcome the fact that we have moved so much further than our predecessors in terms of the level of that support, and I give him a guarantee that I will ensure that the Education and Culture Committee is kept informed every step of the way, as it was this morning, when it received the list of shadow chair appointments.

Again, I welcome what is clearly now broad support for the process from the Conservatives. That is a strong move forward. My statement was entirely clear about how we should proceed with the von Prondzynski recommendations. Liz Smith has in the past quite unjustifiably accused me of trying to push or pressurise bodies, so I am sure that she will welcome the fact that I am keen to negotiate and discuss these matters. The von Prondzynski recommendations are essentially correct but, when I work with the institutions, I want to make sure that we engage—and I quote my statement— “the sector itself in implementing the recommendations by agreement and adapting them as necessary to reflect existing good practice”. That will cover all the recommendations that I regard as good ones, but I have also said that we will have legislation as required. We are trying to move step by step with the organisations. I am sorry that Liz Smith was not listening so I will repeat what I said in my statement. “I have asked the committee of the Scottish chairs of higher education institutions to lead a group to develop a new Scottish code of good higher education governance. Membership of the committee that does that must include the voices of students, staff and the small specialist institutions.” We are engaging with the sector on all issues. The von Prondzynski recommendations are soundly based and important for the future, and I am having detailed discussions and negotiations with the sector so that we can get the best out of it. I would have thought that every member of Parliament would want me to do that.

Both colleges are making good progress in their discussions. Last night, I spoke to Alex Rowley, the leader of Fife Council, and I am keen to involve the local authority in the process. Among other things, we discussed the appointment of a shadow chair. I have tried to discuss that issue as widely as possible with key stakeholders. I believe that the colleges will bring forward their formal plans shortly, and I will look at them very closely. On the recommendation of the Scottish funding council, that is what I have to do.

As I explained to Mr Findlay on Tuesday, all members should support the change to using full-time equivalents and meeting the real needs of unemployed young people, prioritising that under opportunities for all. If Mr Findlay simply wants to make political points about changes in weighting and the way in which colleges operate, he is entitled to do so. I am much more interested in supporting young people through the college system. We are developing a series of reforms that, because of Mr Henry’s response, I thought Labour welcomed. Clearly, Mr Findlay still has some catching up to do.

We have to put into statute the issue of widening access agreements, which are part of the outcome agreements with the higher education sector. We will do that, which will allow us to ensure that we have carrots and sticks—although I am more in favour of using carrots than sticks. We must continue to drive up access and get it moving faster than it has been doing. Some universities have done exceptionally well, and some have done very poorly; I want to make sure that all do exceptionally well.

Given the difference in size between regional and local colleges, it is anticipated that in local colleges there would be a minimum of one representative. I say “minimum” because there is scope for greater involvement, which boards should consider. In regional colleges, the minimum should be two, although, again, colleges can appoint more. When colleges come together, which a number of colleges have done, they may want to have interim arrangements to ensure that all the colleges are well represented and all the staff feel satisfied. I stress a point that I stressed when Mr Findlay brought a group of staff and students from the agricultural sector to see me, which is that I want staff and students to be integrally involved in the planning and delivery of all these changes and, thereafter, in the successful management of the institutions. That is the intention, which I hope that legislation will fulfil.

I hope that that angry question can be turned away by my strong support for the principle in the Prondzynski report. I hope that that will be one of the issues that will progress through the process that I have described today.

If the member would simply accept that I am trying to agree with her, that would be a very good end to a long session in which we have had far too much negativity.

Mr Findlay cannot take a positive response for an answer. That really says it all about Labour, and it is why Labour is still 13 points behind.

I pay tribute to Jean Urquhart, who has been very much part of the University of the Highlands and Islands over the years. The development of the UHI structure has been a long process. It has had to take account of not just the unique geography but the unique ecostructure in the Highlands and Islands. We need to ensure that there is an autonomous further education board because it will have about £90 million to disperse, which is three times the amount that UHI has. It is very important that we have a structure that allows that to happen in the interests of further education, and which is integrated with the overall learner journey in the Highlands and Islands. I have asked Michael Foxley to take on the initial task of chairing a small group in UHI to devise the correct structure. He is doing that now, with the agreement of the university and with the involvement of key players throughout the Highlands and Islands. Once that is done, that body will, I hope, move into the shadow body that will start to implement the work. I am keen to get Michael Foxley’s recommendations. He is a very talented individual and I am sure that he will bring us some interesting stuff.

I have met a number of organisations that deal with that issue. I have made a commitment that it should come within the outcome agreements. I want those places to be maintained. Two weeks ago, I met the principal of Reid Kerr College and the named shadow chair of the new west region, who is the chair of one of the existing colleges. They confirmed to me the commitment in their area and throughout the sector to students with special needs. I have no difficulty in confirming that.

I met representatives and chairs of university courts some weeks ago. We discussed the body that they would establish in order to devise the code. Last week, I met the chairs of the small specialist institutions and asked them to join in the process, and they have indicated that they will. I have said to the chairs of the university courts that I want to ensure that staff and students are involved in the process. Subject to that being done to my satisfaction, that is how we will proceed. The important thing to say is that the von Prondzynski report and the recommendations are radical, well thought through and detailed and will produce a better sector. I have indicated how we want to deal with the report. I remain dedicated to its radical nature, and we will put that system in place. Rather than carping at that, I want everyone to say, “This is a good thing; let’s make it happen.” We will make it happen if we have detailed negotiation and discussion with the sector, which is precisely what I am committed to. I am pleased that the chamber has at last endorsed the principle of the changes. Now, let us work together on the details.

One thousand nine hundred and eighty-five probationer teachers took up their allocated teaching posts on the teacher induction scheme at the start of the school session in August 2011. That figure represents more than 95 per cent of those eligible to join the scheme.

I do not find it difficult to agree with such an assertion; indeed, I am very happy to sign up to it in its entirety. Despite the difficult financial constraints that have been imposed on us by the Westminster Government—or, should I say, successive Westminster Governments—we have secured from local authorities a commitment that they will continue to ensure that places are offered to all probationer teachers. It is also significant to note that according to a recent General Teaching Council for Scotland survey 88 per cent of last year’s probationer teachers secured some form of teaching employment during the current year, with 59 per cent of them in full-time employment. That means that our record in teacher employment is better than any other part of these islands, but we can always do better and will go on working hard on the matter.

There is no reduction in funding for colleges in financial year 2012-13. [Interruption.] Presiding Officer, there is no reduction in funding for colleges in financial year 2012-13. [Applause.] Indeed, we are continuing to fund the sector to allow it to maintain the volume of its teaching activity, ensuring that even in the current difficult financial climate, which has been caused by Westminster, the overall offer to students is undiminished. Colleges are increasingly prioritising in favour of young people at risk of unemployment and are offering more full-time courses. That has led to a 9 per cent increase in full-time courses at advanced level and a 1 per cent increase in full-time courses at non-advanced level. That is being achieved by enrolling fewer people on courses that are very short or do not lead to a qualification, or courses that are of less economic relevance and which, consequently, are less likely to lead to a job.

I am very happy to assure Mr Malik that we are trying to ensure an increase in real opportunities. I have no power of direction over colleges—I am sure that Mr Malik finds that as difficult to believe as I do, but the power was taken away by a previous Labour-Liberal Government and, as a result, I cannot tell colleges how to employ people. However, I have repeatedly told—and will go on telling—every college that I believe that compulsory redundancy is wrong. If the entire chamber joined me and said, “That’s how we want to go forward”, we would be able to send out an even more powerful message. Nevertheless, I agree with Mr Malik: we must ensure that real opportunities lead to real jobs. That is the purpose of the college reforms, and I am very glad that Mr Henry endorsed them this morning in response to my statement.

Every attempt was made—as it should be made and will always be made—to communicate with the clerks of the committee. That is, of course, the intention of every cabinet secretary. In education, we continue to do so, despite the fact that, on a previous and recent occasion, communication to members was leaked, ahead of the end of the embargo, by the Labour Party.

If I was furious in any way, it was the fury of disappointment that a member of the Labour Party who attended the youth summit and who I thought would work with others to achieve jobs for young people wanted instead to take political advantage from them. That was disappointment in her as a spokesperson, but there is still an opportunity for her to redeem herself and separate herself from the empty vessels on her benches.

I am glad to say that that work is well under way with the college reforms. In particular, I hope that the member will reflect on a core message from Tom Hunter, which was the need to encourage entrepreneurialism. That message permeated the whole of last Friday’s conference. The Government is deeply engaged in supporting innovation with organisations such as Entrepreneurial-Spark.

I congratulate John Park on securing the debate. It has been a constructive and positive debate, and so it should be, because the story of Ardroy and the way in which it has come through a period of considerable difficulty to its present situation is a positive one. It is important to recognise that many outdoor centres are situated in my constituency of Argyll and Bute, and I am glad to be speaking here not only as a minister but as a member for that constituency. However, the concentration of those outdoor centres creates problems. As local authorities found it more difficult to support the centres, others have found themselves with a number of commitments to outdoor centres and find it difficult to sustain them for an indefinite period. A moment ago, off the top of my head, I wrote down the names of some of the outdoor centres that still operate in Argyll. The City of Edinburgh Council has a centre in Benmore. Caol Ruadh used to be an outdoor centre but is now a private house. Perhaps most impressive of all is Kilbowie, which is still run by North Lanarkshire Council. I visited Kilbowie last August and saw young people jumping off a very high cliff into the Sound of Kerrera. They were thoroughly enjoying the experience—I did not do it, but I would like to. It has been difficult for local authorities to sustain the centres, and the imagination that has gone into ensuring that Ardroy can continue to operate is certainly an outcome of the passionate campaign, as John Park said. However, it is about more than that. It is about the great imagination that George Bruce and his wife—who are in the public gallery today—and a variety of other people brought to this activity. Their extraordinary persistence—I know what John Park means when he says that George Bruce has his number; he has my number, too—their determination to make the centre work, their keenness to negotiate with the local authority, and the willingness of Fife Council, to which I pay tribute, to have that negotiation brought the result that we now have. The centre is operating again in Lochgoilhead. It has wide support in Fife and in Argyll. Parents, teachers, pupils and the community are all impressed and are keen to support the centre. As members have said, the centre is booked through until next year. I look forward to visiting the centre this summer to see for myself what has been done. John Park was also right to quote the individual user. I will quote one of them, too—a pupil called Megan, who was quoted in The Herald last year in its coverage of Ardroy. She said: “It’s changed my friends ... I have never seen them in the way I see them now.” Visiting any outdoor centre for a period of time has a profound effect. That personal experience is backed up by wider research. The Outward Bound Trust’s social impact report in 2011 found that 93 per cent of teachers reported improved personal, social and emotional wellbeing among young people following such a visit and that 60 per cent displayed improved performance on their return to school. That is why the Scottish Government’s social entrepreneurs fund was happy to award almost £25,000 to enable the re-establishment of Ardroy as a sustainable social enterprise. A number of members have rightly referred to the curriculum for excellence. The publication “Curriculum for Excellence through Outdoor Learning” provides national guidance and resources that highlight the value and importance of progressive outdoor learning experiences, including through residential programmes. Education Scotland is promoting outdoor learning as an approach to learning across the curriculum, supporting local authorities to build capacity and share practice. The national network for outdoor learning includes local authorities, the Association of Heads of Outdoor Education Centres, the Scottish Advisory Panel on Outdoor Education and other partners. From August to October, there will be a series of glow meets around the theme, “Building your curriculum—outside and in”, which will all be based at outdoor residential and adventure centres and which will feature discussions of residential experiences in primary and secondary. In cross-curricular terms, the recommendations of the Scottish studies working group noted the importance of outdoor learning, too, and said that it should be highlighted in guidance and included in professional learning activity. That guidance was published on 21 March, alongside the studying Scotland resource, and professional learning events are planned. The Scottish Government is supporting the sector more widely. Scottish Outdoor Education Centres was awarded £500,000 through the social investment fund in 2011 to support business development and refurbishment. A social return on investment study calculated that every £1 that is invested in five-day residential outdoor learning programmes has a social return of just over £11, so the £500,000 will produce many outcomes. We are talking about Ardroy, so I will conclude with Ardroy. People who are lucky enough to know Lochgoilhead know that it is a beautiful small community, but it has been revitalised over the years by the outdoor education centres there, of which there is more than one, as David Torrance pointed out. Those centres give young people the opportunity to experience wonderful surroundings—sometimes for the first time—and to participate to the full in a range of activities and sports. Young people can go away inspired and excited, with their eyes wide open. They often come back year after year and, as John Park said, people sometimes come back as teachers to take young people to the centres, which is a truly great thing. I always regard myself as lucky to represent Argyll and Bute, where the opportunities for outdoor education are great. It gives me the greatest pleasure to know that Ardroy will continue to operate, through the enthusiasm and campaigning of John Park’s constituents, through the vision and commitment of George Bruce and through the excitement of every child in experiencing something new. Meeting closed at 17:51.

Scottish taught postgraduate students are the only ones to benefit from financial support in the United Kingdom. We have introduced for 2012-13 a new postgraduate tuition fee loan under the postgraduate students allowances scheme, which will provide about 5,000 eligible postgraduate students on eligible courses with the ability to continue their studies. Students studying for the diploma in professional legal practice will all be eligible to access the new loan, whereas only a limited number are supported under the existing model. We anticipate that about 700 diploma in professional legal practice students will now have access to financial support for tuition fees, which is more than double the previous total. Support for living costs is not available to all postgraduate students, so DPLP students are not alone in that, but there are alternative sources of funding, such as professional and career development loans. As with previous Administrations, our priority has always been to support first degree qualifications. Postgraduate funding has always been limited to a group of vocational qualifications. The new loan scheme opens up eligibility to a much wider group of students.

I am grateful to the member for his long-standing interest in the subject, but neither of those points actually holds water when examined closely. First, the Scottish Government’s policy has always been to support as many students as possible to attain a first degree, and that remains a core objective, particularly given the current circumstances. Secondly, funding for students who are studying for the diploma in professional legal practice under the postgraduate students allowances scheme was previously available only for the top 300 students, who were nominated by their university, while the other students received nothing at all. However, from 2012-13, all those students—more than 700—will be eligible to apply for non-means-tested loan funding of up to £3,400 towards the cost of their tuition fees. That increases the opportunity for students from non-privileged backgrounds. There are reasons why the diploma in social work is different. We do not support similar schemes for other professions in which employment is mainly private, such as the architecture and veterinary professions, and I do not think that we should do so in the case of the legal profession.

I will of course consider all possibilities to assist students, but Jenny Marra is not correct that the measures do not widen access. I repeat that funding was available only for the top 300 students, all of whom were nominated by their university. Now, every single one of the 700 students will have access to finance. By definition, therefore, a wider range of people will be able to get additional help. The move helps postgraduate education and does not hinder it, which is why I support it strongly.

I hope to respond to that report as soon as I can after its receipt. Sheriff David Sutherland and his commission have been working very hard. They have a vast range of complex evidence to consider. Obviously, we will need to absorb that when he reports, but I am keen that we progress the issue.

I am always happy to agree with Dennis Robertson, and I am occasionally happy to agree with Liz Smith—and on this occasion I do so. I do not think that anyone who knows me and my work will fail to know that I have worked very hard on the issue of rural schools and against closures for a long time. I regard the commission’s work as of central importance, and I will ensure that understanding of the really important role of rural schools in communities is taken forward strongly.

I am glad that Liam McArthur knows the very day that I made the announcement. It had slipped my memory, but I am grateful to know that it was a year ago today. On the second point, when I made that announcement, I made it clear that there would be occasional exceptions, particularly if a community was united in its view that a school should close and a new school should be occupied. There have been one or two of those situations—I can think of one in Ayrshire, for example—but the decisions have been reached by negotiation and discussion. The proof of that is that, by and large, there has been no public dissent from them. On taking the issue forward, it is obvious that the moratorium should remain in place if the report is not received. The new education conveners will be aware of that: I will personally make sure that they are aware of that when I meet them, and my officials have also made it clear to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. To be fair, I do not think that anybody would want to do anything other than wait for the report, on which we hope future policy will be based.

The Scottish Government and its partners are carrying out a range of research and other activities to evaluate the impact on attainment of the curriculum for excellence. Those include the Scottish survey of literacy and numeracy and our on-going participation in the programme for international student assessment—PISA.

I give that unreserved assurance to the member. I am shocked that any school would say that the curriculum for excellence is responsible for falling attainment levels, as the opposite is true. If that is being said, it is absolutely untrue. If the member furnishes me with that information, I shall act on it.

I believe that good progress has been made. On 8 May, I led an encouraging meeting at the Crichton in Dumfries that was hosted by Dumfries and Galloway Council and involved Dumfries and Galloway College, the University of Glasgow, the University of the West of Scotland, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the Crichton Trust, among others. As the member knows because she was present, we agreed an action plan for partners to develop proposals that could unlock a unique opportunity to integrate senior phase school provision, further and higher education and research on one campus site.

I am happy for that to be given serious consideration. The idea of a learning town, a learning campus and a learning region is an exciting one and it is being pursued by the new administration in Dumfries and Galloway. The languages working group has made a number of interesting recommendations. Over the next few months, we will work with partners to identify the right places for the pilot schemes on the 1+2 languages policy. If Dumfries and Galloway Council found itself bringing forward a proposal, I am sure that we would consider it seriously.

I will be delighted to do so. We are making excellent progress with post-16 reform. We are doing so by working closely with a wide range of stakeholders, including universities, colleges, training providers and local government. I shall make a full statement on our reforms before the end of the current Parliamentary session.

The member makes a good point. As we develop the outcome agreements for regional colleges, that issue and the issue of learning disabilities must come to the fore, so that, within our expectations of each region and their delivery agents in the colleges, we place an expectation that those issues will be taken into account and acted on. I would be very happy if the member or the committee came to me to discuss how those issues could be built into the regional outcome agreements.

My colleague Angela Constance has done considerable work with Skills Development Scotland and others to ensure that we are aware of young people who leave school and go into the jobs market and who are looking for training or education or who are simply not being contacted in any way. My colleague has also been very concerned about those who are most distant from the labour market. I hope that we can build and develop a system that ensures that every single individual has the opportunity that goes with the opportunities for all initiative and that they get what they need.

It is not the practice of this or any previous Scottish Government to reveal either whether it has received legal advice on a particular matter or, if it has, the content of any such advice.

I remain completely, utterly and absolutely committed to free access to higher education. I hope that the member who asked the question also has that commitment. If he does, I hope that he will tell his party leader, who appears not to.

As I said in response to the first question this afternoon, the Scottish Government’s policy has always been to support students to attain a first degree. The new loan scheme under the postgraduate students allowances scheme will widen access to almost 5,000 students from the 2012-13 academic year—the figure is up from 2,700 in 2011-12. Students who would previously have received no funding will now therefore be able to access loans to contribute towards the cost of their tuition fees. I should point out, as I did in my first line this afternoon, that Scottish taught postgraduate students are the only ones to benefit from such financial support in these islands.

That is an important issue. Indeed, this week when I met the president of the National Union of Students and the president of Edinburgh University Students Association, we discussed information availability—both information from universities on the demographics of those who are studying and information for students who are potential postgraduates on what is available to them. I am in no doubt that investment in postgraduate education is exceptionally important for the future of Scottish universities. Worldwide, postgraduates are often the lifeblood of a growing, expanding and developing higher education sector. I am proud of the fact that the sector in Scotland is expanding. Indeed, higher education is expanding in only three places in Europe: Slovenia, Luxembourg and—I am proud to say—Scotland. I am pleased that Scotland is enlightened in that way and invests in higher education for the future of the country.

The potential for mobile devices, including tablet computers, to enhance learning in Scottish schools is being explored by Education Scotland through a new online community of practice. The aim is to help us understand how technologies can be embedded in learning on a wider scale. Education Scotland will give consideration to the publication of national guidance on sustainable solutions for the deployment of devices in schools, including advice on the potential use of pupil-owned devices. That forms part of a larger programme to promote the aspirational use of technologies in our schools, which is underpinned by the five information and communications technology in education objectives.

Absolutely. A couple of weeks ago, I had an inspirational visit to Sciennes primary school in Edinburgh, which is in Jim Eadie’s constituency. I saw a primary class there working with tablet computers as a normal tool. That showed how that approach changes ideas, visions and methods of work and will equip those children incredibly well for moving forward. Access to such devices will not happen overnight, but we should be aspirational, learn how such initiatives are working and look at ways of taking them forward.

We are aware of and excited by the research. The Scottish Government has for a number of years funded CALL Scotland at the University of Edinburgh to develop expertise in the use of assistive technology in communication in schools. A variety of projects are on-going. If the member wishes to see any of them, I will be happy to arrange that.

Further and higher education in the Highlands and Islands is being supported through the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, which supports thriving colleges, as well as the University of the Highlands and Islands, in the delivery of high-quality further and higher education. We are building even further on that success through new regional funding arrangements for colleges in the Highlands and Islands and through the consideration that the UHI and its academic partners are giving to the university’s future structure and governance. In doing that, we aim to develop a system of post-16 education that allows seamless progression for all learners.

Commercial spin-offs can be encouraged by a range of means. Some of the knowledge exchange partnerships and knowledge and innovation partnerships that are funded by the Scottish funding council and others are key means of providing such encouragement. There is a range of possibilities in the Highlands and Islands. I recently visited the Scottish Association for Marine Science at Dunstaffnage, where fascinating work is being done on the use of algae to produce fuels. Research needs to be encouraged in an academic context, but capital and support are needed when research moves into the commercial sphere. Both those elements are available, and the interchange of leading researchers and research students with commercial companies is important. A lot of the funding council’s work on that is cutting edge and highly successful.

I am always very pleased to learn from other countries’ experience in delivering education services. Finland’s approach is of continued interest to Scotland and, indeed, I visited Finland in March 2010 to see its system at first hand. I was pleased to meet again, on 2 May, Dr Pasi Sahlberg, who is the director general of the Centre for International Mobility and Co-operation in Helsinki, when he spoke in the Scottish Parliament about lessons from Finland. Although the Scottish education system is different to Finland’s, a number of aspects of the Finnish approach are helpful for discussion, reflection and learning across the Scottish education sector.

Dr Sahlberg was very interesting on a range of issues, one of which Stewart Maxwell has highlighted. However, I draw attention to two things that he tweeted as he left Scotland, the first of which was to say that there should be “More professional responsibility rather than bureaucratic accountability for schools”, which is a very interesting reflection on the need to increase teacher performance and invest in teaching. Secondly, he tweeted that we should “Enhance teacher professionalism by shifting inspection from external Inspectorate to schools.” In other words, he believes that self-evaluation in schools is vital. We are moving forward with that. As for equity, Dr Sahlberg’s presentation highlighted a finding that has been mentioned in reports by the programme for international student assessment—PISA—McKinsey & Company and Michael Fullan. Scotland has a significant problem in that it is below the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average in relation to the equity gap between the education attainment of children and young people from disadvantaged backgrounds and that of those from advantaged socioeconomic backgrounds. The attainment group that I appointed last year and which reported earlier this year was specifically tasked not just with looking at raising attainment for all but with examining how to narrow the gap in attainment. The PISA findings also showed that 86 per cent of the variation in performance in Scottish schools is down to variation within schools. In other words, children are not generally disadvantaged by having to attend poorly performing schools. That is really important.

The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is represented on the teacher workforce planning advisory group, which advises ministers on the number of student teachers that universities should enrol each year to ensure that sufficient teachers, including supply teachers, are available across Scotland. In addition, COSLA, together with the Scottish Government and the teaching unions, sits on the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers. The SNCT meets routinely throughout the year to discuss relevant matters, including those that relate to supply teachers.

I will correct something that Mr Scott said. Supply teachers are paid for the first five days at the first point on the scale, which is not less than probationers are paid. We accept, however, that the negotiated agreement on supply teachers that was accepted by the trade unions was a difficult agreement. It was necessary to reach that agreement because of the resources that we had available. That said, I give John Scott the assurance, which I have given on a number of occasions, that we will keep the situation under review. We want to ensure that we are fair to everyone. We have insisted that local authorities honour the agreement in details, which means that once supply teachers move beyond the initial period, they revert to the place on the scale that they might otherwise have been at.

That is guaranteed by the agreement that we have that was entered into willingly by COSLA—including Labour local authorities—by the teaching unions, and by the Scottish Government. Misrepresentation of that agreement is not helpful to anyone.

Nae point.

I do not think that one is allowed to advertise, Presiding Officer—though if I were, I would. The national 4 qualification will be monitored through Scottish Qualifications Authority benchmarking activities and the on-going monitoring of standards as the new qualifications are implemented. The SQA’s quality assurance processes for the new national 4 qualifications will support schools and colleges in achieving and maintaining national standards. The new arrangements will build on the quality assurance and moderation that are already in place locally and nationally and will draw on best practice.

Absolutely. It is a necessity in our education system that there is a national standard. However, there must also be—as there always has been in Scottish education—flexibility from place to place and, indeed, from school to school. Teachers will be able to find assessment material and exemplars for the new national 4 qualifications in the national assessment resource. That is an online resource and the second phase is being delivered. Draft documents have been provided and the model for national benchmarking will be similar to that for other qualifications. All those things will ensure that there is strong national quality but that education will be enriched, as it always is in Scotland, by the localisation that exists.

Will the member give way?

I do not want to shoot the member’s fox so early on, but I say unequivocally and without fear of contradiction by anybody that the commitment stands as made and will be delivered. We should get on to the substance of the debate rather than the smears of the debate.

No, we cannot.

I welcome what is, as Liz Smith pointed out, the second debate on the topic in seven days. Last week’s debate was called by the Liberal Democrats. It is clear that they got a surfeit of information last week and decided not to have a second shot at the issue. This week’s debate has been called by Labour. I would not dispute any member’s describing childcare as being “exceptionally important”. It is exceptionally important. It benefits children, of course. Education and care are indivisible. Being within that process is extremely important for the youngest children. As they move towards formal schooling, the flexible childcare that we are talking about becomes ever more important. Such childcare benefits parents, not just in their working lives, although that is clearly important. There are working mothers in the Parliament, two of whom have spoken in the debate. It also helps with parents’ work-life balance and, overall, it benefits society. [Interruption.] I am told that there are four working mothers in the chamber. Is there any advance on four? There are quite a number of working fathers in the Parliament, too. We should not forget them. We now have five working mothers in the chamber—Angela Constance has just entered. I think that I will stop with that. Flexible childcare also benefits the economy and the overall wellbeing of society. We have had a number of positive contributions to the debate. Claire Baker’s was positive and helpful in pointing out the issues that need to be addressed, and Dennis Robertson’s was exceptionally well informed and constructive. The questions that Liz Smith asked are important ones. I will come to the issue of legislation in a moment. It is important that we take a fresh look at what we are trying to do. Dennis Robertson was right to say that a great deal is happening. It is definitely wrong to represent the debate as an either/or scenario—either you are interested in the provision of 600 hours or you are, in some sense, a failure. I will come on to address the tone of the opening speech in the debate, which was unfortunate. There is very strong concern in this Government and across this chamber—nobody has a monopoly on concern for children—about making progress on a range of issues. We have done so: early years work has been done, getting it right for every child work has been done, and quality has been driven up. For example, additional qualifications are required for childcare. Those are all important things. The significant achievement of taking the number of hours from 412.5 to 475 in the early days of the first SNP Administration was important. The number of hours delivered was lower—I will not make any political point about this—before the SNP came into office. We still want to improve and we have that aspiration to improve, which the First Minister has been right to lay out. We need to work out how we can improve and the right way to deliver that improvement. That right way must be flexible, because this is not just about hours or sum of hours. We have moved on from there and we know that early years’ care and education are indivisible. We need flexibility and we need primary legislation to deliver that flexibility. I will not swap opinions with people—that route will not help us—but this Government is committed to doing those things, wants to do so and wants to introduce the right legislation. The Government is happy to work with all parties—I make this offer—to introduce that legislation.

In a moment, Mr Henry. The Government is happy to introduce that legislation. Liz Smith has asked to discuss it and I am very happy to sit down and discuss it. I make the same commitment to Hugh Henry. I constantly make commitments to Mr Henry that he can come and talk to me, and he never does, but on this occasion he would be very welcome to do so and we might make some progress.

That was an unhelpful intervention, but I am used to that from Mr Henry. I was talking about developing the way in which we deliver childcare to take account of the flexibility required, and that needs primary legislation. I make the offer again—if Hugh Henry wants to sit down and talk, or if Neil Bibby is asked by him to come and talk to the minister, I would be very happy to have those discussions. We need that discussion and debate. A great deal is being done, and, of course, more can be done, but I want members to reflect on something else this morning. We have had two debates from Labour on interesting and important subjects. Unfortunately, the focus on the Labour side has been not on progress but on insisting on spending now—not next week or next month, but now. There was not a word, not a single contribution, about what they would stop spending the money on. That is important because of the constitutional circumstances in which we find ourselves. We live within a constrained, fixed budget and in those circumstances, if anyone is going to argue for additional expenditure—indeed, our budget procedures in the Parliament demand this—they have to say where it would come from. There has not been a word about that important aspect of the question. It was also very telling—this was the difference between this week and last week—that there was not a word about the assault on families being undertaken by the coalition through welfare reform. The debate has simply, alas, been about oppositionalism—it is best just to say it and be open about it. It has been about naked, simple oppositionalism. The people of Scotland are not fooled by that and I will tell members how I know that they are not fooled. A year ago today, on 22 March 2011, this Parliament dissolved. We had had four years of oppositionalism from Labour members; four years of anger, bile and frustration. That frustration was not just at not being in office, but at having their entitlement to office taken away. That has been striking. We went through that election and there was a lot of expectation that things would change, and they did change. They changed big style. This party got an overall majority, the first time that it has ever happened. There is a lesson in that and I want to give that lesson free, gratis and for nothing to Johann Lamont. The lesson is that people in Scotland find that type of oppositionalism deeply unattractive. I have not done the word cloud of her speech, but I suspect that my estimate is pretty close, and a speech on childcare from the leader of the Opposition that uses the words “First Minister” as often as it uses the word “child” tells us something about what is taking place. A speech that attacks the Government for not caring about children is deeply unattractive, too, I must say. I speak as not just a parent, but the minister who has overall responsibility for children.

I suggest that the leader of the Opposition, who is shouting out as usual, and the education spokesperson who is about to sum up take a positive approach. They should come and discuss this issue. Let us get together on it, because I suspect that we are about to hear more anger and bile directed more at the fact that they are not in office than at any care about anything else.

Will the member give way?

Liz Smith uses the phrase that the solution “is the right one”. Can she equate that with the report from the Institute for Fiscal Studies that shows that the coalition’s changes to the welfare system will increase the number of children in the UK who are in absolute poverty by 500,000 by 2015 and by 800,000 by 2020? How can that be the right solution?

I welcome the overall tenor of the debate, even if parts of it have been disappointing. I got a slight shock when I turned round in my seat and saw the four Liberal Democrats present. I was reminded of the remark by Donnie Stewart about the Tories in Scotland. He compared them to the buffalo—gone are the days when they roamed the landscape in great herds, but there will always be one or two dotted about. There the Liberal Democrats were—four of them together. Tavish Scott could not stay, however. He had to go away and tweet about the debate from outside the chamber, which seems a strange way of contributing to the Liberal Democrats’ business, but there we are. I am sorry that we are down to a single Tory. The buffalo analogy applies again, although I would never be so ungallant as to refer to Liz Smith in that way. I will inject a sense of reality into the debate and ask one or two questions that need to be answered. When the SNP came to office in 2007, only 400 hours of childcare a year per child was being delivered in Scotland. Who had been in government at that time? It had been the Lib Dems and Labour. Who then increased the number of hours from 402.5 to 475 almost immediately? It was the incoming Government, the SNP. Who has been faced with unprecedented cuts from Westminster, first from Labour and then from the Tories and Liberals? It is again the SNP Government. But who still has the ambition to go further? Who, despite those difficulties, is planning ahead and is going to put it in legislation? It is the SNP Government. No one could doubt that we need to do more; no member has disputed that. However, I have listened to the debate for the past hour and a half and have heard only one set of proposals or costed plan, and that has come from the SNP. Therefore, I hope that, when people listen to this debate, they realise that the people who have the commitment, the intention and the purpose, and who are in government, are the people who are serious about the issue. Other members are concerned, and I respect that. Liz Smith’s contribution was important; we should absolutely deliver the flexibility that she asked for. John Park also made a good contribution. It is not just about flexibility in terms of the delivery of a number of hours in blocks; it is about responding in a transformational way to changes in the world of work and to the differences in the ways that families live their lives, and ensuring that we underpin that. We will certainly do so. I say to John Park that Aileen Campbell’s announcement about PSP trialling is an important one. It will look at, for example, rurality and shift work and develop a pattern of activity that will suit Scotland.

Absolutely. Mr Park knows that I am a great fan of transparency. There is a need to publish the trial and to involve others. I say, quite genuinely, that we need to engage others who have an interest in the subject. Mr Chisholm is serving on the early years task force, and I thank him for that. I would genuinely welcome the constructive input of others. I do not welcome the type of contribution that we had at the beginning of the debate from Liam McArthur. He started off by making some assumptions about what everyone was going to say and then said that all the problems were due to the evil SNP. We will not get progress that way. We will make progress if we accept that, at a time of extraordinary financial difficulty, which has been made considerably worse by the Westminster Government’s actions, we can still have aspirations, intentions and plans to deliver. I will finish by talking about the brass-neck award. It has already been given but I want to endorse my colleagues’ view that it should go to the Liberal Democrats, particularly to Liam McArthur. On 22 December 2011, Liam McArthur said of welfare reform: “the notion that we can simplify without creating winners and losers is ridiculous.”—[Official Report, 22 December 2011; c 4955.] He comes here today and argues that we should simply carry on as if nothing that the coalition has done has happened. I will tell him the truth. The proposed changes to child tax credits mean that 84,900 families with children in Scotland will no longer be eligible for child tax credit as of 6 April 2012. That is happening because the Liberal Democrats are supporting the Tories at Westminster. Those are the families who are claiming at or below the family element of the child tax credit, which is worth £545 per family. That will affect 118,700 children across Scotland.

I ask—and I will be happy if he answers in a single word—whether Mr McArthur is happy that 118,700 children will be among the losers.

Answer came there none, so let me give the answer. Mr McArthur is happy that 118,700 children will be among the losers. It takes a brass neck to come to the chamber and lecture another party that is delivering on childcare and then fail to recognise the damage that he and his party are doing. That is a brass neck; everyone heard it here today.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. On behalf of SNP back benchers, will you reflect on parliamentary language and the use of the word “toady”? I think that that has been commented on before in the chamber and I am sure that, on reflection, Mr Rennie would not like that word to go down on the record.

In Scotland, all apprentices must be employed, so apprenticeship opportunities are advertised and recruited for by employers in the same way as they advertise and recruit to fill other job opportunities in their organisations.

We recognise the need to ensure that young people can access job adverts, but it is important that we do not duplicate existing services of one sort or another. Between 30 and 40 per cent of jobs are advertised through Jobcentre Plus and in a variety of other ways. I am glad that the Labour Party is now convinced of the worth of my world of work; its conversion from its previous hostility is welcome. The my world of work service includes a freephone helpline for young people. We are improving it constantly, and of course SDS will look to see how more progress can be made. It is true that modern apprenticeship places are being filled and being filled well. The 25,000 places that are on offer are in considerable demand. That is a record number, which I am sure will be filled. In those circumstances, I encourage anyone who encourages young people to look for work to ensure that they look widely, that they always look at the advantages of modern apprenticeships and that they look on the my world of work website.

I am always pleased to have the opportunity in the Parliament to reinforce our long-standing vision for curriculum for excellence, and to congratulate our teachers and everyone who is committed to Scotland’s education system on the successful implementation of the curriculum for excellence. I would be happy to receive from Mr Henry the details of every single individual whom he quoted, and I would be happy to offer additional help and support for every single individual whom he quoted and any others whom he wishes to quote, because my job is to ensure that we support every single teacher and inform every single parent. That is what we will do. If Mr Henry provides those details to me after the debate, we will take supportive action. However, our shared purpose in the Parliament goes further: we have to ensure that our education system is the best that it can be, and we have to prepare our young people for an uncertain and challenging world. As I said to the Education and Culture Committee on Tuesday, the timing of this Labour Party debate is not constructive. There can be only one interpretation of a decision to hold a debate during a period in which it is known that we are in the middle of negotiations with the EIS. That interpretation is that some people may wish to prevent an agreement from being reached between the Government and the EIS on all the support and help that must be made available to teachers at every stage of the programme. Providing that support is precisely what we will do. I am pleased to tell the Parliament that discussions and negotiations are going well. I am optimistic that we will be able to announce more details over the next week or so, which will address the concerns of teachers that have been expressed in the EIS survey and elsewhere. I am also grateful to the EIS general secretary-elect for another thing: Larry Flanagan has offered to support and facilitate a restoration of the cross-party consensus on curriculum for excellence—a consensus that we need. Larry’s strong record in building and developing curriculum for excellence makes him ideally placed to do that. I said to him yesterday that I would want him to take that forward and I told him that he would have my full support. I hope that he will also get the full support of the other education spokespeople in the chamber, so that we can get back to the cross-party consensus that was essential in this process of major change.

No, I would like to make some progress before I take an intervention. I am grateful to members of the Education and Culture Committee, whose motives have been in contrast to the motives behind today’s debate. Members of the committee have taken the time to question and inquire into the issues that face the programme. Let me put the current criticisms in context. From 2004, the building blocks for curriculum for excellence were laid down in documents establishing the key principles. As Peter Peacock said in 2004, curriculum for excellence would be “the key liberator ... opening up choice and flexibility in learning for the first time”. Since 2007, we have focused on key implementation issues, and detailed guidance for the curriculum from three to 18 was issued in 2009.

I regret that Mr Henry appears unwilling to take part in the discussions with Mr Flanagan. I hope that other spokespeople will not be as unwilling to re-establish the consensus. The programme that has been rolled out in secondary school since 2010 includes a raft of measures to support schools and teachers. It has included Education Scotland inspectors working in partnership with the Scottish Qualifications Authority and local authorities to provide direct support for capacity building in schools. More than 360 support activities took place during the 2010-11 school year alone. I set up 18 excellence groups to stimulate debate and discussion about the place of subjects. Those groups reported in May 2011. I have given particular priority to information engagement with parents and the production of written fact files, web-based information, and DVDs for parent nights. I estimate that more than 1,500 professionals from schools, colleges and universities—plus parents, employers, stakeholders and other partners—have engaged with the SQA in the development of the new qualifications. Since I became cabinet secretary in December 2009, I have delivered on all our commitments—including new investment of £3.76 million a year to support teachers’ development of assessment. Furthermore, not one target date for the introduction of the new qualifications has been missed on my watch. In the past year alone, the full suite of draft documents for the new national qualifications—from national 1 through to higher—has been published online, to allow all teachers to feed into their development. In addition, a series of SQA and Education Scotland curriculum events, attended by more than 1,000 practitioners, was held over November and December. The final documents will be published, on schedule, in April. That will allow—and I think that I should stress this point, Presiding Officer—16 months for teachers to plan for implementation in secondary 4 in 2013-14. Calls have been made for delay, and I treat those calls seriously. I treat seriously EIS’s survey today. It had a response rate of under 10 per cent of secondary school teachers, but I treat it seriously. However, we have to put some other things into the balance. First, the chamber should fit into the balance the 54,000 young people in the current S2 cohort. Those young people have been in the vanguard for curriculum for excellence since they were in primary school. They are the pupils we should be thinking of. To let them down, and to desert their aspirations and their education, would be wrong. Let us also put into the balance the 31 directors of education who confirmed with their headteachers that our 360 secondary schools are on track. Let us also turn to the National Parent Forum of Scotland, which represents every parent council in Scotland, whose chair, Iain Ellis, wrote to me and all our parliamentary spokespersons on 2 March to say: “Our view is that delay is actually unworkable”. Last week, the head of the SQA, Janet Brown, warned the Education and Culture Committee that continuing to offer standard grades—so-called triple running—is not tenable. She said: “the additional risk to our ability to deliver a successful diet would be over the top. The option of triple running is simply not viable.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 28 February 2012; c 811.] We need to listen to those compelling voices.

No. I want to make progress and I do not have much time. Although those voices are indeed compelling, I am listening to every single voice. Education Scotland continues to work with local authorities and a new support package will be put in place. We will do everything we can, but we should do it within the context of ensuring that the people who need additional help and support get it. I do not believe that any teacher in Scotland who has the right support, the right help and the right leadership—which will come from the Government, from Education Scotland, from their local authority and from within their school—cannot rise to the challenge and deliver the conclusion of a programme that has been eight years in the making. Curriculum for excellence is the most important educational reform programme in our generation. It is not a revolution but a wide-ranging process of transformational change that will make our education system fit for the 21st century and improve our children’s achievements, attainment and life chances. We are preparing young people to take on jobs and start up new businesses using technologies that have yet to be invented and brought to market; we are preparing children for an unknown world and we need to have the courage to go ahead with this long-lasting programme. In conclusion, I quote Rod Grant, the head of Clifton Hall school in Edinburgh, who in today’s Scotsman has said: “the time has come to stop prevaricating and instead to be getting on with the business in hand. A further delay in CfE’s introduction serves no useful purpose but simply cements current uncertainties and worries and does nothing to improve secondary education in Scotland.” Let us finish the job that we are doing. I move amendment S4M-02242.3, to leave out from “however” to end and insert: “the widespread support for Curriculum for Excellence from teachers, parents and learners, including the hundreds of teachers and other professionals involved in the development of these qualifications; recognises the risks to learners that could result from a wholesale delay in implementation; further welcomes the unprecedented levels of support that are already provided by national agencies and local authorities to ensure that teachers are confident in delivering Curriculum for Excellence; recognises that additional support has been and will continue to be offered on a school by school basis as required, and remains true to the vision of empowering teachers and working with parents and learners to deliver the right education for every child in Scotland.”

The member knows this and I suspect that she was expecting me to say it, but I want to repeat it. The letter from the East Renfrewshire headteachers in the Times Educational Supplement Scotland of 24 February contains the phrase, at the end of the comments on the request for the delay: “This is only possible because of our unique position.” If the headteachers recognise that, the member should recognise it, too. They are asking for this because of their unique position. It is not possible for others.

Will the member give way?

May I clarify that point? Perhaps Mr McGrigor will want to reflect on whether he should have recounted a private conversation that took place during a school visit but, that aside, I hope that Mr McGrigor will also relate to the member the conversation that I had with the teacher, in which I indicated the ways in which additional support and help could, I hoped, be provided to him. Mr McGrigor’s quoting of that conversation is extremely unhelpful, given that the individual concerned might now be identified. However, I am happy to say that help will be provided to the entire school. We look for a mechanism to encourage teachers to come forward and get the help that they need, which is not helped by the type of action that the member has just taken by reporting a private conversation.

It was a private conversation.

I make a quick point, which is that one of the parents—who chairs the Education and Culture Committee—said that he had not been consulted, so there are many question marks. I refer again to the letter from headteachers, which I quoted to Liz Smith. They said that delay was possible in East Renfrewshire only because of the unique circumstances there. I advise the member to read the letter, because that is what it says.

For the record, I point out that, of the 2,700 respondents, 648 did not fill in an answer to a single question and 58 per cent of them lacked confidence in an organisation that no longer exists. There are many questions that need to be asked about the survey. I am taking seriously the general information and am acting on it, and I ask the member to please acknowledge that.

The commission on the delivery of rural education is expected to report to the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in August 2012.

In establishing the commission, the Government and COSLA were conscious that the process was complex. We were also aware that it needed to be done in a reasonable timeframe. I would advise local authorities to bear in mind that the commission will report, and that they should therefore wait for its conclusions. The public meetings that the commission has held have been very successful. Indeed there was a meeting in Lochgilphead on Tuesday with the council, which indicated that parents and others are having a strong say. There should be an anticipation of interesting findings from the commission, but we should not anticipate an interim report. The commission wants the space to do the job and do it well.

The policy of successive Administrations has been that universities and colleges should be free to take their own decisions about the curriculum that they offer. Where they do so under the terms of grant in aid from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, it of course makes clear its expectations on the quality and efficiency of provision. I have therefore asked the chief executive of the funding council to write to the member with further, full information.

One of the great benefits of the college reform programme lies in ensuring that there is a closer focus on the outcomes from colleges. As the member said, there should be a regional and national understanding of what is required and how that will equip young people and others for work. The nature of the question illustrates the need for college reform, and college reform will provide the answer to the question.

A skills investment plan was published last year. If the member does not have it, I will be happy to ensure that it is provided to her. There are very good examples of how that plan is coming to fruition. I was in Carnegie College just this week. Its activity in that area is an excellent example of how colleges are playing a key role in supporting Scotland’s emerging economies. I repeat: the changes that are taking place in colleges will enable them to focus much more closely on issues that relate to skills needs in their regions and on a national basis. I am pleased that the answer to the member’s question is also the college reform process and what it will produce.

East Renfrewshire Council has indicated that its seven secondary schools wish to delay the introduction of the new national qualifications. No other local authority has advised us of any school that has requested a delay in the introduction of the new national qualifications. Education Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority are providing a wide programme of support for local authorities and schools across all aspects of the curriculum for excellence, including qualifications. Additional assistance will be considered where that is necessary, if the local authority or school requests it. Indeed, I am working on a plan for such assistance in discussion with the Educational Institute of Scotland, as the member would know if he had been present this morning.

The answer to both questions is no. I say gently to the member that if he had been present at this morning’s debate—if he had listened to that debate or participated in it—he would have heard much discussion of the matter, much discussion of the fact that there is a tailored programme of support and that progress is being made, and much discussion of the fact that the damage that is being done to curriculum for excellence comes from his party, from his front bench and, perhaps, from the type of question that he has asked.

The Scottish negotiating committee for teachers is monitoring the impact of the changes to the terms and conditions of short-term supply teachers. We will play our part in the tripartite discussions and the tripartite group will take action if there is concrete evidence that a real problem is emerging.

The member must recognise that the terms and conditions for short-term supply cover were agreed by the SNCT, which is a tripartite arrangement, so they were agreed by the trade union side, the Government and local authorities. It would require the agreement of all three to examine the arrangements and see whether they need to be altered. The member’s figures are very interesting. The approach to short-term supply cover does not apply to long-term supply cover, yet the figures that he has given indicate that there is a more severe problem in long-term supply cover, although it is not constricted in any way by the arrangement and is not paid at point 1 on the scale. I think that the member’s information is confused. I repeat my original answer: we are monitoring, along with our partners in the tripartite arrangement, the impact of the changes and we will continue to keep the situation under review. I am concerned that we get it right, but the tripartite agreement was among all parties, so all parties would have to take part in any change.

There should be no such inflexibility. If the member wants to indicate to me instances when that guidance has not been observed, I will look at them very seriously but I have to say that we have ensured that there is clear guidance on this issue. I repeat that I think that the evidence is not yet wholly convincing. For instance, the evidence that the Labour Party produced from the response to its freedom of information request included some authorities that had not implemented the change. If the blame for the problem lies with a change within the tripartite agreement, how can it affect authorities that have not implemented it? We need to be sure of the circumstances but, as I have said, if the guidelines are not being observed I am very happy to hear that evidence and ensure that we act on it promptly.

I am always concerned if problems emerge. If the local authority has been to the Scottish Government and the union—and of course as a local authority employer it is part of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities arrangement—and has tabled the issue for discussion and consideration, it will be considered. However, I say to Mr Findlay that publishing a response to an FOI request containing inconsistencies and inaccuracies is not helping the matter at all.

The importance of developing enterprise skills and entrepreneurial behaviour is recognised in curriculum for excellence as beginning at an early age, through primary school and into secondary school and further and higher education establishments. Indeed, curriculum for excellence is delivering that with the incorporation of determined to succeed, our strategy for enterprise in education. Curriculum for excellence also recognises the importance of business skills, which is why the issue features in many of the curricular areas. In particular, the social studies guidance clearly states that children and young people will “engage in activities which encourage enterprising attitudes” and “develop an understanding of concepts that encourage enterprise and” challenge “business”.

Business education and economic issues were considered by an excellence group. Indeed, I hope that every local authority is considering the reports of those excellence groups, which have been very productive. We have a distributed system of education with considerable power at local authority and school level to vary the curriculum and choose local priorities. I do not want to threaten that, but I hope that every local authority is considering employability as a key element of education, which will include ensuring that young people are skilled up for enterprise and business.

That opinion is expressed in EIS’s official response to the Griggs review of further education governance, and I have read it with interest. In that context, it is one of many views that I am considering closely alongside Professor Griggs’s proposals. I will not form a final position on any issue until that process of careful consideration is complete; in fact, I have taken forward the process this week in further conversations with colleges and others.

I am considering the composition of regional boards and will certainly take that point seriously. There is a correspondence between the von Prondzynski and Griggs reviews with regard to the participation of students and staff. I very strongly support that in both cases and will ensure that whatever the composition of regional boards—and, indeed, whatever the composition of university courts—there is an adherence to those principles, which I think have been agreed across the board. I hope that, as we take forward these reforms, everyone in the chamber will support that element of accountability, which I think is essential.

That is a key element of discussion with the colleges and with others. I think that it is fair to say that the overall view, to which I adhere, is that the regional boards will have a financial role, as the fundable bodies, and a governance role. We do not want to duplicate provision in such circumstances, so the role of college boards will be one of delivery. The regional boards will be important. They will need to draw in representation from across the region, to ensure that the localism elements are preserved and that a regional strategic view is taken. They will be required to have governance and financial responsibilities, with college boards slimmed down, I think, and more likely to be delivery boards. In some circumstances, of course, there will be only one structure in the region, as we are already seeing, and that makes matters simpler still.

The Association of Directors of Education is a member of the curriculum for excellence management board and the newly formed curriculum for excellence implementation group. It has been fully involved in the implementation and delivery of curriculum for excellence, including the new qualifications. Through various networks and support events, there are regular meetings at all levels between local authorities, ministers, Scottish Government officials, Education Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority.

I can only say to Mr Kelly what I said earlier—although if he had been part of the discussion this morning and had learnt from the debate he would not have asked that question. [Laughter.] I do not know why Mr Findlay finds that amusing.

As I said, if Mr Kelly had listened he would not have asked the question. He was clearly present corporeally, but perhaps in no other way, because he does not seem to have absorbed anything of this morning’s discussion. The debate indicated absolutely clearly what the situation is, and it demonstrated the work that is being done with the Educational Institute of Scotland and others to take forward the issues. The job that needs to be done is to ensure that there is confidence in the process, that support is given to all schools and individuals that require it, and that we do not undermine the importance of the programme. One of the most distinguishing things that Mr Kelly might have heard in the debate, and which I shall drive home to him now, is that every Labour speaker had to preface their words with, “Of course, I support curriculum for excellence”. In the light of that debate and the questions so far, I have to say: By their works shall ye know them.

Yes. That discussion takes place regularly; it has formed part of the discussions that I have had with the Educational Institute of Scotland and others. I congratulate Liam McArthur on his impeccably Liberal Democrat approach to this morning’s debate; he agreed with me and he agreed with everyone else. In the circumstances, we need an utterly clear commitment to helping and supporting Scottish education, and to ensuring that every teacher, every school and every department that says that it needs additional help or a boost to confidence gets that help or boost to confidence. I cannot say more than that. I do not want to be even more helpful than I am being now because that is not possible. We will do everything we can to ensure that curriculum for excellence works. If all members do that, the programme that we all apparently support—the Tories and the Liberals have been very clear about that—will be done in a way that helps Scotland’s young people—in particular, the 54,000 young people who are in secondary 2 waiting to take exams, and who deserve our priority attention.

The directors of education in those areas have confirmed that their schools are on track to deliver the new qualifications. We have not received any requests for additional help from those areas, but Education Scotland stands ready to help any school that asks for or is identified as needing it.

I am glad that reports of the debate were taken hotfoot to Richard Simpson to inform his question. I commend that approach to other Labour members. The detail of how support will be provided was gone into in detail at the Education and Culture Committee on Tuesday. There is the Official Report of that meeting: if, having read it, Richard Simpson requires more information, I will be happy to give it to him. I am also happy to arrange for Bill Maxwell, the head of Education Scotland, to explain the support to him. The discussion contained considerable detail. I am keen that we continue to ensure cross-party consensus on curriculum for excellence. As I said in the debate this morning, the general secretary elect of the EIS will be well positioned to re-establish that consensus, and he has volunteered to do so. It is important that we express our determination to offer support in every way possible—in all the ways that I mentioned on Tuesday and in other ways—and to make sure that that support goes into schools. If schools or individual teachers in Perthshire or Stirlingshire require support, there will be mechanisms for them to secure it. One of the questions that we need to discuss—and are discussing—is how they can do that with confidence. We had the same situation two years ago. Members might remember a debate in which Labour was, I seem to remember, still on the side of delay. That debate was about how we should take curriculum for excellence forward, and I said then that no stigma would attach to anyone seeking help because the curriculum is focused on helping young people. I repeat that loudly and clearly this afternoon.

The pre-legislative paper “Putting Learners at the Centre—Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education” sets out the strategy for maximising the contribution of university research to increasing sustainable economic growth. A range of proposals will contribute to achieving that, including a single knowledge exchange office for Scotland, new innovation centres in our key sectors, and improved support for knowledge exchange. Good progress has been made on all those proposals. In particular, I welcome the establishment of a new working group that includes university and business interests to explore what a single knowledge exchange office might look like.

There are already good practices in Scotland in a range of universities, including the University of Dundee and the University of Edinburgh. I want to ensure that the experience and knowledge that exist are rolled out across the sector and to universities that have perhaps done less of such work. Many Scottish universities have learned from experiences overseas and applied that to their situations. Chic Brodie’s point is well made. The work that is being done to ensure a unified Scottish approach is important and I am certain that it will continue to bear fruit.

We have held no discussions with law students regarding the removal of student loan support for those studying for the diploma in legal practice, because that is not being proposed. From the 2012-13 academic year, we will introduce a new loan scheme—the post-graduate tuition fee loan—to replace the existing postgraduate student allowances scheme. It will be available to all eligible Scotland-domiciled and European Union students undertaking eligible courses, including those studying for the diploma in legal practice.

I would be happy to provide information to them in the first instance because—as I have made clear—the basis on which Gavin Brown’s question was asked is untrue. We are not removing student loan support for those who study for the diploma in legal practice—that is not being proposed. In such circumstances, a meeting based on a false premise would not be sensible. However, if there is a reason for a meeting, I would be happy to ensure that my officials speak to those involved and, if it would be useful thereafter, of course I will meet them. Let us deal with facts, rather than things that are simply not true.

This Government provides a wide range of support to the University of the Highlands and Islands.

I do. Only this week I visited Perth College, where I saw the tremendous work that is being done not just in music courses, but in sound engineering courses and even in the music business course. Moreover, Perth College will begin shortly to take on the applied music course that used to be provided by the University of Strathclyde. That is a very good example of how a sensible map of provision shows that, if something stops happening, it might be good for it to happen elsewhere. I am happy to work with Jamie McGrigor and all other members, particularly those in the Highlands and Islands, to ensure that UHI’s good work in this and other areas is promoted vigorously, and that word about it is spread throughout the country, even to areas outside the Highlands and Islands.

I congratulate my good friend Humza Yousaf on securing the debate. As members would expect, how we ensure that all our children and young people are given the support that they need to realise their potential is a subject with which I am very engaged. I welcome the parents and representatives of Gadburn school. I have been involved in the issue of school closures for all of my political life. The Presiding Officer is right to say that people in the gallery should not applaud, but she will allow me to applaud those who are fighting for their school. Last year, we published a refreshed Government economic strategy. It reaffirmed our central purpose of making Scotland a more successful country, with opportunities for all to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. I make that point because key to the delivery of that purpose is an education system that unlocks the true potential of every child. A child’s education is affected by a wide range of issues: social, emotional, environmental and even genetic. However, it is also affected, axiomatically, by his or her school. Legislation such as the Education Scotland Act 1980, the Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc Act 2000, the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 and the Equality Act 2010 have enshrined the right of every child to receive the support that they need to access learning. The curriculum for excellence is providing a framework for all our young people to gain the knowledge and skills for learning, so we know that prospects are bright for our young people. The most important principle is to meet the needs of the individual pupil in the most appropriate setting for them. That is true for all children; it is particularly true for children who have additional support needs. Today we are debating the future of Gadburn school, which provides for children with such needs. As we heard, members are passionate about the positive impact that the school is having on young people. Glasgow City Council has taken the decision to close Gadburn and transfer the children to new specialist provision at the neighbouring Barmulloch primary school. I understand the widespread concern that the decision has caused, particularly given the questions that have been asked about the process. As I have said many times in the Parliament, sometimes schools have to close. Communities change, populations move and sometimes buildings become unsuitable. However, I am entirely clear that common decency as well as good practice demands that a closure must attempt to command public confidence. At the very least, the process of decision making must be inclusive and transparent. All proposed school closures result in worry, anger and resentment for the pupils, parents and staff who are affected. I have been through school closures—I have seen and suffered them at close quarters. The effect is made much worse when schools are closed without proper and full consultation with the communities that they serve. That is why this Government introduced the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which was agreed to unanimously by the Parliament in November 2009—the bill united the Parliament. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 is intended to make the consultation process for the proposed closure of any school open, transparent and fair. The Government sought to increase local participation, ensure that there is genuine dialogue and foster a sense of trust between local authorities and the people whom they serve. The 2010 act established a more formal role, by means of a safeguard whereby ministers are able to call in decisions in relation to which they perceive serious flaws in the consultation or decision-making process. The call-in can be triggered by community or parental request, but such requests have to outline a flaw in process. The key word is “process”. The 2010 act is not about prejudging or second-guessing a local authority’s decision; it is about ensuring that the process, as enshrined by statute, has been carried through properly and correctly. Since the 2010 act was passed, it is fair to say that a number of school closures, particularly of rural schools, have given me great cause for concern. That is why, in June, I established the commission on the delivery of rural education, to consider and make recommendations on the 2010 act. I am grateful to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities for agreeing to a moratorium on rural school closures while the commission undertakes its work—although we should note that a presumption against the closure of rural schools is written into the 2010 act. Since the establishment of the commission, no contested closure of a rural school has taken place. The commission is currently taking evidence and I was encouraged to hear the constructive and active participation of the local community at the commission’s evidence session at Lochgilphead last night. The commission has arranged several more meetings, so that it can take evidence from rural communities across Scotland. I encourage parents and other interested stakeholders to attend whenever they can. I look forward to receiving the findings of the commission in August. I think that its work will greatly improve the process of consultation on all closures and I hope that it will restore confidence in the 2010 act throughout Scotland’s communities. Gadburn is not a rural school. Indeed, Glasgow is the one local authority in Scotland that has no rural schools, by the definition that we operate. However, the school is vital to the community and the young people whom it serves, and I take every proposed school closure seriously. Glasgow City Council notified me formally of its decision to close Gadburn school on 27 January. The 2010 act allows a three-week period for representations to be made to the Scottish ministers and a further three weeks to enable me to consider representations and reach a decision on whether to call in the council’s school closure decision. I have received 19 representations from parents of children at Gadburn school, setting out their concerns about Glasgow City Council’s proposals and asking that I call in the decision. I have also received letters from the local councillor, Grant Thoms, from Glasgow MSPs Paul Martin, Patricia Ferguson and, of course, Mr Yousaf, and from the Westminster MP, Margaret Curran. I have carefully considered the representations that I received and I can announce that I have decided to call in Glasgow City Council’s decision to close Gadburn school, for further investigation. The council was informed this afternoon of my decision. A copy of the letter will be published on the Scottish Government website tomorrow. Given that it is now for Scottish ministers to determine the matter of process, I am sure that members will understand that I cannot comment further on the case. To do so could be seen as prejudicing the decision that I now have to make. However, I can assure all members, stakeholders, Glasgow City Council and the school community that, in reaching my decision, I will consider very carefully all the information that has been put to me. Meeting closed at 17:30.

In September last year, I launched “Putting Learners at the Centre—Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”, which was a consultative paper that set out my ambitious proposals on reform of post-16 education. I am pleased to be able to address Parliament today to report on some of the key issues that are emerging from the consultation. I thank everyone who has taken the time to contribute their views through written responses or as part of the consultation discussions. Today, I am publishing all the individual responses, alongside our consultation analysis, so that everyone can access the wide range of views that have been presented. Much of the attention in past months has fallen on the implications of my plans for colleges; my proposals for the sector are unashamedly far reaching. During the consultation process we listened to the sector, and we have responded with the college transformation fund and the resources that are necessary to support students. I have made clear my plans for regionalisation and I am fully committed, with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, to working closely with colleges to implement those essential reforms, which will bring benefits for learners and employers. I met college principals and chairs only yesterday to discuss the way forward on the important issue of governance. I am listening to their views and to the views of many other people and I will say more about the matter before the Easter recess. Over the coming year, our programme of reform will gain pace. We will move to redistribution of resources based on needs, we will develop outcome agreements with our new regions, and many colleges will continue with their plans to merge because they think that that is the right thing to do. My overall intention is to refocus our existing systems to ensure that they are driven by the needs of learners and not by the needs of institutions, so I was very pleased to see that proposition being strongly supported in the consultation responses. We have already made a great deal of progress by starting to reform college delivery structures and by making wider changes to underpin effective delivery in the sector. Today, I want to focus on all the reforms that will put learners at the centre to create better life chances for young people and support our ambitions for sustainable economic growth. That will mean building on our many existing strengths and responding to the new opportunities that are emerging as curriculum for excellence becomes fully embedded in our schools. As was reflected in the responses, the transition from school into training, college or university and the progression of young people through those systems into work are critical. The responses also demonstrated a great deal of consensus; in particular, the need to recognise and clarify the full range of possible pathways from school and to strengthen the system’s connectedness were paramount. From community learning and development to workplace learning right through to college and university, all parts of the post-16 system must be linked more effectively. Equally, many respondents stressed the need to develop stronger partnerships across sectors. The consultation highlighted many areas where such partnerships are already emerging to create more coherent pathways. For example, the Dumfries and Galloway Council submission sets out how it is developing links through closer working between schools, CLD, colleges, universities and business and it is one of many good examples that I think reflect a commitment, across Scotland, to work differently to learners’ benefit. Another emerging theme is the role of the Scottish credit and qualifications framework, which I am glad to say was fully recognised and supported. However, views differed on how it might better support progression, with the key area of contention being whether it should form a basis for funding, and important points were made about raising its profile for learners, parents and employers. In response to those views, I want to take a number of steps. First, I will issue new community learning and development guidance. I will also consider how I can use forthcoming legislation to develop stronger links between the provision that is offered in colleges and that which is offered elsewhere in communities. I also want to make progress on the important issue of pathways. There was a clear view that learner journeys are not always linear and that we must do more to map out learner pathways to reflect that fact. I have asked my officials to work with Skills Development Scotland, learners and others to consider how best to achieve that objective. Our fundamental challenge is to strike the right balance between having a flexible system that provides the best possible choices for learners, and making that system sustainable and reducing unnecessary duplication. Part of the answer to that will rely on making better use of the SCQF and developing clearer pathways. I will explore those issues further over the coming months. We also received a big response on widening access. The clear message is that widening access goes beyond admission to university and that it is essential that we focus on other areas, including provision for those with more complex needs, opportunities for older learners and maximising the contribution of community learning and development. Although much of the work that I have already discussed will address that, I want to focus on three particular issues. First, we will continue to work through curriculum for excellence to enhance the offer in the senior phase of education. That will include not only promoting and extending the use of the Scottish baccalaureate and advanced higher, but looking at how schools prepare learners for transition into other areas such as college, training or employment. Next, I want to work with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the National Union of Students Scotland and institutions to take forward the report that I commissioned last year from the council on improving articulation and transition, which sets out the current situation and what we might be able to achieve. Finally, I want to develop further and more fully the case for a stronger legislative base for access. In so doing, I want to ensure that we recognise the importance of curricular links, and reflect learners’ different needs and the sector’s diversity. There seems to be clear support for legislation to support the current activity on access agreements that is being led by the Scottish funding council, and that is the route that I will pursue. Continuing with the theme of building on curriculum for excellence—and, in particular, the senior phase—we must give learners the opportunities that they need to enhance their skills at every level. As we recognise the importance of higher level apprenticeships in supporting businesses to develop their staff, I am pleased to announce today that, following the conclusion of the “Making Training Work Better” consultation, higher level apprenticeships at SCQF level 8 or 9 will become technical apprenticeships while those at level 10 will become professional apprenticeships. Such a move will develop the flexible framework that will enable all businesses to develop their staff to acquire the skills that they need to grow at their own pace and without any limit on their ambition. Our post-16 reforms will also contribute to achieving the aims that were set out by Angela Constance at the end of January in the draft youth employment strategy. The bedrock for that will be the opportunities for all scheme, which will guarantee every 16 to 19-year-old a place in education or training. I will also look at ways to improve our engagement with employers, and we will develop a more flexible approach to pre-employment training to ensure that that support is better aligned with the needs of learners, the labour market and our economic priorities. We are clear about the continued importance of local employability partnerships in delivering tailored employability programmes, and we will continue to work with the Department for Work and Pensions and other partners to drive better alignment. On student support, the consultation responses generally welcomed the commitment to ensuring fair and affordable support arrangements. To deliver that, we continue to work closely with NUS Scotland on the commitment for a minimum income of around £7,000 in higher education. That work is on track and I expect to announce more details in the summer. Alongside that, I want to ensure that we strike a balance between the consistency that will be achieved through a national policy on support for college learners and the local discretion of colleges to deliver tailored support and to improve support for part-time learners. The value of part-time learning was made clear in the responses, and I am also keen to build on our progress. I make no apology for focusing on issues that address the learner, but before I conclude, I need to mention research. A key part of our proposals is the need to make better use of the world-class outputs from our universities, in order to support our ambitions. To achieve that, I have set out proposals to develop a single knowledge exchange office to help businesses to access that resource. I am pleased to say that, building on the responses, I have asked the Scottish funding council to set up a working group with Universities Scotland and business representatives. I look forward to seeing the output from their work later in the year. The breadth of the consultation and the responses means that I have not been able to address every aspect of our reforms—far from it—but the paper that I have published today provides a lot more detail. I have tried to capture the key issues and, in concluding, I want to draw attention to what is at the centre of the issue: it is partnership, the importance of which was emphasised time and again during the consultation. Strong and purposeful partnership working is critical to the success of our reforms and to meeting our objectives in life chances, in jobs and growth, and in sustainability. The Government is focused on delivering the best education for our young people by protecting free access to undergraduate education, reforming student support, and building on the international excellence of our research reputation. There is no doubt that we could do more if we had more powers, which is why we will hold a referendum on independence in 2014. For now, we will focus on what we can do within the existing arrangements. I am far from being the first nationalist to see in education the bedrock for the new nation of Scotland. In his maiden speech to the House of Commons in 1945, the first ever Scottish National Party member of Parliament, Robert McIntyre, said: “I happen to be more interested in the education and welfare of the people of Scotland than in any party consideration. We need a real programme for rebuilding our educational system in Scotland. We need a thorough-going measure of educational reform in Scotland.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 1 May 1945; Vol 410, c 1299.] We needed that then and we still do. The Government’s commitment to such reform is stronger than ever. I will continue to work with our partners across the education landscape to deliver it and I will introduce a bill after the summer recess to support it. I will also make announcements before the summer recess on how I intend to proceed on governance and a range of other matters.

I welcome the fact that Hugh Henry and I can make common cause on many areas of my statement. I hope that we will enjoy the support of the Opposition as we advance important issues such as the pathways, the details for which I have given. I regret, however, that Hugh Henry is not able to be more positive about the range of subjects that I have talked about, which are full of detail and consideration. We are also publishing comments today on some important initiatives. There are two ways to approach education. The first is to work together to ensure that we improve Scottish education, and the second is to be bitterly partisan. The first part of Hugh Henry’s response hinted that he wants to work together but, alas, he ended up being bitterly partisan. That will not help Scottish education. We are making a range of reforms in the post-16 sector, and they are regarded as being long overdue and essential. My discussions with the principals and chairs of Scotland’s colleges are positive, as are those with a wide range of people in the sector, including the trade unions. We have important reports on governance. I would very much welcome the support of the Opposition and its constructive criticism. To say simply, “Stop what you are doing,” is not constructive criticism.

Those are important and good questions. On the principles that will underpin the link between colleges and communities, I want each of the regional boards to focus closely on that question as they develop. How can we ensure that the wider recognition of what the region needs and what is needed throughout the community is reflected in the college delivery structures? I would be very happy to discuss with the member those principles in detail and how they work together. It is an important issue. On flexibility and funding, I want to be as positive as I can be. The resource will be available in the coming year. When I met the college principals yesterday, I think that they agreed that we have to stick to a demanding timetable, given the demands of the budget that comes to us from elsewhere. Were we living in a more normal nation that had full control of its resources, that would not be the case. Within that, I am willing to be as flexible as I possibly can be in relation to access to transformation funding. The points about the baccalaureate and advanced higher are interesting. I accept that we need to make sure that they dovetail with other changes in Scottish education. We need to look at three things. The first is, undoubtedly, a widening of the scope of the baccalaureate. I have supported the baccalaureate. Its uptake is small, but growing, and we need to see what else can be addressed. Indeed, I anticipate an early announcement from the SQA on that. Secondly, transition is extremely important. This morning, I spoke to a headteacher who is concerned that the universities need to give a much clearer indication of how they understand what is happening with curriculum for excellence and what will flow out of that, as well as what is taking place with the baccalaureate and advanced highers. We are making progress on that and there are interesting indications. I have spoken to universities on a number of occasions about how important that is, and we will follow that through. Thirdly, I am keen that the range and depth of qualifications improve. One of the most impressive things in curriculum for excellence is the understanding by young people not just of what they are learning, but of why they are learning it. In one sense, that understanding of what skills are and how they build up is the most extraordinary change. We need to see that in the higher-range qualifications, too, because that is good preparation for further learning and development.

The likely benefits include more money in the pockets of students, which is what many students are looking for. We understand and need to break the link that exists between the difficulty of supporting oneself as a student and the pressure that might apply and which might lead to people dropping out or not completing a course. I want to ensure that we give our students the best possible opportunities.

The guarantee will be met. We intend to do that and we are working hard on it. I will not get into the business of who is the only begetter of a policy, but I am glad that the member likes it and that we are on the same page. We could make common cause and make the policy work well. We have given a guarantee, and the necessary places are being provided. As the member will know from discussions with his local college, there is a clear understanding of the number of places that are being supported through our guarantee for places, which is absolute.

The use of legislation is important because it will underpin our aspirations. We have been making slow but steady progress on increasing access under previous Administrations and the present one. However, as I said in my statement, the access issue is not just about access to university; it is about a range of possibilities. We need to consider whether we can guarantee continuing improvement in access. In some areas, it is possible to underpin that with legislative force. One important area that I mentioned is the access agreements that are negotiated by the SFC. That is our direction of travel and where the support lies. We now need to ensure that we devise legislation that will be effective and will produce a result. I am not interested in legislation for legislation’s sake; I am interested in legislation that will assist the good efforts of a range of people.

The question of how Skills Development Scotland takes forward its business and activities is for Skills Development Scotland. If the member wants to ask that as a parliamentary question, I will ensure that the chief executive of Skills Development Scotland answers it. However, if the member is simply arguing, as he frequently does, that nothing should change and everything must stay the same in education, I will introduce him to the philosophy of conservatism.

Knowledge exchange is extremely important. We have a strong world-beating research sector in Scotland, which—considering our size—is quite remarkable. We need to ensure that we do everything possible to encourage and support the sector, but translating the outcomes of the research into other activities in Scotland has been difficult. Some places have succeeded very well—the University of Edinburgh being a good example—but some have done fairly badly. In my discussions with the universities, we have come to the conclusion that those that are doing well need to influence the process for those that are not. That is why the combined working between the funding council and Universities Scotland that I announced today, which will refine the proposal and ensure that it both learns from the experience of places such as the University of Edinburgh and brings some added value to that university, is the right way forward. Both sides are keen to work in that way, and I am keen to encourage them.

Let me start with the last point, because it is an important one. I made it clear yesterday, and am happy to make it clear again, that merger is not a precondition for access to the transformation fund. There are a number of other models developing in Scotland, including some collaborative agreements, but there has to be reality in those agreements. In one or two places, there is much talk about collaboration but little sign of such. We need to understand that, but merger is not a prerequisite. I had an interesting discussion about regionalisation with principals and chairs yesterday. I hope that Scotland’s Colleges is much clearer now about the issue, but it is absolutely clear that the relationship between a regional strategic board and an individual college will change from place to place. In some places, there will be one single delivery college and in others there might be two or three colleges. We need to get that relationship right where structure is concerned. The paramount body will be the regional one because it will have the strategic overview. I am grateful to be asked to allay fears, and I am sure that the fears are real in the member’s mind. I want to ensure that the structure is much more accountable. From the very beginning, I have pointed out that there is a lack of accountability in the college structure that needs to be addressed. Russel Griggs made the important point to the committee that there is a considerable difference between appointment and approval. I want to ensure that the regional chairs are people with whom we can all work, but I have no desire to control the structures. I want to ensure that the structures emerge as accountable ones, and I want to create the ways in which there can be full accountability. The Griggs report and, in parallel, the von Prondzynski report talk strongly about how accountability can be applied to further and higher education, and I am keen to see those principles applied firmly and properly, providing an accountable sector. To be honest, we have not had that in every place up to now.

Yes, I think that they have. There are still odd pockets that need to be convinced—mostly Labour members. However, I am not entirely sure that I will ever convince Mr Findlay of the need for change—such a natural conservative he has become—but we have made significant progress with those of more open mind and disposition. There have been consultation responses from more than 300 organisations, individuals and institutions, and they have shown broad overall support for reform. “Putting Learners at the Centre” and the concurrent SFC consultation on college regionalisation have received strong support from colleges for the regional college model. In fact, the SFC described it as overwhelming support. As part of my continuing commitment, I have held regular meetings with principals, chairs, college leadership teams and a range of others including students, those who work in the colleges and the trade unions, and I will continue to do so. I have met—I think—every single college principal. I have had meetings in a number of colleges and I am happy to go on doing so. Indeed, members have been bringing college principals to me, and I am happy to meet them with members. Consistent with that, I am establishing a change team that comprises core Scottish Government officials, the SFC and senior representatives in the college sector to continue to drive forward what is recognised as necessary change that will produce benefits for learners.

My ambition for the world extends to full employment. I have lived through generations of Labour Governments that have never delivered it, but I am, as they say, aye hoping. I want to see progress on youth employment. I was happy to see that the member was present at the event on 1 February. There is considerable scope for us to regard youth employment as a national priority and to work together on it, and I encourage that. If contributions are made from members in every part of the chamber, I will welcome that, and we will get things done together. We can choose to do that, or we can choose the sniping from Labour’s front bench. That is the choice—join in, and let us get it solved, or keep sniping. I know which I prefer, and to be honest, I think that Kezia Dugdale is the type of member who could contribute a great deal to that, if only her front bench would let her.

I believe that college regional outcome agreements will be developed year on year, and I think that they will be very helpful. First, they have to focus on the aims of the post-16 reforms, meeting the needs of learners, supporting jobs and growth, delivering life chances, and developing the sustainability of the college sector. Initially, I expect colleges to focus on meeting the needs of learners in their own defined regions, and on delivering the structural change that will allow them to do that, in the process focusing on the needs of those regions. That will involve them delivering on our opportunities for all guarantee, putting in place effective structures and then looking forward. I think that the agreements will be annual, in line with academic years. I suspect that, in time, they will develop to reflect the changing needs of regions and, more important, learners within those regions.

There is no such strategy, but let me give a guarantee that I am keen to encourage mature students. Indeed, I understand that Drew Duncan, the former chair of James Watt College, is at a loss to know what to do, given that he resigned in a pet because he was not being listened to. If he would like to learn in his own college, I am sure that he will get a place.

It is often said that the quality of a nation’s education system is matched by the quality of its teachers. Scotland has a good education system that is supported by a high-quality teaching profession. At the outset, I commend the hard work of the tens of thousands of professional and dedicated teachers across Scotland. Last month, the Parliament discussed improving learning outcomes. We recognised that a high-performing early years and school system is the single biggest tool to improve the employability and life chances of our young people. It is therefore right that we recognise the achievements of our teachers and pupils. At the same time, we need to be constantly ambitious for our education system. There is always scope for improvement, and we face the continuing challenge of working to reduce inequalities in our society, especially given the current economic climate, and of ensuring that our children and young people gain the skills and knowledge to enable them to thrive in a rapidly changing world. The case for driving up the quality of teaching is compelling. A study that the American National Bureau of Economic Research recently published highlighted the fact that there is a clear relationship between the quality of teaching that a child receives and how much they earn and how well they get on socially in later life. The study, which was undertaken by leading educationists from Harvard and Columbia Universities, concluded that every parent should “place great value on having their child in the classroom of a high value-added teacher”. In his report, “Teaching Scotland’s Future”, which was published in January 2011, Graham Donaldson said that “the foundations of successful education lie in the quality of teachers and their leadership. High quality people achieve high quality outcomes”. I share his belief in the fundamental role of teachers in shaping and delivering the learning outcomes that we all want to see. That is why I commissioned his groundbreaking report, which has challenged us to examine the way in which we train, develop and support our teachers. “Teaching Scotland’s Future” offers us the opportunity to reinvigorate the concept of teacher professionalism. That opportunity was welcomed across the Parliament. In response, I established the national partnership group, which brings together the Government, universities, local authorities, the General Teaching Council for Scotland, teachers and other stakeholders to deliver the positive changes that we all want to see. However, driving up the quality of teaching through improved training and development is only one part of the equation. Highly trained, highly skilled professionals require modern, flexible terms and conditions that will allow them to deliver the best possible education for our children. That is why I commissioned the independent review of teacher employment, which Professor Gerry McCormac led. I thank him and the six members of his review team for the work that they undertook in completing the important and unanimously agreed report, “Advancing Professionalism in Teaching: The Report of the Review of Teacher Employment in Scotland”, which was published in September last year. Since the report’s publication, I have been considering its messages and I have taken time to discuss the recommendations with education partners. Teachers, employers, trade unions and parents hold strong views about the issues that the review raised. It is right that, like Graham Donaldson’s review, Professor McCormac’s review acknowledges the strengths of Scotland’s education system but also highlights the challenges that we face. They are not challenges that we can ignore—that would not deliver the Parliament’s aspirations for improved outcomes. The review builds on our current system’s strengths, including the arrangements that we have in place for negotiating changes to teachers’ terms and conditions. The review endorsed the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers and the local negotiating committees for teachers. The recommendations that relate to teachers’ terms and conditions are therefore rightly the responsibility of the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers. I am happy that the SNCT has agreed a work plan, which includes a clear timetable, and has established working groups to consider those recommendations. Those issues are for the SNCT to discuss. I know that some of the discussions will be challenging, but at all times we must focus on how we support our teachers to maintain and build expertise, so that our education system can continue to deliver excellent outcomes for our children and young people. I assure members that the Scottish Government will play a full part in SNCT discussions to help realise positive change. However, there are a number of recommendations that fall outwith the SNCT’s remit and, following engagement with key education stakeholders, I want to set out how those will be taken forward. Perhaps the most challenging of them is McCormac’s clear recommendation that the chartered teacher scheme should be discontinued. This is not a debate about the importance of continuing professional development or professionalism in our teaching profession. Through the national partnership group, we are already committed to delivering an enhanced model of professionalism for all teachers. Specifically, I have tasked the partnership group with considering how to deliver opportunities for teachers to work towards masters-level qualifications. There are many excellent chartered teachers in schools across Scotland, but I am not convinced that the chartered teacher scheme remains the best model to provide the teaching profession with opportunities to improve and develop. We must do more, not least because the aspirations that prompted the creation of the chartered teacher scheme remain and, indeed, have been reinvigorated by Graham Donaldson’s report. This is an opportunity for us to design and develop frameworks that help us to move towards highly successful models of teaching that are seen elsewhere in the world, thereby encouraging a thirst for knowledge and intellectual ambition in the profession that will deliver improved outcomes for our children and young people. We should aspire to a vision of teaching as a masters-level profession, and we should do so, first, by building on the chartered teacher scheme. It provides us with the opportunity to make a masters profession a reality. Moreover, chartered teachers and those who are in the process of becoming chartered teachers should be, and now will be, among the first to access these opportunities. In developing a masters-level profession, we will ensure that existing chartered teachers and those who are in the process of becoming chartered teachers are given credit for relevant professional development that they have already completed or are currently undertaking, and are encouraged to be the pathfinders in that process. Although terms and conditions are rightly the responsibility of the SNCT, I want to assure chartered teachers and those who are working towards that standard that the Scottish Government, through our role with the SNCT, will work to recognise their position and their commitment in moving towards a masters qualification. Raising standards across the board is ambitious, and rightly so—we should be ambitious. There will be many issues to consider in developing the proposals. I am sure that they can and will be understood by moving forward in the way that I suggest. I have therefore asked Education Scotland to work closely with key education stakeholders, including the Association of Chartered Teachers Scotland, the national partnership group and the GTCS, to take the issue forward, first with existing chartered teachers and those who are working towards that status. Teacher training and development are not just about the acquisition of qualifications. We need to embed such developments in our induction-year activities and continuing professional development. Professor McCormac recommends that a new system of professional review and personal development—PRPD—should be introduced. I welcome that approach. Although there is an existing system of professional review and development, we know from Graham Donaldson’s review of teacher education that that system is applied inconsistently across the country. I believe that all teachers should be entitled to a structured opportunity to review their work and plan their development. The ideas behind the recommendations are not new. McCormac’s recommendations on personal development echo those that McCrone made more than 10 years ago. The McCrone inquiry recommended the creation of an effective annual review process. It is time that Scottish education took that forward. All professionals require the opportunity to reflect on how they go about their work. Teaching is no different, and if we are to achieve a strong, confident and reflective workforce, concepts such as professional review and personal development should be embraced, not rejected. Such ideas provide an opportunity to strengthen teaching as a whole. The national partnership group is already looking at related issues as it considers the recommendations of “Teaching Scotland’s Future”. Equally, the GTCS is developing a system of professional update to help ensure that Scotland’s teachers maintain and develop their skills. I have therefore asked the national partnership group to work with the GTCS in considering the recommendations of McCormac that relate to professional development. Finally, I want to address the issue, as Professor McCormac did, of how we use external experts in our schools. In keeping with the principles of curriculum for excellence, I am committed to helping to ensure that our children receive a broad education that suits their needs. We know that many schools have already created partnerships with universities, colleges, local employers or third sector and community groups. Such partnerships are to be welcomed. I am convinced that if we are to build a varied, pupil-centred education for all children and young people, it will be necessary for our schools and teachers to draw on a wide range of resources, including resources that might currently not be available. Although there is broad agreement about those positive opportunities, there are also concerns. I have listened to stakeholder opinion on the issue, and I want to move forward with a measured approach. To start the process, I have asked Education Scotland to consider the current arrangements, to identify best practice and to recommend whether further safeguards or guidance are required. To be clear, this work is not about replacing teachers or diluting their position at the centre of learning. Teaching should be done by teachers. Nor is it about finding ways in which savings could be made from local authority budgets. Indeed, I am explicitly ruling out the model that is proposed by Renfrewshire Council, or variants of it. Instead, I want to build on existing good practice. In taking forward the McCormac recommendations, there is a great deal of hard and detailed work to be done. I do not want to rush what will be sensitive discussions, but equally I want progress to be made by all the working groups, including the SNCT, by the autumn of this year. Ultimately, I expect a new teachers agreement by April 2013, which will allow any new arrangements to be in place for the new school session that starts in August 2013. As ever, the stakes are high. Scotland’s young people deserve to receive the best possible education. They deserve a flexible curriculum that is responsive to their needs as learners, and curriculum for excellence is delivering that. They also deserve to be taught by skilled and motivated teachers who are supported by the right terms and conditions. Our work in taking forward the recommendations of “Teaching Scotland’s Future” and “Advancing Professionalism in Teaching” will help to deliver that aspiration. If we are to offer the best possible educational experience, these are challenges that we must face together, and I invite all parties to play their part in this agenda for positive change.

The idea that a unanimous report from a group as distinguished as the McCormac review group was designed to destabilise and demoralise Scottish education is so ridiculous that it devalues most of the rest of Mr Henry’s contribution. However, let me be positive about what we have announced today. The move from the chartered teacher scheme to a masters profession fits well with the McCormac report, the Donaldson recommendations and education worldwide. If Mr Henry thinks back to when he was briefly in my job, he will realise that, worldwide, the desire to ensure a masters profession is something that has driven continuous improvement in teaching. The existing chartered teachers and those who are working towards that position are being given an opportunity to enter a masters profession as pathfinders. I think that many will welcome that and that it will, in time, be seen to drive the whole profession forward. I am happy to give a commitment to the probationary teacher scheme. The fact that I did not mention changes to the scheme means that there will not be significant changes to it. Of course, from time to time there are always changes to any scheme as education moves forward and develops, but the probationary teacher scheme, which is a very important part of our teaching profession—indeed, it is world renowned—will remain in place. I have been very clear since McCormac reported that we should try to discuss this in a calm and constructive way with all stakeholders. It was important that we did that, and that is why it has taken me several months to get to the stage of bringing my statement to the chamber. I repeat the closing words of that statement and commend them to Mr Henry, even having heard his contribution: “I invite all parties to play their part in this agenda for positive change.” If there are positive suggestions about how we could improve our approach, I am happy to listen to them; if, however, suggestions are merely reactionary and backward looking, I am afraid that they will do nothing to help Scotland’s education and Scotland’s young people.

I thank Liz Smith for her kind words. I recall that only last Thursday morning she was criticising my tone, so I am glad that absence has made the heart grow fonder. On CPD, I welcome the constructive tone that Liz Smith has taken, and I hope that she will continue to contribute in that way, because we regard CPD as a very important element. That is demonstrated in many ways in the McCormac report and in what I have said today. We should be moving towards structured CPD that is challenging and leads to a masters-level profession. In other words, we should gather up CPD in a way that leads forward in terms of capability. Of course, Graham Donaldson was a member of the McCormac review, and those ideas are carried through into it. The proposals on professional review and personal development show how seriously we take the issue. On best practice, the masters is based on a Finnish model that has been applied very successfully. I always look to examples from elsewhere, as does everybody in education. Some we reject. For example, we rejected the Swedish free schools model—which Liz Smith came close to supporting, but which she steered away from—on the grounds that we think that it is incompatible with the Scottish model of education and would not work here. We saw free schools in operation—indeed, we saw the same school as Michael Gove—but drew different conclusions as to how they might work here. I have talked to education ministers and educational practitioners in many different countries, and I will continue to do so. Part of the work that our researchers do in education is to look at examples worldwide to make sure that we understand what is happening elsewhere. I think that Liz Smith referred to two different things in relation to the Renfrewshire model. As regards responsibility for staffing, before Christmas the Cameron report took forward, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the idea of devolved school management. Implementation is still being worked on, and I am sure that we will see continued progress. I say frankly that I think that the Renfrewshire model was wrong and would not work, and that to introduce it now would be a distraction. We need to consider existing good practice. That is what I have encouraged Education Scotland to do, and that will lead us forward in the right way. I think that even in Renfrewshire some people accept that the model was perhaps not the way in which they should have been going forward. To continue to talk about the model would be a distraction.

Yes. The timeline declares itself, to some extent. The current teaching salary agreement concludes in April 2013. The establishment of the McCormac review was agreed while that agreement was being negotiated and the intention was that the new agreement would be able to be in place around April 2013 or, at the latest, as the school session commences in August 2013. The timescale is challenging, because there needs to be full discussion, as the member was right to say. Discussion is taking place. There will also be local authority elections on 3 May, and COSLA will perhaps not be fully functioning for a period. I am not putting pressure on people but I think that we should have a target date that all stakeholders recognise and agree to.

It is not a slap in the face at all. No progress is made in life unless people come up with ideas and discuss them. The ideas either go forward or are rejected. Mr Bibby’s approach flies in the face of evolution; there would be no progress for the human race at all—I think that perhaps that turns out to be true, as I look at the Labour benches. Of course we will carefully discuss with all stakeholders any changes that are in the McCormac report and we will reach a negotiated agreement and settlement. I have made that point again and again and I could not be clearer about it. The moment when Mr Bibby asks me to hamstring the process is the moment when I say no. We must trust the negotiating skills of the unions, the local authorities and ourselves to try to get the best not just for teachers but for Scotland’s young people.

I have been keen to ensure that supply teachers are in the loop on CPD. Indeed, I have visited and addressed the organisation that is involved in that. I have made it clear on every occasion that supply teachers should be part of the CPD process, and I want that to continue to be the case. It is important that every part of the teaching profession regards itself as involved in continuing professional development and a process of learning. Leaders of learning must themselves learn all the time. That is essential, and I am sure that no one in the teaching profession doubts it. We are trying to lay down an opportunity for that to happen in a structured fashion that produces real progress. Like all other teachers, including teachers who are temporarily out of the profession, supply teachers should have the opportunity to continue to update their skills.

I share Mr Findlay’s concern on the supply teacher issue, which I keep constantly under review. As Mr Findlay knows, local authorities make decisions all the time on how they should take forward those agreements. Indeed, I understand that the budget that Mr Findlay voted for, which was proposed by his council group in West Lothian, included savings on supply teachers. That perhaps indicates that, as the First Minister has pointed out, Mr Findlay has one position for Mr Findlay MSP and one for Mr Findlay as a councillor. The issue of supply teachers continues to cause concern. We examine closely areas where there are shortages. I am waiting for information on where those shortages are and we will take the necessary action. However, it is important that we take forward the issues in negotiation. Mr Findlay knows that payments for supply teachers were part of the negotiated settlement last year that was agreed to by the Educational Institute of Scotland and taken through the SNCT process, and therefore finalised by all parties. As it was agreed to, it can be returned to if any of the parties wish to return to it, and then there will be a formal negotiation. However, let us get the evidence first, rather than treating the issue as a campaigning cause with nothing other than political advantage in mind.

On the second point, I have asked Education Scotland to look at existing best practice, and that will take us forward. I stress that my statement was absolutely clear on the chartered teacher scheme. I am not ripping it up and starting again. I went out of my way to say how important the scheme had been for its time but that we needed to move on and do more. I said that we could add to the scheme by moving to a masters-level profession and that the people best able to take us there were existing chartered teachers and those who were training to be chartered teachers. I expressed my support for them and opened that opportunity up to them. The member’s question was based on a false premise, and I hope that he will accept that he got that part wrong.

I am sure that Mr Campbell wants to rely on my word; others in the chamber apparently have difficulty in so doing. I made it clear in my statement that those who are chartered teachers and those who are in the process of becoming chartered teachers are encouraged to be the pathfinders in the move towards masters degrees. I indicated that they would be given credit for previous work done; indeed, I have met and made that point to the Association of Chartered Teachers Scotland, and my officials will continue to have those discussions. It is my intention that chartered teachers be given every opportunity to continue their progress and be supported in the work that they have done and will continue to do in their new role.

I indicated in my statement that universities were a key partner in every part of this. Discussions are taking place with the universities as partners—for example, in the partnership group—so that they can participate fully. The masters will have to be supervised and delivered at university level, and discussions are under way on how that might take place. I hope that the Association of Chartered Teachers Scotland will be part of that discussion, too. Universities are deeply involved in taking forward the Donaldson proposals and they are vital in ensuring the production and supervision of our probationers.

No. The McCormac committee’s recommendation was entirely clear. It was not a great surprise, because there have been many comments that we need radical change to the chartered teacher scheme. I believe that we are providing an opportunity for those who have shown their willingness to take forward a higher degree of professionalism to ensure that they keep moving in that way and that they contribute something new. That is a positive thing and it should be welcomed.

I am happy to give the member the reassurance that lies in the full membership and involvement in the negotiating procedures of the unions. They are a critical, key part of the SNCT, which is a tripartite arrangement. The SNCT has now set up its sub-groups to take forward the terms and conditions issue. The unions are centrally involved in that process, which will be one of careful discussion and negotiation from now on. I hope that the member accepts that reassurance. I want the process of negotiation to be detailed, careful and ultimately successful.

The last point is not true. The figure has improved greatly over the past few years. Off the top of my head, I think that the figure in terms of jobseekers allowance is now four per 1,000, which compares favourably with the figures in the rest of these islands. The figures in Northern Ireland, south of the border and in Wales are substantially worse. We have made considerable progress on the matter and we continue to do so. The probationary system has not failed. I think that the member, on reflection, would regret her remark. The probationary system is a highly successful system that produces excellent teachers, and the member should support it rather than trying to run it down. The reality is that Scottish education—I have always said this—is good but could be better. We are trying to make it better through a careful process of discussion and negotiation. I welcome constructive contributions to that. What I do not welcome is the use of language that runs down the system, and to say that the probationary system has failed is such a use of language.

Everything that we do in education is designed to support the curriculum for excellence, which lies at the heart of the work that we do. Since I became Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning over two years ago, I have kept a close eye on the curriculum for excellence. Where additional support or help has been required, I have put it in place, and I will continue to do so. Indeed, I will meet the EIS later today to take these issues forward. I want to ensure that education in Scotland is a collaborative and consensual activity. McCormac ensures that the teaching profession has the opportunity to adapt and change to reflect the way in which the curriculum for excellence works—indeed, that was part of its remit. All the McCormac proposals are in keeping with the curriculum for excellence. Now, we need to ensure that, as we negotiate our way through many of these issues, we keep in mind the importance of the curriculum for excellence in our negotiating procedures, and in the things that are undertaken by other bodies. That is definitely what we will do.

I feel it necessary to repeat part of my statement. “There are many excellent chartered teachers in schools across Scotland, but I am not convinced that the chartered teacher scheme remains the best model to provide the teaching profession with opportunities to improve and develop. We must do more, not least because the aspirations that prompted the creation of the chartered teacher scheme remain and, indeed, have been reinvigorated by Graham Donaldson’s report. This is an opportunity for us to design and develop frameworks that help us to move towards highly successful models of teaching that are seen elsewhere in the world, thereby encouraging a thirst for knowledge and intellectual ambition in the profession that will deliver improved outcomes for our children and young people. We should aspire to a vision of teaching as a masters-level profession, and we should do so, first, by building on the chartered teacher scheme. It provides us with the opportunity to make a masters profession a reality. Moreover, chartered teachers and those who are in the process of becoming chartered teachers should be, and now will be, among the first to access these opportunities.” If necessary, I will set that to music and sing it. I do not think that I can be any clearer.

The interlinking of the two is well seen in Graham Donaldson’s involvement with the McCormac review panel. I am grateful to everyone on that panel, which comprised, among others, a former president of the EIS; a distinguished headteacher from Lanarkshire; Alf Young, the former deputy editor of The Herald; and a lawyer from Glasgow. Although the people on that panel had a range of knowledge, Graham Donaldson’s involvement was fairly crucial because we knew from the outset that his report would have to dovetail with the recommendations of a review of terms and conditions. As a result of Graham Donaldson’s presence on the McCormac review, we were able to ensure that those two elements could come together. That approach has been very positive and in the announcements that I have made this morning we now have a way of taking forward both sets of proposals, linked together not only through the partnership group but through Education Scotland and the GTCS. This is an agenda for positive change and reform that should be welcomed and encouraged by every member and I look forward to negotiating on it constructively. After all, that is what we are talking about today: constructive negotiation.

Scotland welcomes students from all over the world. I am pleased that increasing numbers of overseas students from the EU and further afield recognise the superb quality of the higher education that is available in this country.

My officials and I continue to have discussions with EU officials and a range of others to explore this difficult area. My view remains that we should introduce such a mechanism if possible; I wish for such a mechanism to be introduced. Whether it is possible is the subject of the discussions that are taking place.

I am interested in the member’s observations on comments about colleges. Will she comment on an e-mail that I received on behalf of the principal of Edinburgh’s Telford College, Miles Dibsdall, whom she quoted last week in the debate on college reform? He said that he has not spoken to her on any occasion, that he made the comment a considerable period of time ago and that he no longer agrees with it. Perhaps it would have been important to represent that to members.

We see something interesting this morning. The Tory press release that was issued moments ago includes this quote from Liz Smith: “There is an overwhelming opinion across Scotland that the proposed cuts to the further education sector are excessive and will be deeply damaging when it comes to maintaining college places and staff numbers.” I am interested in her opening phrase. I do not think that the Tories are in a position to talk about overwhelming opinions across Scotland because I do not think that they know them. I will tell members what the overwhelming opinion in Scotland is.

No, I will not. The overwhelming opinion in Scotland is in three parts. The first part is against the Tory-Liberal coalition and its cuts—that is the overwhelming opinion in Scotland. The overwhelming opinion in Scotland is also against paying for education. It was incredibly disingenuous of the Tory spokesperson this morning not to talk about raising money by raising student fees, which is her prescription for paying for education in Scotland. She has talked of it before, but she would not talk of it today. Why? Because she is in alliance with Labour, and Labour is edging towards that Tory policy as well. Maybe she wants to give Labour the advantage of it.

I will make a third point before I take Liz Smith’s intervention. The overwhelming opinion across Scotland is also against hypocrisy and scaremongering about colleges, and we have heard more scaremongering this morning. I have regular meetings with the college principals and we are working together to ensure that we get the best out of the situation. Exploitation of them and of students is taking place in the chamber today—we have heard it from one side and we will hear it from the other shortly.

Let the vice speak its name. Is the member suggesting that the Tories would raise fees from students in Scotland? Yes or no?

Ah! There we are. Out of her own mouth she is condemned. Liz Smith is talking about raising fees in Scotland in order to pay for education. The people of Scotland rejected that absolutely in May and they would reject it again. It will be interesting to see whether Labour has the courage to continue with its policy against people paying for education or whether it is moving on to that dreadful, anti-Scottish, anti-educational track. [Interruption.] No—the Scottish tradition is free education and I stand proudly for it. I recommend that members read Iain Macwhirter’s column in today’s The Herald, in which he writes of a Scottish educational tradition that is, unfortunately, foreign to the Tory benches, which explains why the Tories languish where they do.

No, I will not. I want to talk about the reality, not the fiction that the Tories have been involved in. Let me give Parliament some facts. From 2007 until the end of the current spending review period, we will have invested £4.7 billion in colleges alone—40 per cent more, in cash terms, than the investment made under the two terms of the previous Administration. Although the spending review has been tough for colleges—the result of the unholy coalition that is trying to destroy Scottish education, among other things—we will continue to make a significant investment in the sector of more than £500 million in 2012-13.

No, I want to make progress. I will let the member in in a moment. By comparison, the UK Government is reducing its investment in English further education by £1.1 billion from £4.3 billion to £3.2 billion. That is a 25 per cent reduction in cash terms, which is 7 per cent higher than the reduction in Scottish sector funding over the same period. In other words, further education in England is having a real-terms cut of 32.3 per cent. That is a fact. With regard to capital investment, non-profit-distributing investment in colleges represents an additional capital investment of £300 million. Through NPD, we will invest £200 million to build a new City of Glasgow College and are making a combined investment of £100 million to build new colleges in Inverness and Kilmarnock.

The investment that we are making in 2012-13 and 2014-15 will be larger than in any single year of the previous Administration. Moreover, I have listened closely to the sector’s views on the pace of reform. After all, this is reform; we need reform and the colleges know that. In response, I announced a £15 million college transformation fund, which has been welcomed by the NUS and Scotland’s Colleges. In last year’s manifesto, we said that we would maintain student numbers—and that is what we will do. On 11 January, I wrote to colleges to confirm that no college will have a funding reduction of more than 8.5 per cent; indeed, I made it clear in that letter that the delivery of the commitments is based on published Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council baselines. Moreover, not only was I able to identify the 96 per cent of target numbers that we would maintain in a traditional way but, working with the sector and consistent with its suggestions, we are now moving to a different and more flexible provision for 4 per cent of places. Our record on student support is second to none. As has been made clear in various letters, there is no reduction in the baseline for college student support. Baseline student support budgets have increased every year under the Scottish National Party—

I will take Mr Findlay when I have finished this fact. Since 2006-07, we have increased college student support by 25 per cent from £67.3 million to £84.2 million whereas, in the previous four years, the previous Administration increased student support by just 8 per cent. I give way to Mr Findlay.

I am happy to take the member’s intervention.

That is very good of you, Mr Findlay. I am looking forward to your speech as part of the Tory-Labour alliance on this matter. As part of our review on post-16 education, we are reviewing college student support to ensure that the balance between national policy and local discretion is right. That is why I met the NUS yesterday to discuss this issue. We have agreed to ensure that we move quickly to find a better way of paying FE student support that takes away some of the discretionary problems that were put in place by the Tories—of course. We must ensure that, with the sector, we move forward on radical reform to get the best we can from the investment we make. That is our responsibility in this chamber. It is a great pity that only the SNP recognises that. I move amendment S4M-01876.1, to leave out from “condemns” to end and insert: “acknowledges the difficulties resulting from the UK Government’s cuts of over £3 billion to the Scottish block and the inescapable pressures that this creates for college budgets; welcomes the fact that the Scottish Government is ensuring that £265 million of capital investment in colleges is made over the spending review period, including through the non-profit distributing programme; further recognises that the support is in place to maintain student numbers in the coming year; commends the hard work and commitment of college staff and students at all levels, both to improve learner outcomes and to take forward the progressive programme of reform set in train by the Scottish Government, including its plans for a regional structure in which learning provision is better matched to need, and reiterates its support for the creation of 125,000 modern apprenticeships over the current parliamentary session and for the introduction of the Opportunities for All programme, which will provide a suitable place in learning or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds who require it.”

Let me start with the one area of agreement in the Parliament today—with the exception of the personal abuse, which I will not get involved in—[Interruption.]

It was interesting to hear personal abuse, because I know—and other politicians, such as the Conservatives, know—that when the argument is thin the abuse always comes out, which is what happened. Our one area of agreement is that colleges in Scotland are very much needed and very much valued. However, that does not mean that they are immune from the cold winds that are circulating in the entire economy, which were fanned first by Labour and then by the Tories and Liberal Democrats. The kindest thing to say about Mr Findlay is that he lacks understanding of public finances. He believes that there is some “consequentials rabbit”. Well, there is no consequentials rabbit, okay? Labour shot it and the Tories have eaten it. If Mr Findlay is looking for a consequentials rabbit, he will spend a lot of time looking into black holes, because it is not there. We are faced with the reality of financing.

No, I will not give way to Mr Brown. I have heard too much from him this morning, and it has all been nonsense. The fault lies in the UK economy, the funding of the Parliament and the unnatural nature of the constitutional settlement. If we had a constitutional settlement that allowed the Scottish Government and Parliament to spend and raise money in a normal way, we would not be having this debate. However, we do not have such a settlement. The extraordinary situation is that the Opposition parties know that, but cannot admit it to themselves. There has been no answer whatever on where the money will come from. We have simply had constant complaint. I want more money for all education.

Yes, I do. Unfortunately, we are going to have a pantomime, because I will simply reply: “Yes, I do.”

No, indeed. Probably, Mr Brown will see the consequentials rabbit hopping across the chamber somewhere. The reality is that there has been not one indication of where the money will come from. We are facing the reality. It is the college sector, not the Opposition, that is rising to the occasion and taking forward a difficult programme professionally and well to ensure that the places and quality continue. As I have only a short time to speak, I will simply set out 10 facts that indicate the reality. First, from 2007 to the end of the current spending review, we will have invested £4.7 billion in colleges, which is 40 per cent more in cash terms than the investment that was made under the two terms of the previous Administration. Secondly, south of the border, in England, there is a 25 per cent reduction to further education in cash terms and a 32.3 per cent cut in real terms, which is coming from the Tories and Liberals. Thirdly, the Scottish Government’s NPD investment in colleges represents additional capital investment of £300 million at a time when the resources that are available to us are declining. Fourthly, those planned developments, together with our on-going capital spending, will ensure that the value of our capital investment each year will be larger than that in any single year of the previous Administration. Fifthly, in our manifesto last year, we said that we would maintain student numbers and college student support, and that is exactly what we are doing. Sixthly, there is no reduction in the baseline for college student support. We have written to all college principals to make it clear that the student support budget will be maintained at the record baseline level that the Scottish funding council published in December 2010.

No. Seventhly, we have increased college student support by 25 per cent since 2006-07, from £67.3 million to £84.2 million, whereas in the four years prior to that, the previous Administration increased student support by just 8 per cent. Point 8 is that we have protected the education maintenance allowance, when the UK Government has scrapped the scheme for students in England, which has a direct effect on colleges. Ninthly, we will ensure that every single 16 to 19-year-old has a place in learning and we will prioritise college places for 20 to 24-year-olds. Finally, recent figures show that 88.9 per cent of school leavers are going to positive destinations, such as work, training or education, which is a 2 per cent increase on last year and an overall increase of nearly 5 per cent. I am strongly behind the college sector. [Interruption.] The difference between me and the empty vessels that are cackling away among the Tories is that I am working with the sector to ensure productive and positive change. I am not indulging in the class war that we heard about this morning, and nor am I doing the dangerous thing that we heard from Mr McMahon, who actually talked down the achievement of our universities. I am solidly in favour of colleges and universities and the progress of education in Scotland, and I am proud to be a member of a Government that is driving that forward. We will drive it forward successfully and we will see the results.

Of course, that is a typical tactic of the Tories. The point to which Mr Fraser refers is my allegation that the Scottish tradition of free education is so important that to put it in jeopardy risks the whole of Scottish education. I have said that repeatedly and I will go on saying it, because it happens to be true. If the member is proposing fees he should say so, because that is against the Scottish tradition of higher education.

Last June, I commissioned independent reviews into how our universities and colleges are governed. In September, I launched “Putting Learners at the Centre—Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”—our ambitious programme of reform of post-16 education. Our governance reforms were prompted by widespread concern that the existing models were in need of review not because they had failed, but because the time was right to consider their fitness for purpose. Moreover, our subsequent plans for reform set a wider context for change. Those plans extend across the spectrum of post-16 learning, from universities to first-step skills provision. It is fair to say that the college sector occupies a central part of our reform programme, and rightly so, since it provides opportunities for tens of thousands of learners each year. Despite the way in which some people have chosen to characterise the situation, it remains a system in which we shall invest in excess of £2  billion over the spending review period. Therefore, last November, with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, I published a second consultation, this time on a regional system of colleges in which funding would more closely relate to need. We have consulted extensively on both papers and will publish our response to the full consultation in a few weeks. However, I have, being conscious of the need that college representatives expressed for an early announcement, reached conclusions on two important matters: the regions and the colleges that they should comprise. In my statement I also want to outline next steps on the two governance reviews. On governance, our universities and colleges absorb enormous sums of public money. That is as it should be; they are a good investment. The public rightly expect the highest standards of governance and accountability in our universities and colleges, as in our board rooms, in our council chambers and in the Parliament. I am delighted to publish two reports: one on governance in universities, by Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski and his committee, and one by Professor Russel Griggs, on colleges. I very much welcome the reports, which give us a firm basis from which to move forward. We will do so in close consultation with both sectors, to be consistent with the approach that I have taken to all areas of reform. I will highlight the main issues in the reports. Professor von Prondzynski’s committee took evidence from a wide range of interests in Scotland and beyond, including America and Finland. The result is a thoroughly considered piece of work, which I hope will be welcomed across the sector and can form the template for long-term improvements to how our universities are governed. First and foremost, the report recognises the importance of academic freedom and that it is clear that that principle must be protected in any programme of change. I entirely agree. The report also recognises that the sector receives—as I said—and always has received considerable sums of public money, and that it therefore has a clear responsibility to help the Government to take Scotland forward. Again, I agree. I am sure that the sector will agree, too. Against that background, the report advocates a single statute that sets out the basis on which our universities are established, which would remove the anachronism that is inherent in the involvement of the Privy Council and would replace the six different models of governance that are identified in the report, thereby allowing future change to be brokered more easily. The report also addresses the remuneration of senior management, again in the context of the need to give all stakeholders confidence in the leadership of our institutions. Transparency and accountability are, again, the watchwords in that regard. Given the significant levels of public investment, I want to work more closely with the sector to agree a strategic direction. In that sense, Professor von Prondzynski’s proposal for an advisory forum to help to develop strategy is helpful. If confidence is to be maintained, democracy and transparency need to be at the heart of the systems that are used to appoint the people who govern our institutions. I welcome the proposals to address the shortcomings that exist and, in particular, I welcome the intriguing idea of electing chairs of court. As I said, I will consider all the proposals with the sector in the period ahead. I broadly welcome them all and wish to see them being taken forward. On colleges, Russel Griggs has delivered a thought-provoking set of proposals, which links our plans for a regional structure—I shall come to that in a moment—with a new style of governance, which is designed to fit the institutions that will emerge. I am delighted to say that I can accept almost in its entirety the new regional structure that Professor Griggs proposes, which is substantially in tune with our thinking. Professor Griggs also makes significant recommendations on the relationship between Government and the college sector. Back in 1993, colleges were dragged away from local authority control by the United Kingdom Government of the day. That brought some benefits, but it also offered freedom to individual colleges to engage in what has, at times, turned out to be wasteful competition. It allowed the establishment in individual colleges of systems on pay bargaining and curriculum, for example, which has resulted in expensive duplication. We will look very closely at the recommendations of Professor Griggs that are aimed at addressing that issue. Professor Griggs has made a number of other helpful suggestions. He covers the anachronistic stipulations on how a college must be governed, including the rule that debars people aged over 70 from being appointed to a college’s governing body, the provision that debars local councillors—but no other level of elected representative—from accepting an invitation to chair a college’s board of management, and the provision that no local authority employee may accept an invitation to chair a college board, which makes no sense at all. The important point is the principle that underpins Professor Griggs’s work. Our overall approach should be one that holds a college’s governing body closely to account for the outcomes that we want to see, while allowing the governing body the latitude to deliver those outcomes as it sees fit. We have made significant headway on college regionalisation and we have been working closely with the sector on how we will take forward that central element of reform from the next academic year. We can too easily slip into education jargon. Regionalisation is merely the means of restructuring the sector so that colleges work together to plan strategically while continuing to deliver locally; it does not mean “merger”. We need to work out the exact relationship between the regional structures and individual colleges, and we will do so with the colleges themselves. A healthy debate is now under way and that debate includes, where such an approach is desired, institutional merger and other delivery models. I can report that active discussions are taking place on those developments. This week, for example, I discussed with the education director of Glasgow City Council and the principal of Glasgow Caledonian University the prospect of a broader strategic partnership involving schools, colleges and universities in the Glasgow region. Both were hugely enthusiastic about the education benefits that could flow from such a move, so I hope that they will play an active part in shaping and delivering a new plan for that region. Such a model in Glasgow could act as a real force in planning and delivering the sort of coherent learner journey to which we are committed, and the learning and skills pipeline that the city—and, indeed, Scotland—needs in order to accelerate growth. The next important step, therefore, is to confirm the regions, and the colleges that will fall within them in order to allow the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to give colleges the detailed budget information that they need to plan provision for the next academic year and to begin doing so on a regional basis, ahead of full roll-out next year. As this is the best way of meeting the needs of learners and employers, let me outline what I have concluded. There will be 12 regions, most of which are now finalised, but with some detail in two places still to be concluded. The Highlands and Islands region will include Perth College, Lews Castle College, Orkney College, Shetland College, Inverness College, Moray College, North Highland College, Argyll College and West Highland College. The Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire region will comprise Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College. Some work still has to be done on the Fife region, but it will be formed by Adam Smith College and Carnegie College with the non-land-based provision at Elmwood College and the possible involvement of another third sector partner. The Tayside region will be formed by Dundee College and Angus College. The Glasgow region will comprise Anniesland College, North Glasgow College, Stow College, John Wheatley College, Cardonald College, Langside College and City of Glasgow College. The west region will comprise Reid Kerr College and Clydebank College and the Inverclyde campus of James Watt College. The Ayrshire region will include Ayr College, Kilmarnock College and the Kilwinning campus of James Watt College. The Dumfries and Galloway region will comprise Dumfries and Galloway College, but it will be linked at the Crichton site with a wide range of other provision to make a very exciting model. The Borders region will comprise only Borders College. The Lanarkshire region will comprise Coatbridge College, Cumbernauld College, Motherwell College and South Lanarkshire College and the Edinburgh and the Lothians region will comprise Jewel & Esk College, Stevenson College and Telford College, and there will be a central region that might comprise just Forth Valley College. The position of West Lothian College remains uncertain. There has been a great deal of debate about it and I have asked the funding council to progress the issue in discussions. I will meet some of those who are involved in those discussions next week. Finally, I make clear my view that with the land-based colleges it makes better sense to have an arrangement that is based on specialism rather than on geography: they are already working in partnership and are moving to a merger with the Scottish Agricultural College. In summary, those will be the 12 regions for the purposes of planning and funding of FE provision. I am writing today to the funding council to confirm my views. Not everyone will agree, although I think that many will. In any event, I need to make the decisions now so that the sector can get on with restructuring and we can begin to realise the benefits for learners. I conclude with the future governance of the University of the Highlands and Islands—an issue that neither Professor Griggs nor Professor von Prondzynski was asked to consider in detail but which is of key importance. Yesterday, I met all 13 of the university’s academic partners, along with the principal and chair of the university court, to consider how we might move towards the creation of a genuinely integrated structure. I was delighted that the partners offered their support in a number of highly significant areas, including agreement in principle to a new tripartite framework within which the leadership of the institution would sit. Such an arrangement would attach equal weight to the interests of higher education, non-advanced further education and research and specialism. I will meet the partners again in March to progress that approach. In what was a busy day yesterday, I also met representatives of the National Union of Students Scotland who—I am delighted to report—agreed to work with me on examining how we might distribute more effectively the resources that we make available to fund financial support to college students. That will include examining the scope to remove some of the uncertainty that is currently associated with the system’s discretionary nature. I have made a personal commitment to work closely with the sector to tackle the challenges. I have met principals on many occasions collectively and individually; I have listened and am listening. The £15 million college transformation fund and our work with the SFC to alleviate the drop in funding between this academic year and the next are hard evidence of that. We are having the kinds of conversations that people once said were impossible. However, we still have a lot to do. The next step is to give the sector the detail that it needs about next year’s funding. With a decision on the regions, the funding council is now in a position to do that and I expect that information to be with colleges imminently.

There are elements in Mr Henry’s points with which I agree. There is a strong role for the funding council—its role will have to change and develop to match the new circumstances. Accountability is one of the issues that we are looking at. I hope that the Labour Party has responded to the post-16 consultation, which raised the issue of the funding council’s role. I welcome Mr Henry’s views on changes in universities. I am grateful for the report on that, which we will take forward through discussion and consensus, because there are some very important things in it. A key point is that the accountability of universities is central to how we view universities in Scotland. There is a great deal in the report on which we can agree. I also agree that charitable status is important, so we need to find the right way forward on that. There are a number of possible ways forward, and the view of Scotland’s Colleges is not the only important view in that regard. I disagree on regionalisation, of course. It is not a shotgun marriage or a forced marriage: there has been a great deal of discussion about the proper regions. Indeed, the whole purpose of today’s statement is to respond to the report from Russel Griggs, which outlines the ideas for regionalisation and makes a very cogent argument for ensuring that it takes place broadly as I have outlined today. On funding, I simply say this: as a Government, we are in a difficult position. We should have a normal funding situation in this country, but we do not. In discussion of funding in the chamber, with the Labour Party and everyone else, I have not heard on even one occasion a member say, “We will find the money here.” What they have said is, “Give us more money.” There is a solution to that. Give us independence.

Those were three interesting questions. The first represents the very basis of Conservatism: a refusal to modernise and to change and a determination to stay where one is and to ensure that nothing gets better. In 1993, we saw the incorporation of the colleges—

In 1993, there was of course a Conservative reform to colleges—

The radical nature of it was that it removed any—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Let me respond to those who have made remarks from a sedentary position. The nature of that reform was to remove any democratic accountability whatever, to drag the universities and colleges out of democratic accountability and to stuff them full of Tory cronies. That did not succeed in Scotland because there were not that many Tory cronies—there is a distinct lack of Tory cronies in Scotland, thank goodness. It is not the best model and we can move forward with a better model. The Conservatives could and should welcome change and progressive thinking. However, on modernisation, they are against it; on the change to university structures and functions, they are against it; and on regional boards, they are against them. The Conservatives are defined by what they are against, not by what they are for. I would like their close involvement in, for example, the debate on university chairs. Alan Simpson was a representative of the chairs and he has issued a minority report that disagrees with three items. He has the right to do so and that debate will take place. I have spoken to one of the university chairs in the past week and have listened to his point of view. I have also agreed to meet other university chairs. Such debate and discussion is the hallmark of the Government’s involvement in educational reform. Reform is a good thing; it is only the Tories who are always against it.

That is a strong point. The regional boards and, I hope, the university courts must be cognisant of the fact that they serve a range of communities, which must be represented on and participate in the boards. I give the member a guarantee that staff and students will certainly be a part of the regional board structure.

Neil Findlay makes a good point. The reason why I have not made a final decision is that a cogent argument to look at the matter in a different way is being put forward by the college, by West Lothian Council, by other partners, by the constituency member and by regional members. I am keen for us to get the right solutions in each part of the country. As I indicated briefly in my statement—I am happy to discuss it at greater length with any member, although not immediately—different patterns will emerge in different parts of the country. In Glasgow, for example, it is likely that senior-phase school education and university education will be involved. In West Lothian, a pattern that involves the community, the council, the college, Skills Development Scotland and others would be perfectly feasible. I will meet the council leader and others next week, and I would be happy to hear from those who have interests in the matter. If Mr Findlay would like to write to me on it, I would be happy to consider his representations.

Yes. The regional boards are about taking a strategic overview of what is delivered. They should allow the priorities within regions to be more closely focused on the requirements of the regions and, indeed, of parts of those regions. They are not about centralising provision or activity. I visited Angus College with Graeme Dey before Christmas. We saw the work that was being done locally and we saw an intriguing and innovative approach to ensuring that students in Angus who live distant from the college can make it to the college for classes. Colleges can and should be imaginative about a wide range of access issues. This is not about reducing local provision; it is about focusing local provision more closely on local need.

I have just addressed travel in one area. Travel in the new west region will be an important issue. In a region that comprises Clydebank College, Reid Kerr College and the Inverclyde campus of James Watt College, travel issues will be raised. Through working together in the regional board, those colleges will be able to make more closely together strategic decisions about the courses that are delivered in the area. At present, Clydebank College looks west to Dumbarton and has tended to look to Glasgow as well. If it looked across the river and took a different approach, that would require something of a reorientation, but it has entered voluntarily into the discussion. Such an approach might enhance the subject choice that is available to people who normally go to that college. It would certainly enhance the subject choice in Inverclyde, because Clydebank College has other specialisms. There are lots of new opportunities. I am sure that the college principals, working with the regional board, will work out closely what is required and how they can deliver it.

During the election campaign last spring, Sandra White and I were actively involved in discussions with the University of Glasgow. One issue that we all recognised then was that better dialogue was needed in the institution—the principal has accepted that in comments that he has made since then. The proposed changes are likely to produce that, as they will create a modernised university system that is based on a single statute, with accountability through the chair—if chairs are elected, which is up for discussion. The proposal to have elected chairs is modest. It would involve a nominating committee that would deal with a limited number of candidates who would be offered to a limited electorate—although that electorate has still to be fully defined. We should remember universities’ wider responsibility to their communities. Election of chairs would be an additional democratic element in ensuring that universities are responsive. Modernising the underpinning statute for universities should also allow for that. We have some distance to go, but we have started on the journey positively with Professor von Prondzynski’s report, which addresses the issues that arose last year, including the salary and accountability point that Mr Henry made.

There is no such proposal. I say charitably to Alison McInnes that both the points that she made are chimeras. There is no proposal to “siphon off ... reserves”. The question whether reserves should be part of the resource that colleges use when they undergo reform and transformation has arisen. As for “rainy-day reserves”, colleges that have reserves for new buildings and other matters will want to retain them, but colleges should invest in the future. On autonomy, I have made it absolutely clear that colleges will continue to operate locally and serve locally. The member is either ill-informed or scaremongering; I hope that it is the former.

That question is important. I hope that, as discussions take place—especially when mergers are to occur—those who are involved will consider successful activity elsewhere. It is interesting that the City of Glasgow College has just established a resource to make more widely available all the information that was generated in the merger that created it, in order to allow people to study and learn from what took place. There have been other mergers from which we can learn; the merger has been a commonplace process in Scottish education in the past 30 years. Perhaps the important thing to stress—Linda Fabiani was right to raise the point—is that the process of education is about learners; it is not about institutions or managers. If we keep that in mind, I am sure that good sense will prevail.

I make the point again—I make it very genuinely—that the interests of learners and education must be paramount. I expect principals, boards and the rest of the system to recognise that. I have made it clear in one or two cases in which I thought that mergers became a matter of institutional preference because of managers that that was the wrong thing to happen. We need continually to bear that in mind. With regard to the question about Audit Scotland, I remain open to ensuring that there is effective scrutiny of the actions of every public body. We should remember that, although there are substantial sums of money in the university sector, it is not a simple issue. For example, around 30 per cent of the budget of the University of St Andrews comes from Scottish Government sources, but the amount is around 80 per cent for the University of the West of Scotland, so there are differences in levels of scrutiny. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council needs to be part of that, but we should debate whether other organisations need to be involved. As we move towards legislation, I make it clear that I am interested in having that discussion. I am quite sure that the Education and Culture Committee will also wish to do so, as will others. When legislation comes along, there will be an opportunity not only to scrutinise it, but to amend it.

I am aware of the strong representations on the matter that have been made by local members. I wish that I had had time in my full statement to go through what will now take place. I spoke to the principal of James Watt College earlier this afternoon to inform her of this decision. It is not the decision that she wanted, but we had a useful discussion. We now need to get the mechanism to take the issue forward, as the member suggests. I would perhaps seek a mechanism that would, first of all, give the lead responsibility for the Kilwinning campus to one of the Ayrshire colleges. Some 95 per cent of the students at the Kilwinning campus come from Ayrshire. Once that lead responsibility is in place, but with the payment of staff and other domestic arrangements still in the hands of James Watt College, a process of negotiation should take place for that asset and responsibility to move over time. The most important thing is that that process should not be disruptive to the students. If lead responsibility is part of a pan-Ayrshire structure, and financial and structural responsibility are negotiated over a period of time, we will handle the situation well and constructively. The principal gave me the commitment that the college would engage in those constructive negotiations.

I will meet Elaine Smith and another constituency member who has asked for such a meeting. It would be a brave man who took sides in some of these disputes. I have seen the arguments from both sides. Those who read last week’s Times Educational Supplement will know that there are two sides to the issue. We need to sit down and discuss how the issue will move forward. The announcement today of the Lanarkshire regional board gives a context in which things can go ahead. It would be perfectly possible, within that regional structure, to have one merged college consisting of three coming together, and another college that is not merged. It would be up to the colleges to decide how they wanted to arrange that. If, as seems to be the case, the colleges have a genuine interest in merger but some difficulty about how the merger will take place, a discussion could take place with the funding council and others to see how they might be of assistance.

What I have announced is crucial to the delivery of opportunities for all. I am glad that the Minister for Youth Employment agrees with me on that. We have a joint responsibility to ensure that opportunities for all makes the contribution that we believe it can make in eliminating people who do not have positive destinations. The college sector, with SDS in particular, will be crucial in allowing that. We envisage a college sector that focuses on regional and employment need as being crucial, and what I have announced will produce that.

Life is made more exciting by paradox. There is a paradox in this case, and I am happy to explain it. The land-based colleges demonstrated well to me their desire to work together. The colleges volunteered to work with the Scottish Agricultural College and are engaged in a merger process. It would have been perverse of me to stop that in its tracks and to tell them to do something different. In reality, the merger of the land-based colleges produces two issues that require to be addressed, one of which is how specialised colleges work together. Pinning that on the SAC’s involvement gives a structure. Secondly, there is, in Elmwood College, provision that is not land based, and I have mentioned that that will require to be undertaken in the Fife region. However, there is a big opportunity. Indeed, I am sorry that Alex Fergusson did not ask about the opportunity in Dumfries and Galloway. One of the most exciting things in all the proposals is the possibility on the Crichton site—which I recognise is partially outwith the member’s constituency—of providing something that is unique in Scotland, which will possibly run from a sixth-form college through Dumfries and Galloway College to three universities, the Scottish Agricultural College and research institutes. That is tremendous, and I am very much looking forward to discussions that can help to take it forward. I hope that the member will help to do so.

Of course I would be happy to meet the member and the cross-party group. I am regularly asked about that issue in colleges; indeed, it was raised when I was in John Wheatley College on Friday. I make it absolutely clear that nobody—and I mean nobody—should be refused a place in college or university because of their disability. Colleges exist to help individuals to prepare for employment; that is what they are all about. Allowing and encouraging people to use the college sector to move forward is exactly what we should be doing. Therefore, I am happy to meet the member and his group.

The matter is not as simple as Murdo Fraser outlines. There is a charitable status issue, but there are other issues that affect the viability of colleges, and I am constantly engaged with all of them. The member should wait to see what happens with the proposals. It was not particularly helpful for the matter to be made an issue today by Scotland’s Colleges. It should be more focused, as its members are, on ensuring that we agree the basis of regionalisation and move forward. Scotland’s Colleges sometimes needs to listen a bit more closely to the concerns of its members on the matter. To raise the issue today of all days was perhaps a little bit of a red herring.

Ministers and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council have consistently encouraged collaboration within and between the college and university sectors. I am in regular contact with representatives from the higher education sector—including Universities Scotland, which I met this morning—to ensure that our priorities as a Government are known. In my letter of guidance to the Scottish funding council in September, I set out the need to ensure university and industry collaboration and the exploitation of research. An example of what is being done in the sector is that, since 2003, the council has invested more than £150 million in a research pooling initiative to encourage researchers across Scottish universities to pool their resources and respond to increasing international competition and collaboration.

Absolutely. I am delighted to see that level of collaboration and co-operation. I know that the universities in Aberdeen are actively engaged in a Scottish culture of research and teaching. The University of Aberdeen, Robert Gordon University and the University of Dundee have all worked together as part of the northern research partnership in engineering to develop excellent research in engineering and related disciplines. I will be at Robert Gordon University this evening to talk to its principal and visiting principals of Irish universities. One issue that will be raised is the way in which Scottish universities are building on collaborative ventures.

We take our responsibilities in that area seriously and continue to work to ensure that in taking financial decisions we pay due regard to their impact on equality. An exercise was undertaken to gather available information about equalities groups that are likely to be affected by the further education budget proposals. That is summarised in the equality budget statement, which was published alongside the “Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13” and is available on the Scottish Government’s website.

There is no cut in the student support budget. The baseline has been protected as the Government promised it would be—in fact, it has increased from the bad old days when Labour was in power very substantially indeed. I always look for opportunities to continue to add to that sum in year, and I will continue to do so. However, the reality is that this Government has been second to none—and I mean second to no party in the chamber or elsewhere—in defence of student finance. That is a lesson that members should take.

I intend to present the findings of the post-16 reform consultation report to the Parliament in the coming weeks.

I wrote to the Scottish funding council on 25 January 2012 with additional strategic guidance on funding allocations for 2012-13 that will allow it to make clear the funding arrangements for the land-based colleges. I strongly support the arrangement that those colleges are taking forward. I think that an arrangement based on speciality is entirely sensible in that regard and I am sure that the funding council will pay attention to that.

We have proposed no reduction in the baseline for college student support. I wrote to all college principals on 11 January to make clear that the student support budget will be maintained at the record baseline level that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council published in December 2010. In that way, we intend to protect college students from the reductions that we have been forced to make elsewhere as a result of Westminster’s swingeing £3.3 billion cut in Scotland’s block grant over the spending review period.

I find the prospect of Dr Simpson weeping crocodile tears to be deeply distasteful. The reality of the situation is this—I am sorry that he was not here to hear it in my answer to an earlier question. We have massively increased the baseline figure from what we inherited. If the figure that I gave is regarded as unsatisfactory, the figure that existed when we came to office was even more unsatisfactory. We have preserved the baseline figure, as we said we would, so that commitment has been fulfilled. Unfortunately, Dr Simpson was not here to hear what I said earlier; I would like him to hear it, and if Labour members would stop muttering, he would be able to hear it. I said that I would like to be able to find additional resource, but this is a very tough time because of Labour financial incompetence, followed by Tory and Liberal pressures. However, I go on defending the record of this Government in the college sector and in support of students because it is—I repeat—second to none.

I always press for resources, but I have found an additional £15 million for the college transformation fund and I will go on looking for opportunities. However, we have a fair, full and final settlement for colleges. I find it equally distasteful to be lectured on college funding by the Liberal Democrats, whose party is slashing college funding south of the border in an extraordinary way and whose record on provision for students is the worst of any party in the chamber.

My figures are impeccable. I am one of those people who went out and argued for students. I put myself on the line to argue for students. We now know that Labour wants to renege on its previous promise. [Interruption.]

Labour now wants to charge students for going to university—we saw that last week. Indeed, we heard Margaret Curran say that the SNP’s policy on students was unfair. [Interruption.]

On this matter, the Labour Party cannot be trusted, because it is trying to exaggerate and to misrepresent. This Government has improved the baseline figure. When Labour was in government—that was a long time ago, and it will be longer still before it comes back into government—it did nothing.

Colleges exist to help people towards employment and we have made it clear that that should include everyone, regardless of whether they might have learning or other disabilities. Ultimately, colleges take their own decisions on which courses to offer and whom to enrol, but we have made clear to the college sector the value that we place on non-recognised qualifications when they provide an access route to employment, including for people with disabilities, and that, when that is the case, we expect such provision to be protected.

The proactive actions that we have taken are the actions that are needed. We have undertaken strategic reform of the colleges to allow them to perform in the way in which they should perform; we have provided a protection of the number of places, which we guaranteed in a letter to principals last week; and we have established a great focus on ensuring that colleges deliver for those who need them most. We have a huge opportunity to develop the college sector in a way that will serve Scotland even better. As ever, Labour is on the side of those who do not want change, even change for the better.

The 2011 teacher census indicates that there were 51,286 full-time equivalent teachers in our local authority schools on the relevant date in September 2011, which compares with 54,916 in 2007. The difference reflects a fall in pupil numbers of more than 3 per cent and indicates quite clearly that the artificially high level to which teacher numbers had been driven by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration was unsustainable.

In Burns week, Margaret McDougall, as an Ayrshire representative, might remember the line, “facts are chiels that winna ding.” Here is the fact.

I know that Labour members do not like facts, but I will give them this one, as it is important. As of December 2011, the teacher unemployment levels for the United Kingdom and Scotland were: 20.2 per 1,000 in Northern Ireland; 12.9 per 1,000 in Wales; 12.6 per 1,000 in England; and four per 1,000 in Scotland. That number has got better and better for the past three years. A great deal of effort has been put into creating a sustainable level of teacher employment, and Margaret McDougall should be congratulating the Government on that, rather than harking back.

I met representatives of NUS Scotland on Wednesday 14 December at a meeting that was attended by representatives of the union at a national level and student presidents of individual colleges. I have since had informal discussions with elected officials of NUS Scotland, most recently last Thursday, which, as usual, have involved constructive and challenging dialogue around a wide range of issues that affect students in Scotland. I will meet officials next week to discuss matters further.

As ever, Neil Findlay is muttering away. I find it astonishing that, when the Labour Party—which brought forward the Brown review, ensured that students south of the border have to pay £9,000 a year and, through Margaret Curran, whom members of the party may wish to disown, says that students will have to pay for their education—finds an issue that it thinks it can use to worry the SNP, it will not ask about it once or twice but will go on asking about it. However, that issue does not worry the SNP. There is an answer—the true answer. In our manifesto last year, we said that we will maintain student numbers and college student support. That is exactly what we are doing. We secured an increased baseline for 2011—£84.2 million—and we are ensuring that it is maintained. We also secured a share of £15 million of Barnett consequentials, split over two years. However, that was a one-off addition, as we made perfectly clear at the time. We have protected the increases that Labour never delivered. I will say that repeatedly to students, to the NUS and to Labour, because the reality is that, on this occasion, Labour is misrepresenting the facts. I will not allow that to happen in Scottish education.

When we see the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service figures next week, we will know what the situation is. However, the interim figures that have been released tend to indicate that application figures in Scotland are better than those in England. We have adopted a positive and progressive view of what education should be. We believe in the right to free education. We have provided a better system than exists south of the border. It is, of course, typical of the Labour Party not to give credit for that, because it gives credit for nothing to Scotland.

I wrote to college principals on 11 January indicating that colleges will receive funding for the academic year 2012-13 that will allow student numbers to be maintained at 2011-12 baseline levels. That will involve 4 per cent of places being funded through a pilot scheme that is aimed at promoting greater synergy between Skills Development Scotland and colleges.

I am indeed committed to collective bargaining and a national scheme of pay and conditions. I have made that absolutely clear for a considerable time and have discussed it at a number of meetings with the college sector and, on Thursday night, with trade unions in Glasgow. I hope that we will be able to continue to make progress on that.

I hope to announce next week my thinking on the regions and how far that has progressed. As somebody who was brought up in Ayrshire, I am fully familiar with its boundaries and recognise the representations that have been made to me by Ayrshire MSPs.

I inform the member—although she will know this already, as this is about the fifth time that I have said this today—that I was able to write to college principals on 11 January indicating that colleges will receive funding for the academic year 2012-13 that will allow student numbers to be maintained at 2011-12 baseline levels. Staffing and the curriculum are matters for colleges themselves to determine. We have made it clear that, where colleges need to reduce staffing, that should be done in a way that avoids compulsory redundancies. There is also benefit to be had from the £15 million transformation fund. We have, however, no power to direct colleges on the issue, that power having been given up in 2006 by the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration.

I get on well with Jackie Baillie as a neighbouring MSP, but I think that she is being unfair about this. The letter includes the word “baseline”. As a former minister—admittedly, that was some time ago—Jackie Baillie can remember what the word “baseline” means. The letter says “baseline” and the baseline is the figure on which the funding is based—every principal knew that. When the letter was released, it had the word “baseline” in it. I cannot say more than that. What worries me is the conservatism—with both a small c and a large C—of the Labour members. We know about the collaboration with the Conservatives, but Labour stands against reform of any description. We have a college sector that needs reform, as almost everybody in it knows. It needs change: it needs to go from 41 colleges into a better and more manageable structure, and there is an acknowledgement that we need to focus more on the needs of learners. People who know about the college sector want to see those things happen, but Labour’s only response is constantly to oppose such change. That will mean that Labour will be left behind in this argument. It will be left arguing about other things; it will not be arguing about how we serve our young people. That is a great pity, because there should be a desire across this chamber to ensure that our young people are served as well as possible and that our college sector can operate with them and with the wider groupings that it attracts. What we have heard repeatedly this afternoon—we may hear it again—is some members looking backward on the issue instead of trying to change the college sector to be more efficient and more effective and to deliver more. I intend to do the latter. It would be nice to have the support of the chamber in doing so, but Labour members just want to prevent things from happening.

Since the teacher induction scheme was introduced in 2002, the Scottish Government has ensured that every new teacher is offered a one-year contract of employment as a probationer. Despite the difficult financial circumstances in which we find ourselves, we have secured an agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that local government will maintain teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers and secure places for all probationers who require one under the teacher induction scheme.

There are so many possible answers to that question that it is difficult to know where to start. Let us start with the position of Ed Balls. He has made it clear that the Labour Party should be indicating that some cuts are necessary, but that message has clearly not made it as far as far as Rutherglen or Mr Kelly, who continues to chant the same mantras. As the First Minister correctly pointed out earlier, the local authority share of Government spending is actually at a strong level. I also used figures earlier—[Interruption.] Shouting from Mr Kelly will make no difference to the truth. [Interruption.] In December 2011—

I only raise my voice to allow the chamber to hear me over the hubbub.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In December 2011, the rate of teacher unemployment was 20.2 per thousand in Northern Ireland; it was 12.9 per thousand in Wales, under a Labour Administration; it was 12.6 per thousand in England; and it was four per thousand in Scotland. If Mr Kelly thinks about those figures carefully—if he takes them home and studies them—he will discover that they indicate positive progress on the matter. I am sure that he will then come back to the chamber to say “Well done.” Actually, I am not sure of that, but I am aye hoping.

I do not want to interrupt the flow, except to say that I was there and that that was not what happened. It is important that members recognise that. I want to get one thing clear. The SNP accepts that it did not sign the claim of right, but it did not sign it because the Constitutional Convention would not discuss independence. That is a fact. I was there and I took part in that discussion. The issue now is whether we will all sign the claim of right today. From the Patricia Ferguson’s point of view, it is a matter of right or wrong; from our point of view, the claim of right would take people forward. Is that not a prize worth having?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Perhaps you would ask Mr Henry to withdraw that remark. That was not what was taking place.

It is complete nonsense.

As somebody who was there—my memory is still basically intact—I am happy to repeat what I said to Patricia Ferguson at the start of the debate. The refusal of the members of the convention, including the Liberals, to allow independence to be placed as a realistic option in those discussions was absolute and meant that the SNP could not join. We have learned from that and our proposals for Scotland are inclusive. I hope that Mr Rennie will learn and realise that it is nonsensical to assert that the Scottish National Party is not interested in Scottish sovereignty.

Will the member give way, because there is?

The opening words are “In the Constitutional Convention”, so the claim of right declares that those who have signed it are in the Constitutional Convention. We were not in the convention, for the reason that I have given.

I was struck this morning on reading the coverage of yesterday’s events by an article by Rebecca McQuillan in The Herald describing the events in Edinburgh castle. She described a young Catalan television journalist called Carles Costa. She says of him: “Bundled up in a heavy coat against a Scottish January, and regretting not having eaten lunch before he came, he explained what made the greatest impression on him: that in the UK, it was possible to debate independence in polite terms.” I fear that Señor Costa might be a little disappointed this afternoon. There is some distance still to go before we are having the type of debate that we should have in Scotland on those issues. I will deal mostly with the attitude of the Labour Party this afternoon, but I will touch on two other matters first. First, the attitude of the Tories is absolutely baffling. Both speakers appeared to be conducting a seminar on constitutional theory. They were actually echoing—in a very strange way—words that the Secretary of State for Scotland, Arthur Woodburn, pronounced in 1949 in the House of Commons. On the question of whether Scotland’s people would wish to make their own decisions, he said: “the answer, undoubtedly, would be ‘Yes.’” However, he went on to say: “Such questions are quite unrealistic and have no reference to the practical application of such a sentiment. The answers which they automatically provoke are quite valueless.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 16 November 1949; Vol 469, c 2094.] David McLetchie and Murdo Fraser never told us whether they believed in the sovereign right of the Scottish people to do anything. They indulged in sophistry all afternoon. That shows why the Tories are utterly irrelevant to this debate.

That is a clearer exposition than the one that we heard two hours ago, but it is still irrelevant to this debate. We are asking people to sign on to a simple statement. We will see when they vote whether or not they believe in the sovereignty of the Scottish people. I will not spend any time on the position of the Liberals, because I do not understand that either. They are a bit like Lord Wallace on television last night, who—as some members will have seen—was not waving, but drowning in this debate. They have little relevance, too. The problem with the Labour Party that I have identified this afternoon is a serious one. I think that Theresa May once described the Tory party as becoming the “nasty party” in politics, and—unfortunately—we began to see that this afternoon. Mr Findlay’s speech was utterly remarkable. Two things were running through my mind while I was listening to it, the first of which was the endless insistence on something that the Labour Party tried to insist on in the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s: that the constitutional debate had nothing to do with social progress, that it was a distraction and that we needed to get on with social progress. Well, that failed in the 1950s, the 1960s and the 1970s, and it will fail again. Also going through my mind was an echo of something that I used to hear in the first session of the Parliament. When Neil Findlay intervened, I suddenly realised what it was. We were hearing an echo of Tommy Sheridan talking about class war. I knew and was not a great supporter of Tommy Sheridan; Mr FindIay is no Tommy Sheridan. Labour’s argument was entirely based on history. It was entirely based on what happened 23 years ago, in late January and early February 1989. At the beginning of the debate I made it clear to Patricia Ferguson that if she thought that the SNP had made a mistake at the time she should be glad that we lodged the motion for today’s debate, because that shows that we are overcoming that historical mistake. However, we can never apologise to the Labour Party. Labour members did not want to hear a word of it; they wanted to hear their own voices going on and on about what happened 23 years ago, which nobody can remember. I was there and I am having huge difficulty remembering exactly what happened. Nobody is interested in what the SNP did or did not do. The historical record needs to be set right, in a small way. All that we heard about the SNP’s failure to do this or that is set a little at naught by Canon Kenyon Wright in his book, “The People Say Yes: The Making of Scotland’s Parliament”, in which he wrote: “From the SNP’s own point of view it would probably have been wiser never to have been involved at all. From the Convention’s point of view however it is good that they were there, even if only for some of the preparatory stages. Their presence and their demands propelled the Labour Party and other partners into concessions which they might not otherwise have been prepared to offer or accept. The whole idea of sovereignty, and of real progress by consensus, were matters which the Churches had certainly proposed from the start in the Convention, but which the SNP’s brief flirtation reinforced.” The SNP’s influence in the convention was there. As I made clear several times, the SNP’s lack of involvement had its reasons then but is utterly irrelevant now. Let us look forward and talk about what we have to achieve. According to Kenyon Wright, at the first meeting of the convention in 1989: “Donald Dewar called for ‘independence for Scotland, independence of action, the reality of power, the control of our own affairs, our relations and continuing links with the rest of the United Kingdom.’” That is a good description of the constitutional chapter that we are moving through, which needs to be renewed in different terms. For the SNP, those terms are independence itself, but we acknowledge that some do not support that. In 2012, as in 1989, there is support among the people and civic society in Scotland for full devolution within the United Kingdom. That, in their view, is the form of Government that is best suited to Scotland. I disagree, but I am upset that Malcolm Chisholm has moved from his position of endorsing the possibility of wider choice. Let us find out from the people of Scotland.

Can I please make progress? I am close to the end of my speech. That is why we have asked the people of Scotland to take part in discussions during the next weeks and months. We want to ensure that they have the opportunity to have their voices heard on the matter. The history of the claim of right is not the question today. The question today is not about individual politicians and parties. It is not about high office. It is not about the mace and the rituals of this Parliament. The question is simple: it is whether power rests with the people. If members do not trust the people, they will vote the motion down. If they believe that the people of Scotland are sovereign and that we are looking forward with confidence to our future and trying to come together to resolve our differences to secure a better Scotland, they should vote for the motion. I ask the Labour Party to stop being the nasty party. I ask it to be the positive party and to join us and prove the irrelevance that we have over here—I regret that even now I see that the leader of the Labour Party is refusing to do that. That would be a tragedy for Scotland.

This is the second education debate in two days. I am glad to have strong parliamentary engagement in and scrutiny of education, as that is crucial in building a better and independent Scotland. I congratulate Hugh Henry on his new post as education spokesperson for Labour and welcome his team. I look forward to their contribution to education in the coming months. Hugh Henry’s return to the education brief after four and a half years is a clear example of education being a long-term endeavour. The work in which all colleagues in Scotland’s education system are engaged today builds on the work of their predecessors. In turn, we are delivering the foundations for those who will have the privilege of and responsibility for improvement in future. I visited Finland in March 2010 and Ontario later that spring. Both of them have world-class education systems that are based on high-quality teaching and a consensus on the purpose of overall education policy. Those are the hallmarks of a world-class system. In Scotland, there has been a remarkable degree of consensus in the Parliament and the Scottish education community on the purposes of education and the way forward for this country. The development of curriculum for excellence is the prime example of that. Despite differences on specific details and the timing of development, that consensus has lasted for four sessions of Parliament and almost 10 years. The Parliament has maintained a shared vision of Scotland’s learning system that is based on the values that are on the mace in the chamber: wisdom, justice, integrity and compassion. That consensus is a considerable achievement and we need to keep it. I commend the work of tens of thousands of professional and dedicated teachers and hundreds of thousands of hard-working pupils across Scotland. We should all welcome their work and the progress that is being made, because it means that we are continuing to improve the life chances of all children and young people. That is a continuous process—it is never done and things can always be improved. The subject of the debate, which is improving learning outcomes, is vital. We are all responsible for continuing to ensure that our children experience and benefit from high-quality pre-school and school environments. That is particularly important in supporting children from challenging and disadvantaged backgrounds. Improving learning outcomes means that all our children enter an education system that supports and nurtures their development and enables them to make sustained progress. I am pleased, for example, that the number of exclusions has reduced by 40 per cent during the Government’s term of office. Improving learning outcomes also means that learning has breadth, depth and challenge, that knowledge is aligned to the development and application of skills and that our young people leave school ready and able to fulfil their ambitions. It means improving achievement and qualifications, and our young people should be congratulated on the improvements that we have seen year after year in the breadth and level of qualifications that they have obtained. It means helping more of our young people to enter education, training or work on leaving school. In such difficult economic times, it is good to see that almost 89 per cent of recent school leavers were going on to positive destinations, and 63 per cent were entering further or higher education. I will say more about the key issue of employability later. It means having an education system that is recognised and respected around the globe. International evidence from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development confirms that Scotland has a good education system and that, after the drop in performance that we saw between 2000 and 2006, the decline has stopped. I take this opportunity to confirm to Parliament that around 3,000 of our 15-year-olds will be taking part in the next OECD assessment survey—the programme for international student assessment, or PISA—in early spring this year. I offer my thanks to schools and pupils for agreeing to represent Scotland in such an important international survey, and I wish them well. Such assessment should not be seen as the sole measure of the success of our system. It provides a useful international comparison when placed alongside other evidence, and it provides compelling evidence that our young people’s performance is improving. It also confirms that we have the skills, ambition and ability to deliver improvement and to go on improving. It proves that the majority of our children and young people can and do experience learning that enables them to fulfil their ambitions. It also confirms, however, that we must continue to work harder to deliver for all our children and young people. The international evidence and our understanding of who has succeeded and is succeeding in Scotland tell us that our challenge is to continue to deliver improved learning and outcomes for all, and that we must do more for those who are not benefiting.

I certainly agree with the member that we should look for rich attainment, which is the widest possible attainment. That is not judged simply by examination results or league tables; it relates to the individual child. In the coming year, we must continue to emphasise an ethos of continued improvement. Raising attainment is central to improving outcomes. Parliament will know that I recently asked five successful head teachers and ex-head teachers to draw on their experience and provide advice on improving attainment in our schools. I also welcome the work that the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland is doing on how to raise attainment and improve life chances, all within the context of curriculum for excellence. Those complementary pieces of work will be valuable in driving and supporting improvement. In March, I intend to send the key messages on raising attainment that those groups have discerned to all teachers. It will be important that schools use the advice and issues raised by those valuable pieces of work to focus their improvement planning for the coming year and subsequent years. That type of idea sharing is indicative of an education system that is keen to improve. It is important that experiences and ideas are received into an environment that is characterised by a can-do spirit that recognises that our education system serves the needs of all our children. It is only through a culture of collegiality and capacity building that improvement can and will be made, and we will see improved attainment and outcomes for all our young people. That culture also needs to be ambitious. Our teachers and education leaders must focus on improving attainment and outcomes for all pupils. The Canadian educator Avis Glaze memorably said “Poverty is not destiny”. All pupils need to be supported. All pupils can attain. All pupils need to be encouraged to aspire to and gain some sort of qualification. Qualifications are a major focus in considering attainment. New qualifications are being developed to better reflect the balance of knowledge and skills under curriculum for excellence. Those qualifications will simplify the current system and offer increased flexibility with a greater focus on skills and applying learning to real-life situations. That will better prepare learners for progression from the senior phase to a college, university, other learning, or employment opportunity. The development work around the new national qualifications is continuing and is on track for the final arrangements to be published in April this year. The child is at the heart of education, but there is also the teacher to consider. The crucial importance of the teacher is clearly borne out by research and was recently confirmed in Graham Donaldson’s report. We all know the vital role that teachers play, so it was welcome when Professor Gerry McCormac’s independent review of teacher employment confirmed that the quality of teachers and teaching in Scotland was high and that the continuous improvement of the profession was a key strand in improving outcomes. It is important that Scottish education gives due consideration to that report’s recommendations. I will provide Parliament with a more detailed statement on the way forward for the McCormac review in the near future. Rightfully, many of its recommendations are the business of the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers. I am pleased that the SNCT is now taking that work forward. The heart of a great education system is not structures or processes but the ambition, dedication and skills of those who deliver learning day in and day out to the hundreds of thousands of pupils in Scotland. Of course, there is another crucial part of our education system: the contribution that parents make to supporting and enabling improved outcomes for children and young people. I am pleased that work is under way on developing a national parenting strategy and the early years framework. My colleague Aileen Campbell spoke about the importance of parenting in yesterday’s good and productive debate. I will continue strongly to encourage schools to promote parental involvement in the curriculum for excellence. Improvement in attainment, health, wellbeing and key skills can be and are strongly influenced and supported by positive parental attitudes and good home learning environments. On the relationship between education and employability, I am committed to ensuring that all our young people are equipped with the knowledge and skills that they need to progress through education into sustained jobs. A successful education is clearly defined by the oft-quoted four capacities of the curriculum for excellence: it should ensure successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. Therefore, it is important that our young people have the core, basic skills such as numeracy and literacy; that they develop effective approaches to learning and applying their learning; and that they achieve a range of relevant qualifications. It is also important that education maximises the opportunities for a young person to access rewarding employment. Although record numbers of young people are entering further and higher education, too many continue to leave school at the earliest possible point without a stable or long-term destination, although the figures for positive destinations have improved year on year under this Government. I am clear that staying and learning after age 16 is undoubtedly the best way of improving one’s long-term job prospects. The senior phase of curriculum for excellence is vital to achieving that. It is about ensuring that young people are able to access a wide range of learning in a place and at a time that suits them and that they get the support that they need to enable them to participate in the option that is right for them. Through the Government’s reform of post-16 education, we will continue to build on and improve post-16 progression pathways for our learners. Through the opportunities for all programme, we have given a specific commitment to all our 16 to 19-year-olds who are currently not in a job, learning or training to a place in post-16 education and training. That also means support for those who are at risk of disengaging, support for those who have already done so and a much greater focus in the post-16 education system on meeting the needs of every person. I have outlined some of the strengths of the Scottish education system as well as where and how improvement must be made. It is not complacent to celebrate our success. Complacency is failing to learn from others, believing that our achievements are good enough or accepting poor outcomes for some of our young people. I will never accept those poor outcomes, and I am sure that no one else in the Parliament will. We have a broad and shared agreement on how improvement can be enabled. We now have good advice and guidance from last year’s work by Professor Donaldson and Professor McCormac. Further valuable material will come out of the work of the attainment group and ADES. That will be placed directly into the hands of classroom teachers. Our challenge for 2012 is to enable and support Scottish education so that it builds on its strengths within an environment of continuous improvement, which leads to better outcomes for every child and young person. I move, That the Parliament commends Scotland’s tens of thousands of professional and dedicated teachers and hundreds of thousands of hard-working pupils; recognises the importance of the Curriculum for Excellence as the principal vehicle for improving learning and teaching and raising ambition; believes that a high-performing early years and schools system is the single greatest tool in improving the employability and life chances of young people, and commits to support efforts that increase attainment for all young people from nursery through to post-16 education.

I draw the member’s attention to his last education debate as education minister, during which he said: “there is a tendency to dwell on the negative and to talk ourselves down. The Scottish National Party’s glass is always half empty, never half full. It moans, it groans, it is full of despair and it never has anything positive to say. It does not sing about our achievements or highlight the positive things that are happening. It looks for failure, it seeks to criticise and it tries at every turn to be negative. Just for once, the nationalists should try to be a bit more positive, because there is much to celebrate in Scottish education.”—[Official Report, 22 March 2007; c 33542-3.] The six minutes of Mr Henry’s speech that we have had have entirely fulfilled what has turned out to be a prophecy. I am afraid that it is Labour now that has nothing positive to say and which refuses to celebrate the success of Scottish education.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I understand Kezia Dugdale’s concern for college principals. She will therefore welcome the letter that was issued to them yesterday about places. I will quote the response from John Birt, the principal of Angus College. He said: “It does seem likely now that Angus College, working collaboratively with local and regional partners, will be able to deliver the same number of funded student places as in previous years and this will assist us in meeting the Scottish Government’s commitment to young people.” Given the positive nature of that response, and the positive nature of the letter that was issued, I am sure that the member’s attitude will move on from where she was to where we are now.

We do that by ensuring that we lean heavily on the Scottish credit and qualifications framework, so that learning is seen to be a continuous process in which people move forward in a way that is clearly identifiable, and that each part of that pathway is equally justifiable. The SCQF is vital to Scotland. The more we use it, the better we will be.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way? I have a point of information.

The member is presenting a travesty of the situation. One particular point, however, is that at no time has any Government in Scotland guaranteed absolutely that a student will get the place that they want in the location that they want. That has never happened. It did not happen under our predecessors and it cannot happen now. Our guarantee under opportunities for all is the best guarantee that has ever been given. I am sure that the member will pay no attention to that, however, because she wishes to continue with her fantasy about what is happening in colleges.

The member is correct—that is exactly what members should do. However, I hope that Mr Pearson will accept that it is hard to respond to detailed criticisms—although they are always needed—when there is a litany of complaints containing nothing positive at all. That is what we heard from Margaret McDougall and what we largely heard from Hugh Henry. I would be very happy to respond to individual complaints, and to set them right.

I said at the beginning of the debate that I welcome scrutiny. However, discussions should be based on fact and I object when they lack fact. For example, I have taken two major steps to change the developed programme for curriculum for excellence, in the light of criticism. I would be happy to do so again and I am happy to listen to criticism in the Parliament. However, when we hear a litany of complaints that are not based on fact, it is right that we challenge them. Of course, I know that the member would never make such complaints.

We have done that.

I am sorry that the member is not up to speed. The indicative letter went yesterday, and colleges have received it. They now know the envelope that exists. They have also known for some time that there will be further details after the regionalisation decisions are made with them in February. Most college principals described yesterday’s letter as helpful and have been positive about it. The member should reflect that in his comments.

The system that is used to fund colleges is under review. I expect the review to look at all aspects of college funding, including the way in which higher education courses are supported.

No, I do not anticipate higher education courses ceasing in colleges. That would be ridiculous. As the member says, further education colleges provide up to 20 per cent of higher education courses—actually, it is a bit more than 20 per cent—and that is a valuable contribution. It follows from that that the Government will continue to fund higher education in colleges, so the question is entirely spurious.

That is undoubtedly true. The way in which the previous Administration encouraged a whole range of public bodies to undertake that type of funding was extremely reckless and very foolish, and now there is a legacy to be paid for. How we can factor that in is a matter of considerable discussion when we look at the future of certain parts of the college sector. I hope that when people look at the college sector in future, they will recognise that the type of capital funding that we are providing is much better and reflects a real increase in our support for the college sector.

My strategic letter of guidance asks the Scottish funding council to provide indicative allocations for the academic year 2012-13 around the end of 2011. This matter regularly forms the subject of the discussion that I have with college principals and others.

I am happy to agree with the member that compulsory redundancies should be avoided. As he will know, I have no power of direction. The decision to remove the ministerial power of direction was made by Allan Wilson when he was minister for this sector in 2005. Nonetheless, I have strongly encouraged colleges on every possible occasion—as, indeed, Angela Constance did when she was taking charge of colleges some time ago—to avoid compulsory redundancies. I believe strongly in that and I regret that I do not have the power to enforce it, but I agree with the member and will do everything I can to encourage colleges not to make compulsory redundancies.

It will be spent in the financial year 2012-13. I will write to colleges shortly on the process by which decisions on the fund will be reached. I will ensure that the member knows about that.

Figures released by the Higher Education Statistics Agency in March this year showed that the student drop-out rate at Scottish universities had fallen to its lowest level in seven years. The figure for 2008-09, the latest year for which figures are available, represents the third consecutive annual reduction. We are therefore making progress, but I agree that we need to do more. That is why, through the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, we are investing nearly £5.5 million a year to support improved performance in retention at eight regionally based universities in Scotland.

There is substantial research on this matter, but if new research was required, I am quite sure that the funding council and other agencies would look at that sympathetically. I agree with the member, as I suspect all members in the chamber do, that increasing retention is an aim that we must work towards. Some progress is being made, but my mind is entirely open to finding out more about the subject and ensuring that we do better.

That is a good idea and I am happy to do what the member suggests. If she wishes to make representations on that and encourage other representations, that would be entirely appropriate.

I welcome Angela Constance and Aileen Campbell to their new roles. I offer my apologies, as I should have done that at the outset. We have made absolutely clear—I did so earlier in the session—our wish that compulsory redundancies should be avoided. Where that might be a prospect following a merger, we recognise that colleges may need help to ensure that any staffing reductions are voluntary. Such help will be among the purposes for which colleges will be able to seek support through the college transformation fund that we announced yesterday. However, colleges are independent employers that take their own decisions on employment matters against the background of their legal responsibilities. As I pointed out, the power to direct colleges was removed by the previous Labour-Lib Dem coalition.

I anticipate that, in the process of reform and merger, colleges will take decisions about how to intensify the work that they are doing to focus on the young people whom they serve. I repeat—I put on record yet again—that I do not wish to see compulsory redundancies, although I have no power to stop them in this part of the sector, because colleges are independent bodies. Their status as such was reinforced by Labour when it was in government. I will do everything that I can to persuade colleges that compulsory redundancies are not the way to go.

Given that the member has had a long-term commitment to the Beechwood campus, on which I have worked with him, I know that he will be pleased to hear that substantial progress has been made. On 2 December, I announced that Inverness College could enter procurement for its proposed estates development at Beechwood, which will be funded to the tune of up to £51 million by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council.

Absolutely. The Beechwood campus is a positive development and I am glad that the work that we undertook across the parties, which included Mr Stewart, allowed it to come to fruition. Of course, the campus will have more than a college on it. It is a good example of how we can integrate various types of learning, and it will have a huge impact on the north of Scotland and the Highlands and Islands, as does the University of the Highlands and Islands, of which Inverness College is a part. I have huge confidence in that fascinating model.

Local authorities are responsible for setting their own policies on the use of information and communications technology in education, including the potential use of pupil-owned devices. However, as part of the ICT in education programme, the Scottish Government and Education Scotland will consider national guidance on sustainable solutions for the deployment of devices in schools, including advice on the potential use of pupil-owned devices.

Yes, I agree with that, generally. Although I am keen for schools to move in the direction of ensuring that there is the widest use of modern and flexible devices, I do not want anybody to be disadvantaged by that, so if it is done at all in schools, it needs to be done with sensitivity. However, there is a different approach, which is to make use of the wide variety of devices that exist in schools, and interesting work is being done on that worldwide. That is a positive dynamic, but I entirely agree with the member that it should be designed to help all young people and not just some.

I do not think that there is a blanket answer to that. There are circumstances in which smart phones, for example, can be used as learning devices, and access to those pupil-owned devices might be appropriate. Some interesting research has been done on the ways in which the use of mobile phones in schools can be treated not as a disadvantage, as it often is when lots of consulting of Facebook takes place, but as an advantage in terms of accessing learning. We should be open to that. However, we are at an early stage and we should be working with schools, young people and ICT experts to make it happen. Something that has worked well in the past few months is the drawing in of ICT enthusiasts to the consideration of the future of glow. The issue is related to that, because access in schools will touch again and again on the issue of smart phones and pupil-owned devices.

We expect colleges, like all other parts of Scottish education, to deliver learning and teaching to a very high standard. Independent reviews by Her Majesty’s inspectors show that that is being achieved throughout Scotland. I look forward to that continuing to be the case as we reform the sector to put an even greater emphasis on learner outcomes.

Argyll College is close to my heart, as it serves my constituency—I am also pleased to be Mr MacKenzie’s constituency MSP. Argyll College has a particular model of operation that is distributed across Argyll—it delivers teaching in something like 20 centres. It is also a member of the University of the Highlands and Islands, which is a federation of 13 colleges. There is already clarity about where Argyll College sits in the regionalisation agenda. I think that it will continue to work with the other colleges in the University of the Highlands and Islands to ensure that that arrangement is as efficient and effective as possible. It will certainly have my strong support.

As I said to Elizabeth Smith, the fund is a transformation fund. I will write to colleges with the full details in the next few days. The transformation fund is not a mergers fund or a small colleges closure fund, as a Labour spokeswoman said earlier this week. It will make a positive contribution to the transformation and reform agenda. I am open to what colleges see as an appropriate use of the resources. I understand that three rural colleges have announced their intention to merge with the Scottish Agricultural College to create an interesting new force that will provide further and higher education and will be consultative, given the work that is done in rural communities. It would be open to those involved in that merger to talk to us about the transformation fund—that is up to them.

All matters that relate to teacher supply and demand will be considered as part of our annual teacher workforce planning exercise. No later than early in the new year, I will issue guidance to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council about the number of student teachers that is to be recruited next autumn.

Dr Simpson, like most of his colleagues, always likes to make a crisis out of a problem. The reality of the situation in supply teaching is that the difficult decision on resourcing Scottish education that had to be made as a result of cuts from Westminster required an agreement in the tripartite setting of the unions, the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on how we should take the matter forward. There was an agreement in that tripartite group—it was therefore endorsed by all parties, including the unions—that there would be a change to the supply pay structure. That was regrettable, but there was little alternative. Some local authorities have not implemented the change, however. In those circumstances, there is bound to be some pressure over a period of time, but that pressure is limited; it occurs in one or two subjects, and in a number of places in Scotland. Those include places that have traditionally had difficulty with supply, such as rural Scotland, where there are often shortages of supply simply because there is a shortage of people available. We keep the matter under regular review—I am absolutely determined that we should do so—but the issue here is the overall supply of teachers and ensuring that we get the workforce into balance. I am pleased that progress continues to be made on that, as the figures published yesterday show. We are eating into the problem of teacher unemployment and ensuring that the workforce goes into balance, and I would welcome the support of the Labour Party to ensure that we can give that hope to young teachers. We have been working hard on this, and we would like that to be recognised by a fair-minded Opposition.

The average fee that a student from the rest of the United Kingdom will be expected to pay to attend a university in Scotland in 2012-13 will be £6,841 a year, before any fee waivers, bursaries or other forms of student support are taken into account.

I have been absolutely determined to honour the necessary commitment that education should be free in Scotland to those who are domiciled here—that relates to between 83 and 84 per cent of Scottish students. That is, regrettably, all that I can do, because we are simply not resourced to deal with the wider issue of the other 16 to 17 per cent. I have said that I regret that, but that is where we are. I am pleased that, in the end, the Labour Party supported the regulation that was required to achieve that end. Of course, if we had not done that, it is likely that fees would have had to be introduced for Scottish students, but this party—the party in government—was absolutely clear that that would not happen. We were joined in that determination by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. The Tories have a very different view, and it is a wrong view—members should just look at what is happening south of the border. If we can continue and confirm that they are wrong, I think that we will be doing Scottish students a great service. Of course, there is a way forward on this, and that is independence. If we had independence, everyone would be treated in the same way, and that would be a price worth paying.

I have never believed that £9,000 fees were the answer for Scotland, so the question is based on an entirely false premise. Of course, if one follows the route of marketising higher education that is being followed by the Tories on the back of a report by Lord Browne that was commissioned by the Labour Government, one will get these difficulties. There is only one party in this chamber that has never voted for student fees, as I am sure Labour members will acknowledge. It would be far better if we were not affected by that flawed policy. How do we achieve that? The answer is independence.

I compliment Mr McDonald on what I think is admirable optimism; I was almost going to call it naivety. The older I get, the more I realise that consistency is not something that we will ever have from the Labour Party.

Significant progress is already being made, and we expect more to follow. Co-operation and partnerships—and, indeed, mergers—are all options in our broad plans to bring better cohesion to the college sector and to deliver better value for money through the elimination of duplication and waste. Many colleges are already making progress. For example, Aberdeen College and Banff and Buchan College are committed to a federation to serve the north-east, and the three Edinburgh colleges are pursuing a merger.

I am pleased to say that Ferdinand von Prondzynski, the principal of Robert Gordon University, will be reporting shortly on the issue of governance. As members will know, I set up two governance reviews: one for the college sector and one for the higher education sector. Russel Griggs will report on behalf of his college education group, and Professor von Prondzynski will report on behalf of the higher education group. I anticipate publishing the reports in the new year, and I hope that the recommendations will be considered as we move into the legislative process. I believe in accountability for both sectors. Accountability is vital, as the sectors are both major spenders of public money; of course, academic freedom is equally vital. We must have a careful balance between the two so that the taxpayer’s interests are protected and our universities and colleges are free to deliver the excellent service that they can and will deliver.

In the context of the post-16 reform programme, the Scottish Government has already announced its intention to legislate to set achievable but ambitious goals for access to higher education for the poorest students. We will consider placing a statutory duty on institutions to seek out those with greatest potential, who would be identified with reference to their grades and their situation. We will also introduce widening access outcome agreements with financial penalties that are conditional on achievement.

Unsurprisingly, I agree 100 per cent with that. I add a caveat, however. We are not yet sure of the difficulties that there will be with applications, because the figures are provisional. However, if there are any difficulties at all, they will be the result of the negativity around the subject that has been created in the debate. I want to send the message out loud and clear—and I hope that I am joined by every member in the chamber—that there are no fees for the 83 per cent of students at Scottish universities who are domiciled in Scotland. Education remains free for them: it is based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay. The Government has made and is delivering that commitment. If we could say that clearly in the chamber, we would be doing Scotland a great service.

Colleges in Ayrshire, like others across the country, are having constructive discussions about our post-16 reform proposals. Last night, I spoke to Heather Dunk, the principal of Kilmarnock College. The proposals are the subject of consultation until 23 December. With the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, we are closely engaged with all colleges as part of the consultation exercise to ensure that implementation of our reforms can begin in the 2012-13 academic year.

The transformation fund, which was announced yesterday, is available to colleges in any part of the country so that they can proceed with their proposals, whether for merger or federation or to create new opportunities to take forward the agenda in their area. I know that the colleges in Ayrshire are having good discussions, although there are difficulties in relation to Kilwinning. It is best that the colleges discuss that, and that discussion is taking place. I hope that the colleges will find a way to ensure that they have the best proposals for them. I stress that nothing is set in stone and that it is extremely important that the colleges find the proposals that suit the learners of Ayrshire. That is what will make the difference.

I do not think that there have ever been so many questions about colleges. By and large, they have been positive questions, particularly those from positive members such as Mr Dornan. We are engaged in regular discussions with colleges, particularly on our comprehensive plans to reform post-16 education. A key part of those discussions has been the future system under which colleges might be funded.

I will not comment on that final point, but I will be delighted to meet Mr Dornan and the federation. I have met a number of Glasgow’s college principals and have had extensive discussions with principals and chairs from throughout Scotland, but I am always open to further discussion to ensure that we collaborate in making progress with the extremely important reform process. I am heartened by the support and encouragement that I am getting from college principals, who know how important it is to make the changes.

I last met formally with NUS Scotland on Wednesday 3 August 2011. I have since had informal meetings with elected officers and officials on several occasions—as usual, those were constructive discussions on a wide range of issues that affect students in Scotland. I met the NUS Scotland president, Robin Parker, at the University of Abertay Dundee on Tuesday night, at a meeting at which Ms Marra was also present.

I will ignore the jibe, as ever. [Interruption.] Well, it is wise to ignore it. To draw attention to Mr Findlay’s unfortunate method of asking a question would not help him. The transformation fund has been welcomed by the NUS. I am happy to engage with the NUS and with many others on the issue of reform, and I do so vigorously. If Mr Findlay thinks that there is some sort of unanimous opposition, he is, as ever, barking up very much the wrong tree.

For the greater part, the debate has been positive and constructive. I will talk about a number of speeches, and I must start by talking about Rhoda Grant’s speech, which I regret. The point that Bob Doris made is significant. If there is no united front against the damage that is being done by the Tories and Liberals, particularly in fiscal terms, Scotland is weakened. I am old enough to remember the 1979 referendum debate, during which Helen Liddell, who I think at that stage was general secretary of the Labour Party in Scotland, memorably said that she would not soil her hands by working with the SNP. The result was a generation—no, two generations—in which the Tories ruled Scotland. The lesson is that when we have a real enemy that is running down Scotland and destroying it, we have to work together.

I thank Mr Baker, but I will make some progress. It is extremely important that we find the positives and emphasise them. We do not do so by making remarks such as we heard about the minimum wage and infrastructure projects. All that does is run things down. Mr Doris is right: in the circumstances the weakness of that argument means that Labour becomes the apologist for Tory misrule. That should not happen, because there were a number of very important speeches from Labour members that I want to explore. Malcolm Chisholm made a number of extremely important points, some of which were echoed by Kezia Dugdale. I want to talk about child poverty in particular. Kezia Dugdale raised an extremely important point about relative child poverty, and I confirm at the outset that the Scottish Government commits itself to the targets in the Child Poverty Act 2010, including that of measuring relative poverty. That sounds as if it is a technical issue, but that is far from being the case. It actually means that the goalposts are being changed—that is the modest way to put it—and that the agreed measurement of child poverty, which allows us to see what progress is being made in this vital area, is being swept away. The current measurement is that a child is living in poverty if they live in a household where the family income is less than 60 per cent of the median. That relative measurement is enshrined in law in the Child Poverty Act 2010, which all parties supported. The act includes other income measures, but the 60 per cent measurement is particularly important. It is widely used, not just here, but across developed nations. However, as Kezia Dugdale and Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, the Treasury documents that accompanied the autumn statement suggest a move away from the relative approach. That development was later disgracefully confirmed by the Prime Minister, who said: “I think there is a real problem with the way we measure child poverty.” There is not a real problem with the way we measure child poverty; the real problem is with the way the UK Government acts against child poverty. The Prime Minister also said that measuring relative child poverty was “illogical”. This is an immensely serious point, on which I share Malcolm Chisholm’s anger—it was a flash of anger that we needed to hear in this debate. What is taking place is an attack on those who can least afford it. I agree with Anne McTaggart that women are among those who will be most severely affected. There has been some progress in Scotland in attending to that issue. For example, we have ensured that employment rates for women have improved—that has happened in Scotland—but the measures that we are seeing in the autumn statement and in the UK Government’s general approach are very regressive indeed. We need to make sure that they do not take place.

That is a graphic illustration of the problem. I tried as gently as possible to say that there is a real problem with the UK Government’s approach. The member does not think that the Scottish Government is perfect. I accept that: I do not think that Scottish Government is perfect. Members: Aha! It is nearly perfect, but not perfect. We could make common cause to oppose things that are bad for Scotland, but the automatic instinct of Rhoda Grant and of a number of Labour members is simply to attack the SNP. The more they do that in the way that they have done it, the more the case against the Tories is weakened.

No, no: I am coming to Mr Rennie. I have a particular paragraph reserved for him, and I do not want him to spoil it. The reality is that female labour market outcomes in Scotland improved over the latest quarter and over the year. There are now 39,000 more women in employment than there were at the start of 2010, and the female employment rate in Scotland is the highest of any UK nation. It is not perfect; we have lots more to do. However, the damage that will come from the UK Government is great. Let us say that. Let us not attack the Scottish Government; let us attack those who are the problem. I will move on to two other issues. I was very impressed by the warmth that Mary Scanlon showed to my friend Mr Swinney; I was touched by it. However, I have to interrupt this a little to say that when she accused SNP back benchers of being out of touch—

Mary Scanlon accused some SNP back benchers of being out of touch with Mr Swinney’s positive nature. However, she was not paying close enough attention to her friend, because he said in a statement on, I think, 29 November that the UK Government was doing too little, too late. That is exactly what each of the SNP back benchers said, and they said that because it is the truth: too little, too late. [Interruption.] Mr Brownlee is drawing attention to himself, and I will draw attention to him, too. Members: Mr Brown. Mr Brown—he is now lodged in my mind. He and Mr Fraser absolutely insisted that slower economic growth is due to events in the euro zone. If Mr Brown turns to the autumn statement document that is in front of him and looks at table 1.1, he will discover that it confirms that the UK Government will act as a drag on growth in each year from 2012 to 2016. The figures are: -0.3 per cent in 2012; -0.5 per cent in 2013; -0.5 per cent in 2014; -0.7 per cent in 2015; and -0.7 per cent in 2016. For the uninitiated—including me, as I am not an economist—that means that GDP growth will be lower in each year as a result of the UK Government’s actions. To blame the euro zone is, to say the least, disingenuous.

No one denies the validity of table 1.1 of the autumn statement document, which shows that the drag on growth is the UK Government. I have a really important point to make about ordinary families. Mary Scanlon said, quite fairly, that people in Scotland will benefit from higher income tax personal allowances, but let us not forget that they will suffer from reductions in child tax credits, working tax credits, housing benefit and child benefit, all of which will reduce household income. There can be no doubt at all that the effect of the autumn statement will be damage to families in Scotland. I do not believe that there is doubt about that in Scotland. I think that the vast majority of Scots, whether they are Labour, SNP or whatever, know that the reductions are damaging. I do not think that the role of any member in this chamber is to act as an apologist for that. However, it is not just that they should not act as an apologist. As many members will know, Mr Rennie was once the Kelty coal-carrying champion, so he is used to taking on heavy burdens.

In a moment—I just want to say this. The task of Sisyphus—rolling heavy things up hills—is what Mr Rennie enjoys, and justifying the unjustifiable is a really heavy thing. Rather than being an apologist for the UK Government, Mr Rennie should apologise to the Scottish people, including my constituents, who have seen through the Liberal Democrats. In the election in May, Argyll and Bute was the number one target seat for the Liberal Democrats, who went around telling people how much they were defending the Scottish people. However, I am pleased to say that in that number one target seat they came fourth. I predict that in future, if Mr Rennie insists on justifying the unjustifiable, that will seem a good result .

I rather thought that if I opened up that trap, Mr Rennie would fall into it, so I will conclude on the issue of colleges. I have consistently made it plain in the chamber that colleges have a central role in supporting our ambitions, but we have to change and reform. The Thatcherite reforms of 20 years ago, which are now defended to the hilt by Mr Rennie—the new Thatcherite—do not leave Scottish colleges fit for purpose. I have talked to college chairs and principals extensively over the past few months. By and large, the college sector supports the ambition for a reformed system. There is a healthy debate under way about institutional mergers, with active discussion taking place across the country. I am working hard with the colleges to ensure that that service is targeted sharply on what young people and Scotland need: greater opportunity, which means jobs. That is an imperative. Those who do not wish to reform are simply unable to see that we can always do better. I always listen carefully to arguments for change, and I have been impressed by the argument that we should invest in the process of change. I am glad that my colleagues agree with it, too. Now we have a proposal—a good proposal—for a transformation fund, which will go a long way to help. It is new money for the sector that will take the process forward and ensure that we have a college sector that is ready for the 21st century.

Mr Findlay—I recognise his voice—shouts “Rubbish”. The reality of the situation is that, when there is pressure from the UK Government—indeed, when there was pressure from its predecessor, which wanted to cut further than Thatcher—this Government ensures that we go on delivering as best we can. That means reform. This has been a positive debate, for the most part. I hope that it will end positively with support for the motion in the name of Mr Swinney.

I welcome the motion and congratulate Sandra White on bringing such an important issue to the chamber and on contributing so positively to it. This is a welcome opportunity to debate in positive terms young people and the contribution that they make to society. I think that I guessed after about a sentence where Claire Baker was going, but it was an appropriate way to introduce the subject. There tends to be a generational divide and, among those who are moving into an older generation—despite my belief about myself, I am sure that that includes me—there tends to be a negative view. It is good to have the truth about youth project drawn to our attention, and I congratulate Glasgow, the Co-operative Foundation, Young Scot and all those who are involved in it. Although Anne McTaggart’s point that no project does everything is valid, I think that we should always emphasise the positive, and it is a positive project. Young Scot is also a positive project. I am proud to say that I work quite often with Young Scot. We have brought it into a number of organisations, including one of the curriculum for excellence groups. We are already ensuring that Young Scot receives substantial Government funding: £500,000 for its headquarters grant, which is matched by health with another £500,000. The organisation is central to fulfilling the purposes that we have as a nation, and it is already contributing. The truth about youth project is naturally one that Young Scot would want to take on. The figures speak for themselves: 60 per cent of 11 to 16-year-olds believe that they have often or sometimes been treated unfairly because of their age, and 77 per cent of 17 to 25-year-olds believe that, too. There is clearly an issue to be addressed, and I am glad that it is being addressed. Too often, there is a negative portrayal of youth and youth activities not only in the media but in our own minds, and it is important to recognise the positive contribution that is made by the majority of young people. Youth work services in Scotland engage more than 300,000 young people every year, so an awful lot of young people are engaged in positive activities. We should encourage them and support them. This project has shown considerable promise and success. It is now in discussion with the Co-op about funding that would allow it to roll out throughout Scotland. The decision will be made later this month. Although I cannot influence funding decisions by other bodies, I think all of us in the chamber—not that we are passing a resolution here—would regard a favourable decision by the Co-op as something positive for Scotland’s young people. As far as Sandra White’s request about meeting Young Scot is concerned, I can tell her that I meet Young Scot regularly, as do other ministers. To use a good Irish word, I will be quite flaithiúlach with the time of my new ministerial colleague, Aileen Campbell, and commit her to meeting Young Scot at an early date to take these issues forward and discuss the wider issues of youth work. It will be illuminating for Aileen Campbell to get to grips with these issues by talking to people who are deeply engaged with them. The job that Aileen Campbell will be doing and the job that I, and my colleagues, do is to make sure that we are champions for children and young people at every age. It is not just about providing for young people in silos, whether nursery school, pre-school, school, college or university. It is about the whole child; it is about making sure that we have that care and commitment. We want to ensure that young people generally are respected within society and have their voices heard, which is fundamental to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which I have been championing since I became shadow minister for children way back in 2000. The Government is committed to recognising, respecting and promoting children’s rights and the UN convention and we will take that forward with legislation in this parliamentary session. We also want to see greater participation in the voice against violence project, which involves full participation from young people on a key issue that affects them and wider society. This week, there is a new ministerial role in the Government: Angela Constance’s new role as minister for youth employment. An additional £30 million has been allocated to that role over and above what is a very substantial budget. That post will also have young people and their prospects at its centre. It is a truism that young people are the future. Unless we invest in them and see that investment as being something that carries forward the whole of society, society will not progress. Key Government policies such as getting it right for every child, the curriculum for excellence and more choices, more chances live together with a wider commitment to the whole child and a focused commitment on matters such as youth employment. We have to support young people not just to be done to but to do—to take control of and manage their own circumstances, rather than being dependent on services that are doing things to and for them. This project is a good example of where young people can be empowered to move forward and tell the truth about themselves. It is always the truth that sets people free. Meeting closed at 18:22.

For the sake of clarity, it should be noted that no changes were made to EMA that had not been made by the previous Labour Administration.

Further education colleges already offer learning opportunities to students from a wide variety of backgrounds. Our plans for reforming post-16 learning are predicated on ensuring that such provision is better aligned with jobs and growth, is sustainable and continues to focus on improving life chances. As part of that reform we want to consider how best to ensure wider access to all post-16 learning, including that offered by colleges.

The record of our further education colleges is very good, but that does not mean that it cannot improve. I am spending a considerable amount of time talking to college principals and students in colleges. I am endeavouring to set to one side the scaremongering in order to talk about how we can focus the resource that we have—a resource that is under a great deal of pressure from the coalition Government and which would have been under pressure from a Labour Government—on where it counts, and in particular on those who are distant from the labour market and who need the best opportunities. The reform of post-16 education can produce better results for more people. The opportunities for all guarantee is part of that. I would have expected Opposition support for ensuring the effective use of resource and the betterment of our colleges but, alas, the Opposition is always looking backwards.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the Government published a paper on regionalisation last week. An active discussion is taking place among a range of colleges about how they should take forward the regionalisation agenda. The exact solutions will depend on the pattern of provision and what those colleges wish to achieve. I had a positive discussion with a group of principals and chairs last night about how regionalisation was moving forward. I encourage every member to talk to their local further education college, to be part of the process of change and to ensure that the resource that we have is applied to the front line of education, and not to the back room.

Although we have had no option but to ask colleges to share in the extraordinary £3.3 billion reduction by Westminster in Scotland’s block grant over the spending review period, we have asked them to retain a clear focus on their core business. That includes playing a full part in our guarantee to all 16 to 19-year-olds as part of our commitment to the opportunities for all initiative, and providing learning opportunities to 20 to 24-year-olds, to those looking for jobs and to those with low or out-of-date skills.

For a start, I would say, “Don’t listen to Mr Findlay.” They should be listening to the college principals and others, with whom I am engaged in a constructive dialogue. This morning, I was introduced at a gathering of college principals by the principal of West Lothian College. We are engaging in a strong, productive and firm dialogue about two things, about the real difficulties—

The important thing, as members should know, is that we need to have a constructive discussion about how we take forward necessary reforms in Scotland in the context of a Westminster budget. It would be far better if we were doing it in the context of independence. I would encourage all who are thinking about this issue to do so in the context of an independent Scotland. Meanwhile, I will do this job, in co-operation with the principals, with the aim of getting the best for our young people. If any Labour member—or any Opposition member at all—wants to help in that, they will be very welcome.

That is a constructive contribution. Reprofiling is hard to do, given the way in which the cuts are coming from the Liberal Democrat and Conservative coalition. However, if there is reprofiling that can constructively be done and if the member, as a member of the Education and Culture Committee, can make suggestions in that regard, having seen the budget, I will consider them. The Barnett consequentials will be an issue for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and the Cabinet. I can make no comment on that.

That is an interesting question. In England, of course, the UK Government is reducing investment in further education by £1.1 billion, from £4.3 billion to £3.2 billion, which is proportionately a larger cut, as it is a 25 per cent reduction in cash terms, which is 7 per cent higher than the reduction in college sector funding in Scotland over the same period. Interestingly, from the beginning of this Government’s time in office through to the end of the spending review period, we will have invested £4.7 billion in colleges alone, which is 40 per cent more in cash terms than the investment made in two terms of the previous Administration.

We are currently consulting on the prospect of a regional alignment of the college sector. Only after we have closely considered the responses to the consultation will we be in a position to reach a final view about its future shape. However, we regard continued local access to further education as of key importance.

I do not see how Anne McTaggart can know who will be affected by this approach, because I have just made it clear that we are consulting on regionalisation. Indeed, I told the principals this morning that nothing is cast in stone and that I was looking to hear proposals and ideas from the colleges about how best this would work. I also stress—I stressed it in my first answer and will do so again—that local access is of strong importance. Although regionalisation should certainly reduce the overheads and the bureaucracy and, I hope, make the organisations more responsive, I see no reason at all why it should reduce local access.

No, I do not.

Room 13 is a successful international social enterprise organisation, grown from the desire of students in a small Lochaber school to establish an in-school art studio. The work is demonstrated and exhibited in this Parliament. Room 13 is an excellent example of the willingness of Scottish schools to develop the ideas of children. I congratulate Highland Council on supporting and encouraging the growth of Room 13, and we should be proud of what it has become. Others should emulate it—and they are.

I have, of course, already met people from Room 13. I am happy to do so again, but I think it might be more practical if we got them to meet Education Scotland, which regularly communicates with all schools to share good practice. It seems to me that Room 13 is a good example of good practice and Education Scotland might be of great use to it in allowing it to spread the word. I am also happy to meet the member to discuss how I can help in that way.

I find it difficult to disagree with a single word that Mr McGrigor has said on this occasion, particularly as that work impinges on my constituency. I am happy to agree with him whole-heartedly.

Young people in rural areas are generally doing well: school leavers in rural schools have higher than average tariff scores and a higher percentage achieve one or more advanced higher. I am ambitious for all our young people and want to build on current achievements. I have brought together a group of successful head teachers—one of whom is from Argyll and Bute—to advise me on improving attainment, based on their extensive expertise. They will report to me in December. The Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities have set up a commission on the delivery of rural education to consider how to improve attainment and life chances for young people in rural areas. The commission will make its recommendations in August 2012.

First, I commend the Argyll rural schools network on its campaign on these precise issues. It has now been shortlisted for public campaign of the year by The Herald newspaper, and I think that that shows the great enthusiasm, commitment and skill of those who have been arguing for rural schools throughout Scotland and certainly in Argyll and Bute. The member raises some key issues. The commission, of course, was set up in reaction to this issue across the whole of Scotland. It has now met twice and it has issued its call for evidence. It is due to report its findings, as I said, in August 2012. It will consider a wide range of issues about the delivery of rural education. I can set the member’s mind at rest: the commission has a broad remit. It is being asked to consider, among other things, how the delivery of education in rural areas can maximise attainment and it will also consider the links between rural education and the preservation, support and development of rural communities. The commission will report to me and to COSLA and I certainly intend to share its findings, particularly on these issues, with my Cabinet colleagues.

There is a continuing dialogue with all Scottish local authorities, particularly those in rural areas, about how to achieve the broadest delivery of advanced highers. The member is right to raise the need to ensure that young people in secondary education in rural areas are not disadvantaged by a limitation on choices. Most rural authorities are aware of the issue, and I encourage them as much as I can.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council invests around £2 billion per year across universities and colleges in Scotland. That includes the directing of significant specific funding support towards the on-going development in the south of Scotland of the Scottish Borders campus and the Crichton campus in Dumfries. Further to that, in my recent letter of guidance, I have asked the Scottish funding council to take steps to secure a more coherent spread of provision across Scotland, and to adopt a more differentiated and outcomes-based approach in seeking ways to grow provision in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, where provision remains low relative to the population.

I can certainly give the member an assurance that we will monitor the impact on participation in Dumfries and Galloway. As I have said before, I believe that the policy of successive UK Governments on higher education tuition fees is misguided. For our part, the Scottish Government provides Scotland-domiciled students and their parents with the continued reassurance of knowing that access to higher education in Scotland is free, and that we will ensure that students who choose to study elsewhere in the UK are not liable to pay fees up front. Loans are available to assist with those fees. More broadly, in the context of the post-16 reform programme, we have already announced our intention to legislate to set achievable but ambitious goals for access to higher education for the poorest students.

Further education colleges already offer learning opportunities to students from a wide variety of backgrounds. Our plans for reforming post-16 learning are predicated on ensuring that such provision is better aligned with jobs and growth, that it is sustainable, and that it continues to focus on improving life chances. As part of that reform, we want to consider how best to ensure wider access to all post-16 learning, including that which is offered by colleges.

I always feel with Jenny Marra’s questions that I should simply say, “Guilty as charged and I’d like to have other offences taken into consideration.” It is silly. We need to focus on how we can together improve Scottish further education, and we can do that. For example, the principal of Angus College was at the meeting of principals that I attended this morning, and he asked the question. We need to engage with the reality. Substantial change is needed. Even if there were no financial imperatives, the vast majority of principals and those involved in further education in Scotland would say that reform was overdue. We need to reform and focus on getting the college system better aligned with the labour market and ensuring that we are not wasting money. The drop-out rate in colleges is 28 per cent, or almost 30 per cent. That is utterly wasteful. In addition, we have financial pressures. It is, of course, always a matter of choices. If the member has better choices that she wishes to be made or alternative choices to be made within the budget figures that have been provided to her—she mentioned them at the Education and Culture Committee meeting last week—she should by all means tell us about them. Indeed, if she has a set of suggestions, I am happy to meet her. Otherwise, let us try to find a way of ensuring that we do our best for Scotland’s young people, and let us do so on the basis of facts. The principal of Angus College could not know whether there will be 2,000 fewer places as he asserted in a letter to Richard Baker, and I hope that the member is not encouraging the students to believe that there will be 400 fewer places. She could not know that, and neither could the students.

As I have now said several times, I think, I met college principals and chairs only this morning in Dunblane as part of the consultation process on our pre-legislative paper entitled “Putting Learners at the Centre—Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education.” I shall continue to meet principals individually and collectively in the weeks and months ahead. Indeed, I have met two principals in their colleges this week already.

I do not accept the premise of the question. We are in a difficult situation, which is the result of being in the union. It would be far better if we were independent; we would then not be in the difficulties that we are in. [Interruption.] I hear a sharp intake of breath from the Labour benches. I hope that it was a revelatory intake of breath and that one more has suddenly been converted to the crusade. If they have not been, I will keep trying. The reality is that we would be doing far better if we were able to spend our own money in the way that we should be spending it. However, within the constraints that we have, I am always open to ideas. If Mr Pentland can come to me with constructive ideas about how the education budget could be better spent, I shall listen to him with interest. If he cannot do so, I hope that he will make the second choice and work with us to ensure that the prospects of Scotland’s young people are improved through a process of constructive reform.

No.

Yes.

The Scottish budget in February increased support to college students this year to a record £95.5 million. That is a real-terms increase of more than 9 per cent. Additionally, we are maintaining education maintenance allowance, investing a total of £31.6 million in 2011-12, so that students from poorer backgrounds have the support that they need to stay in learning.

The member is aware, because that question has been asked before, that my strong preference is that there should be no compulsory redundancies. However, I cannot instruct colleges. Why cannot I instruct colleges? Presiding Officer, that is of course a rhetorical question. The answer is that ministers’ right to instruct colleges was taken away by one Allan Wilson; Mr Martin will remember him, because he used to sit on the same side of the chamber as him.

It is very important that that question is asked and answered accurately. Questions on that have been asked in the chamber in the past week, including a question from the leader of the Opposition that suggested that something was going on. It is far too early to draw any conclusions from the figures that were released by the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service on 24 October about the reduction in the number of Scots applying for university places in England. That release is the first in a series and covers only some courses and institutions. It is reasonable to assume that any reduction, if there is one, will be linked to the significant increase in tuition fees in universities south of the border from 2012-13. We must be very careful with UCAS statistics at all stages of the year, because they are never complete until the end of the application process.

It will be published within the next few days.

Will the member give way?

Ministers are in regular touch with representatives from all of Scotland’s colleges. Representatives from both Stevenson College and Jewel & Esk College were present when I addressed Scotland’s Colleges at one of the organisation’s regular meetings of college principals on 15 August. The principal of Jewel & Esk College was also present at the breakfast that I hosted for the chief executive of Hong Kong on 15 September.

To put it charitably, most of that question is mired in fantasy. There is no reason whatsoever why there should be any impact, except one that is beneficial, on learners and young people. [Interruption.] It is difficult to make way against a candidate for the Labour leadership who seems to regard shouting as the best way to get her point across. She is now muttering under her breath. If Opposition members read the post-16 paper, they will realise that it focuses on the needs of the learner. To scaremonger about it at this stage is utterly irresponsible—it is simply opposing change for the reason of opposing change. I receive many communications from people in the sector who realise that the regional model for the delivery of further education has considerable merit. A letter from the chair of one of the colleges says that there is tremendous potential in considering how colleges can do more and deliver more. Many staff are engaged in that task and it would be excellent if, instead of merely moaning, the Opposition was engaged in it, too.

I am absolutely determined to put learners at the centre of education policy—not boards of management, principals or chairs, but learners. When we put learners at the centre of education policy, we begin to think about how best they could be served. Undoubtedly, the process of merger has been a constant within Scottish higher and further education over the past 30 to 40 years. We do not have a perfect model, but I want to enter into a genuinely collaborative process with the principals, boards, staff and students to ensure that we enhance the learning experience. If only members throughout the chamber would do that, too, we would make significant progress for the learners. I stress again that it is about learners. Learners are at the heart of it—that is who we should be serving.

In my statement to the chamber two weeks ago, I made clear the breadth and depth of Scotland’s post-16 education system. I also made clear the value that the Government places on the various parts of that system, in which we as a Scottish people make an enormous investment of about £2 billion a year—£50 million every week. Many hundreds of thousands of people the length and breadth of Scotland have benefited from that system and they will continue to do so. Two weeks ago, I made clear the considerable contribution that colleges—overwhelmingly our most significant providers of vocational education—make to the Government’s overall purpose. I am happy to reflect that again and to pay tribute to their work. I will name one example from many. Since the onset of the recession, our colleges have provided a valuable buffer from unemployment for tens of thousands of our young people. Let no one doubt the support that we have provided to allow them to do so. In the past three years, we have provided funding of £60 million on top of the £2.6 billion core investment in the college sector during the Government’s first term. Here is a fact that needs to be borne in mind throughout the debate: the investment that we have made in the sector represents a higher proportion of the Scottish departmental expenditure limit than any Government has invested since devolution. That is a measure of our support for the college sector.

No—I will make progress. The college sector’s structure has lain largely untouched for many years. Now we have an opportunity and a pressing need for positive reform. The opportunity is to ensure that the sector delivers to every learner in Scotland; the pressing need is financial. I do not comment on the irony of the Tories lecturing the Scottish Government on cuts, given what they are doing to the Scottish budget. However, they should reflect on the following phrases in a letter to me today from Paul Little, who is the City of Glasgow College’s principal and chief executive officer, because they give the complete lie to the claim about a lack of evidence for finding savings. He reports on the first year of his merger and refers to “remarkable progress ... a new fit for purpose management structure, harmonised lecturers salaries ... promoting a clear learning and teaching strategy” and “realising over £4 million a year of financial efficiencies”. Efficiencies of £4 million a year are being made, but it is alleged that no evidence exists.

That is because we are focused on positive reform that builds on the fundamental changes to school education that are under way through curriculum for excellence. That positive reform takes account of our success in developing a sustainable solution for higher education and takes place against a backdrop of continued investment of more than £2 billion between now and 2014. We have made that investment available despite the cut of £3.3 billion in Scotland’s block grant and the decision south of the border to increase tuition fees dramatically. I do not duck the fact that the unprecedented pressures that we face have meant a tough settlement, particularly for colleges. However, the convener of Scotland’s Colleges, John Spencer, told me on Tuesday that Scotland’s Colleges “is fully committed to working constructively with the Scottish Government on its reform agenda.” I congratulate colleges in Scotland on that positive step forward. They have £2 billion of investment to work with, and much can be done. My priority is to give learners, especially our young learners on whom Scotland’s future depends, a better deal. That is why we will ensure that every 16 to 19-year-old has a place in learning. No Government has made such a commitment before in Scotland. We will also prioritise college places for 20 to 24-year-olds. In addition, we will tackle inefficiencies in the sector, including excessive drop-out rates, and we simply cannot ignore the fact that the number of young people in the core cohort of college learners—the 16 to 24-year-olds—is going to fall over the period of our reforms. Here, though, is something that we will not do—we will not charge young people for their education. We do not want that and the election showed that Scotland does not want it either. I find it deeply ironic that someone who proposes to abolish the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and establish a new party would want to take their failed electoral baggage with them. The reality is that we will not charge students. Indeed, we will certainly not do what the Tories intend and move that approach into the college sector. Let me give members a fact: many others in Europe do not want to do so either. Finland, Sweden and Denmark refuse to charge fees and in the past few weeks Hamburg has chosen to abolish fees, which means that only two of Germany’s 16 federal states now charge students. The Scottish Tories are not swimming against the tide of history—they are drowning in it.

I have frequently said that I wish that that had not been the case. I wish that the Labour Party had not so enthusiastically backed student fees south of the border and had not voted for them. Now it is proposing to raise fees for Scottish students—even in Scotland, it looks like—to £6,000 a year. I will take no lessons from Labour on fees. In the time left, I will tell the chamber what we are going to do. To realise our ambitions, we cannot avoid taking a hard look at delivery structures, which must work for learners and employers and must be sustainable. I want regional groupings, greater collaboration and mergers where such a move makes educational and financial sense. In case anyone might be tempted to misinterpret that last point, I will make my position clearer still. I have talked about mergers. We are not and never will be in the business of closures. We have terrific examples of the benefits of college mergers—indeed, I have already mentioned Glasgow—and various rural colleges are getting together. In Edinburgh, Brian Lister, the principal of Stevenson College, has told me how they are positively working with Jewel & Esk College on a merger. Of course, this is not just happening in Scotland. Members should stop being so isolationist and look around at what is happening. In Northern Ireland, 16 colleges have been reduced to six; in Wales, there are plans to move from 25 to 15; and in England, from 1993 to 2008, there has been a reduction of 72 colleges. Collaborations between colleges and universities are taking place in Scotland, including, for example, between Aberdeen College and Robert Gordon University. The message is clear: mergers of and collaborations between post-16 institutions are far from uncommon and where they benefit learners they should take place by negotiation. In the past week, I have been contacted by many principals. They told me four things, the first of which is that, unfortunately, they did not approve Scotland’s Colleges first letter. Let that pass. They made three other interesting points. First, they believe that the Government is focusing on the right things: the needs of learners, of employers and of the wider economy. Secondly, notwithstanding the challenges, there is genuine appetite for reform. Thirdly, ambition and leadership are absolutely crucial, as is deeper collaboration between Government and the college sector. I will let Sue Pinder, principal of James Watt College, speak for them all. She wrote to me, saying: “I believe that such fundamental and far-reaching change can only successfully come about by joint working between the leaders of the service, the Government and the funding council.” I agree entirely. I want to help the sector adapt to that change and get it off to a flying start. Why do I want that? I want it for the benefit of Scotland’s learners and Scotland’s economy, which seem to have been forgotten by the Opposition parties. I move amendment S4M-00955.2, to leave out from first “notes” to end and insert: “commends the valuable work of the nation’s colleges; welcomes the commitment from Scotland’s Colleges to work constructively with the Scottish Government to deliver learner-centred reform of post-16 education; supports the Opportunities for All programme that will provide a suitable place in learning or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds not already in work or education; notes the value to the people of Scotland of maintaining free access to higher education, and completely rejects the introduction of tuition fees for Scotland-domiciled students.”

I am very interested that Ken Macintosh wants to see more vocational education. I presume that he therefore endorses a point of view that was put forward last week. There was an article on the BBC website entitled “Labour conference: Call to axe half of universities” that said: “Closing half of Britain’s universities is among the radical ideas being considered by Labour leader Ed Miliband, his policy adviser says.” It is clear that somebody who wishes to be the leader of Labour in Scotland will endorse that, as Ken Macintosh is clearly doing.

I would be interested in the evidence that Mary Scanlon has for cuts to masters degrees and doctorates. I am unaware of any such evidence, but if she has it and brings it to me I will be interested to see it.

Will the member give way?

I start with something that the whole chamber agrees on, which is rather hard to find these days, although I always try to be positive. We all agree that a high-performing education and skills system is vital to creating the type of Scotland that we want. It is vital to building our workforce, improving individual life chances and maintaining our competitiveness at home and abroad. Those are the very reasons why reform is more important than ever and they are a test against which the success of a reform programme has to be judged. Not only is that the right thing to do; this is the right time to be doing it. That is not just my belief—interestingly, it is the belief of many in the college sector, who agree that it is time to make those changes and acknowledge that, although the financial difficulties are severe, they can be coped with. I quote another letter I have had this week, from Russel Griggs, the chair of the board of management at Dumfries and Galloway College: “there is an understandable concern that the scale of funding cuts ... coupled with the potential timetable for change ... could ... impact on learners and communities unless this is achieved through effective joint working between the sector, the government and the Scottish Funding Council.” That is precisely what I am committed to, and it is being done jointly and with substantial resource.

No. I want to make some progress. I have a word or two for Mr Henry in just a moment. I made the point in my opening speech that we have spent £2.6 billion in our first term in government. In the next three years, we will invest £2 billion. There is substantial resource to take this forward. A substantial investment is important in a sector that is good but can be better. No Opposition member has even tried to refute the fact that the savings in the City of Glasgow College in the first year of the merger have been £4 million. That shows that it can be done. According to the college’s principal, the service is better than ever.

No. I want to sum up and I have only a few minutes. The problem with the debate is that it has been characterised by assertion, assumption and error from the Opposition, with a liberal dose of scaremongering. Mary Scanlon asserted that there was damage to masters degrees and doctorates. There is no evidence of that. She said that the colleges had turned away a certain number of potential students, but she did not say that those figures include multiple applications, so the figure is totally erroneous. Jenny Marra talked about protecting access courses. Those courses are specifically protected under the instructions that I have given to the funding council.

No. I am sorry—I am going to finish my point. There has been far too much misleading information. In addition to that, colleges are not the only provider for deprived young people. For example, the Skills Development Scotland get ready for work programme, the activity agreement roll-out, the community learning and development fund and the Inspiring Scotland 14:19 fund all exist and are all making a difference. Ken Macintosh called on me to direct colleges to do certain things but did not tell Parliament that the power of direction for the minister was removed by one Allan Wilson when he was Labour minister for colleges. Ken Macintosh was asking me to do something that he should have known was impossible.

David McLetchie suggests that we bring back Allan Wilson. It is possible, given the Labour leadership contest. Of course, Mr Macintosh has had a difficult day because, when Ed Miliband was asked to name the potential leaders of Scottish Labour this morning, he got Harris and Lamont but forgot Mr Macintosh. It has been a hard day for him. To add to that disappointment, there was a fatal flaw in the argument from the member sitting behind him. Despite Mr Henry’s penchant for hyperbole in describing the disasters that he talked about, there was just a hint that, as a former education minister, he realised that progress needs to be made on this agenda—that there needs to be rationalisation and an agenda that delivers better.

No, I am not going to give way, as I have much ground to cover. Liz Smith keeps arguing for fees. In June 2007, Professor Tim O’Shea, the acting convener of Universities Scotland, said: “can I reaffirm Universities Scotland’s entire acceptance that in the post-election environment any further discussion of graduate contribution options is irrelevant.” I am afraid that that defines Liz Smith’s position: she is making an irrelevant point and proposing an irrelevant policy that has damaged her own party and will damage whatever new party is brought into existence. Two Conservative parties, both with disastrous policies—surely they have learned something. The lesson of today’s debate is even more interesting. We have seen the reality of modern Scotland. The SNP has been arguing for positive, constructive reform, but what we have heard from the Tories, Labour and the Liberals is an opposition to reform. That is the true definition of conservatism, so they are all conservatives now—all unionists are conservatives. The Tories scoff at the very idea of reform and Labour laughs with them, while the Tory and Liberal parties slash the funding for Scotland. Mr McArthur asked for an idea for change. I will give him an idea—independence, when Scotland’s resources can be applied to the issues that concern Scotland. The lesson today is this: let us be straightforward and look at the evidence. Let us consider the example of what took place in Glasgow. Let us consider the needs of learners and how we can take Scottish education forward for learners. Then we will embrace with enthusiasm a reform agenda that the Conservatives and the unionists still reject.

As ever, I thank the member for his kindness towards me. Mr McLetchie and I are old friends. I remind him that his own record of prediction and assertion is not unblemished. In 1999, when he was Conservative leader, he stated: “we’re determined to abolish tuition fees for Scots students going on to university.” Ha, ha—“we’re determined”.

Data that can be accessed via the Higher Education Statistics Agency website shows the destinations of qualifiers from Scottish universities six months after graduation. I understand from data that is taken from the Association of Graduate Careers Advisory Services Scotland’s “What do Graduates do? Scotland” website, which is supported by the HESA, that mechanical engineering graduates from Scottish universities fare very well in the jobs market. In 2009, more than 66 per cent entered employment and a further 21 per cent were in further study or a combination of work and study. That compares favourably with figures for the United Kingdom as a whole in 2009, which show that 65 per cent of mechanical engineering graduates were in work and that 18.5 per cent were in further study or a combination of work and further study.

I agree profoundly with Margaret McCulloch. I am glad to say that I anticipated her question, because we published a paper about post-16 education two weeks ago. In that, we addressed the issue of job-ready graduates and how graduates can be produced in colleges and universities. The articulation of students from colleges through to universities, particularly in science and engineering, is important to us. I assure Margaret McCulloch not only that I accept her point, which she and her local employer make well, but that we are acting on it. I am sure that she will go back to that employer to point out how thoughtful the Scottish Government is being and to say how strongly she supports our initiative.

Will the member give way?

It was unworthy of Jenny Marra to make her last remark. On reflection, she will realise that doing so was not sensible. Not only is Dr Allan going on a trip to Auschwitz, but his predecessor went on a trip there, too. The Government has strongly supported the work on national holocaust memorial day and other such interventions. Bringing that issue into the debate was foolish. The debate has been disappointing. I will start with the things that have not barked. We have heard not a single intervention or speech from the Liberals and we have no Ken Macintosh. Ensuring that Labour’s education spokesperson did not take part was probably sensible. As with pictures of commissars in the old Soviet Union, I suspect that somebody has been at work with a razor blade to cut him out of the family photograph. That is probably why Ed Miliband does not remember who Ken Macintosh is—he has been cut out. Ken Macintosh’s statement in August was ludicrous—to talk about brainwashing was nonsense. Of course, today’s debate has involved a slight change of tone and thought. That has come from both sides of the usual Conservative-unionist alliance in the Parliament. We have heard an excuse. Those who do not want Scottish studies to happen—it is clear that some members from whom we have heard do not want it to happen—have realised that they cannot oppose it outright. That is because, as we know, the vast majority of Scottish people—citizens of this country—want Scottish studies to take place. We now have delay, doubt and dissembling, which we have heard all afternoon. The position of Labour and the Tories has remained unchanged from that of Mr Macintosh—it has just got a bit more subtle. That position is well defined in the Scottish novel “Fergus Lamont” by Robin Jenkins, who is probably the greatest Scottish novelist of the 20th century. In a scene in that novel, the teacher, John Calderwood, is teaching his class the history of the clearances, in a school where teaching Scottish history is forbidden. Unfortunately, he is found out. The headteacher turns up in the classroom and says to him: “I must warn you. You are filling these children’s minds with poison. You are undermining their confidence in legally constituted authority. It’s a mistake to study the history of one’s own country. It divides us instead of uniting us. Why bother with stuff so out of date?” Before John Calderwood has the chance to respond, a child from the slums of Gantock—the town in which the novel is set—speaks up. She says: “It isnae out of date, Mr Maybole. People are still being put oot of their hooses.” That is the crux of the matter. I am passionate about Scottish studies, because I understand—as Scotland understands—that, to move forward, we need to know who we are and how we came here. That is the topic today. We need to study those matters carefully. Before I mention some of those things, I will talk about the links and connections that exist in Scotland—about how subject after subject needs to be studied. I will address the spurious point about the experiences and outcomes of curriculum for excellence. The document was published in April 2009. It is the bedrock of curriculum for excellence, but we build on a bedrock. It is a foundation stone. We then ensure that we provide coherence and structure. Scottish studies will provide that coherence and structure to parts of the experiences and outcomes. Those who know anything about education understand that point.

No—I want to make progress. I have heard too much about that issue today. [Interruption.] We have heard sounds from Tory back benchers, too. We have had far too much of what one might call saloon-bar conservatism. We heard that in some interventions, which showed deep hostility to thinking and talking about the present, the past and the future of Scotland, which we need to talk about today. Let me mention one or two contributions before I speak more generally. Joan McAlpine’s contribution was particularly strong. I would like to talk about two things in relation to internationalism in Scotland. One is an Egyptian film called “The Night of Counting the Years”, which talks about what it is to relate to tradition. The other came to me from someone who was a great influence on me—Finlay MacLeod, the former assistant director of education in the Western Isles. When I worked for him, he gave me a copy of a novel that was hardly known there but subsequently became a film. The novel was called “The Wife of Martin Guerre”, and he said, “If you read that, you’ll understand what it is to be alienated within your own community. You’ll understand the Gaelic experience.” Scottish studies is about joining things up. It is about making connections. Let us touch on some of the connections that we have heard about today. Let us touch on the Scottish experience of slavery. Yes, it needs to be taught. The role of Scottish slave traders needs to be taught. And so does something that we did not hear about today—the name Joseph Knight. He was a slave who sought freedom in Scotland and who, from the sheriff of Perth in 1669, heard a commitment of Scottish law—that the state of slavery is not recognised by the laws of this Scottish kingdom. Let us teach that. Let us teach the ambition for human rights in Scotland. While we are doing so, let us go to the Burns centre—much criticised because we encourage children to go there and help them to do so. In the Burns centre, we can see on the wall the last supper—a contemporary last supper.

No, I want to finish this point. The picture is challenging and engaging. And who does it feature? Yes, it features Robert Burns, but it also features Elvis, Marilyn Monroe, Che Guevara, Shakespeare, Muhammad Ali and Nelson Mandela. It talks about the universality of the humanitarian approach. Let us talk about education in Scotland and the commitment that existed in Scotland before it existed in any other country in the world to have compulsory education in schools. Let us talk about emigration from Scotland. In my constituency, there is a place called Canada hill, where the families of emigrants watched people who were being forced out of their own country. Let us talk about Adam Smith and “The Theory of Moral Sentiments”, and about the fact that the Chinese vice-premier, when he visited here earlier this year, had a copy with him, because he carries it everywhere. Let us talk about the poetry of Pablo Neruda; and let us talk about his reflection on Guernica. And let us talk about the fact that the finest translator of Pablo Neruda is the Scottish poet Alastair Reid.

Let us talk about the Shirley McKie case and about fingerprinting in Scotland. Let us talk about Dr Henry Faulds—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I was getting slightly overexcited at the thought. Let us talk about Dr Henry Faulds, to whom there is a plaque in the town of Beith, where he was born. He was the man who invented the modern science of fingerprinting.

No. I am telling you things that you need to know. Let us talk about the city of Edinburgh. We have already heard about Hutton’s stone, which we can see from here, out of the window. Let us talk about Rock house, on Calton hill, where the world documentary tradition of photography was founded. Let us talk about the poet Robert Fergusson and about the fact that, from this very chamber, the Nobel prizewinner, Wole Soyinka, walked with me to the statue. We talked about the influence of Scottish poets on the world. Let us talk socialism—although I know that that is embarrassing for the Labour Party. Let us talk about the injustice that was perpetrated on John Maclean, the first Soviet consul, who was sent to jail by a Scottish judge for five years for opposing a capitalist war. Let us talk trade unionism. A new biography of Robert Smillie, the miners’ champion, was published this very week at the Labour Party conference. Some might think that that was an inappropriate place these days for such a book. Let us talk about Bonawe, again in my constituency. At the ironworks, there is a monument and a tribute to Nelson and the battle of Trafalgar. Yes, the history of the union is part of the history of this country. That needs to be taught, too. I could go on for a long time, but I will not. Members: More! Thank you, but I will not.

Let us talk about the need to ensure that we understand who we are and where we came from. Let us show enthusiasm for that, and let us have nothing to do with the delay and the dissembling that we have heard from the united forces of conservatism in this chamber today. [Applause.]

I expect to receive the report during December.

No, I would definitely not give that advice. I would advise the colleges to continue with their discussions and, where possible, to reach conclusions. I spoke to a college principal who is in that position this morning. The review of governance is a wider review than simply a review of the issues of individual colleges; it looks right across the sector. In my statement yesterday, I indicated that I expect a move towards a regional model of commissioning in colleges very soon. The more that colleges are prepared for that, the better.

To be entirely fair, that is not in small print—it is in print that is exactly the same size as the print everywhere else because it is a proposal that is under discussion and I am keen to have responses to that proposal from the Labour benches and elsewhere. The power in question is a power to ensure that there is a continuing look at the structures that exist over a sustained period. We have tended to have bursts of merger activity, bursts of discussion and long periods in which nothing happens. We need to take a more strategic view, and the idea of having the powers is to allow a more strategic view to be taken.

Absolutely. Financial accountability is a key issue in governance. Yesterday, I talked about the need for transparency and openness. At the heart of that is financial openness and a clear understanding among members of the public of the large sums of money that are expended on colleges and universities and the way in which the public are rewarded for that expenditure.

Local authorities are responsible for providing the complement of teachers and subjects that best suits the circumstances of each school and its pupils, in light of the resources available. Through curriculum for excellence, we have given schools, local authorities and their partners the flexibility to plan and deliver a senior phase that meets the needs and aspirations of all their learners within their local circumstances.

That was a rather tangential extension of the question, but I will do my best to follow the logic of it. The education maintenance allowance is available for young people who stay on at school. I am sure that the member wants to pay tribute to the Government for maintaining the education maintenance allowance, which has been abolished south of the border. The question, thereafter, is what choices are available to young people—it is not only an issue of the income that is available. The guarantee that we have given of a place in training or education will be part of that. With regard to the way in which we can support and encourage students, within the confines of the public finance, this Government offered the £7,000 minimum income guarantee in its manifesto, and we will take that forward. Other opportunities will arise. For example, the paper that we issued yesterday—I am sure that the member has read it—talks about ways in which we could support part-time study, which is something that we do not do as well as we should. With regard to the specific question about the higher than average returns of S5 and S6 pupils, I would encourage every young person, no matter who they are or where they are, to ensure that they get the most out of education that they can. That means ensuring that they have the opportunity to study at school, at college, at university or through modern apprenticeships. I am glad to say that opportunities in that regard are growing as a result of the actions of this Government.

That is a good point, and I am grateful to the member for making it. There are resource pressures on individual schools, and there is also an issue that some schools might not have large enough fifth and sixth years to enable them to offer all options. The ways in which schools can work together and authorities can manage that are crucial. The hub approach is one way; other areas have extensive online learning, which is also a possibility; and some pupils go to different schools to learn different subjects. In all those circumstances, making efforts to give those pupils the maximum opportunity to study the widest possible range of subjects is the right way forward, and I commend every local authority that is doing that.

We fund a range of activities to promote Scottish universities overseas, including supporting recruitment fairs, scholarships, international university partnerships and international exchanges for Scottish students. As outlined in our pre-legislative paper, which was published yesterday, we are committed to presenting our universities as a “destination of learning choice for international students.”

There is, as far as I am aware, no evidence at all that the recruitment of overseas students has been affected by any decisions that the universities themselves have made. I stress to Hanzala Malik that it is for each university to decide which courses to offer and how to present those in its prospectus. Of course, universities must be aware that to attract overseas students they must provide attractive, high-quality courses, but the thing that most attracts overseas students to Scotland is the quality of the university education. That is not being diminished—indeed, we know that it is being improved. This morning I had a breakfast meeting with the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, Donald Tsang, in which we discussed with university principals and others the way in which university students could be attracted from Hong Kong, and Scottish students could go to study there. That living exchange is very important in taking the quality of our university sector ever higher.

I confirm that the Scottish Government is committed to taking forward proposals to extend the council tax exemption to articulating students, so that those who are on two plus two degrees or other articulating courses and students who move directly from an undergraduate course to a postgraduate course will not pay council tax in the short period between courses. We are considering how best to implement those proposals.

I am grateful for the positive support from the National Union of Students, with which we have tried to maintain a close relationship in the past two years as we have discussed student finance. At the heart of that relationship is our commitment that Scotland-domiciled students should not pay university fees. I am committed to the minimum income. To deliver it, we must not only secure the funds—we are in the process of doing so through the spending review—but be absolutely certain that we have the administrative arrangements so to do. As the First Minister said last week, one downside of the scaremongering about university fees in which some parties in the chamber have indulged has been an extraordinary upsurge in pressure on phone lines at the Student Awards Agency for Scotland. We must ensure that that agency can continue to deliver to Scottish students and that its technology is developed so that it can deliver different support, such as the minimum student income. I hope that those systems can be developed in the next year to 18 months.

The number of students who take computer science as their main subject at university has fallen by 1,245 in the past four years, but the number increased by 560 on the previous year to 9,470 in 2010.

We always remain aware of the need to encourage all science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects. We promote STEM subjects in schools. I launched “Science & Engineering 21—Action Plan for education for the 21st Century” in March. I also work closely with the chief scientific adviser on gender participation in science. We keep such subjects under review, but the general trend in STEM subjects is—fortunately—upwards.

Under our proposals, it will be up to individual universities to manage and set their fee levels for students from the rest of the United Kingdom. However, as the First Minister said yesterday, we would have preferred “a more moderate” approach from some Scottish universities when setting their tuition fees. I counsel the Parliament that we need to wait and see what the average fee level across Scottish institutions is, whether that corresponds to what the working group, which included universities, suggested it would be and what the overall fee levels are across English institutions.

To answer the second point first, such a mechanism is in place. Universities will not—I repeat: they will not—recruit fee-paying students from England at the expense of Scottish students. That mechanism exists and I have indicated that I am willing to consider a double lock to ensure that that situation does not happen. I have the assurance of the universities that it will not happen and there is the mechanism through the funding council to prevent it. On the other point, we must wait and see what the figures are, and I will do so. I am sure that universities are considering the decisions that have been made by one or two others and thinking about what they should do. At the end of the process, when all the Scottish universities have made a decision, I am happy to have a discussion on how we go forward and to listen to members’ views on that.

The courses that are offered by a college are ultimately a decision for its governing body, but colleges must take into account the Government’s strategic priorities and the guidance that is issued to colleges by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, both of which have highlighted the need to secure best value from resources, including through collaboration between institutions. As I made clear yesterday in my statement on post-16 education reform, we continue to seek a much more efficient and effective delivery landscape.

I certainly agree that there is a place for a reduction in wasteful duplication. As I said yesterday, the history of colleges in Scotland shows that the current system arose out of a series of reforms that had benefits at the early stage but which, in latter stages, and particularly in recent years, have encouraged a lack of accountability and a certain competition, which has led to wasteful use of resources. Given the enormous pressure that we are under because of the actions of Labour when in government and now the Liberals and Conservatives, we must ensure that every penny goes into the front line, and that is what we will try to do.

I had meetings with representatives from the University of St Andrews and Fife Council in June about the plans for Madras College. In addition, my officials had several discussions with both parties throughout the summer.

I will certainly impress that on Fife Council—indeed, I have done that, and it has impressed on me its great desire to ensure that there is a new school. I think that it will decide the way forward on 22 September, and that the replacement of Madras College remains on its agenda. I am very disappointed about what has happened, as I was an enthusiastic backer of a very good and positive scheme. I have spoken to the University of St Andrews about its future intentions, and it has given me a commitment on its wanting to see a collaboration between it—particularly those involved in its science course—and the new school. However, what has happened is disappointing, which is why I have lent my personal support to seeing whether we can get a solution at the last moment.

The first inspections by Education Scotland, which is the new agency that has been created by bringing together the functions of Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education and Learning and Teaching Scotland, began in September. Education Scotland has evaluation processes in place for reviewing the findings of its inspections and reporting relevant findings to the Scottish ministers.

I am always happy to visit the member’s constituency and to visit good schools. There are many good schools in Scotland. I want to record the success of the new rural primary and small primary inspection regime, which seems to be doing well, and that Luing primary school, which is in my constituency, received an “outstanding” report.

If we were to meet the cost of the tuition fees for students from other parts of the United Kingdom on the basis of the current fees—that is, £1,820—it would cost the Scottish Government more than £36 million.

I certainly agree with the member, and I find it most regrettable that we are in the position that we are in. We are in that position because of decisions that were made in a review that the Labour Party commissioned and which the Tories and Liberal Democrats implemented. That said, my duty and primary responsibility is to be absolutely certain that we can provide the free education that the Scottish Government has offered to Scotland-domiciled students, and that is exactly what we will do.

Last week, the First Minster set out our programme for government and outlined the Government’s ambitions for the current session of Parliament. That was followed, earlier this week, by our refreshed economic strategy, which we will debate shortly. Both documents make it absolutely plain that a high-performing education and skills system is vital to creating the new Scotland that we wish to see, to building our workforce, to improving people’s life chances, and to maintaining our competitiveness, both at home and abroad. We now have an enormous opportunity to build on what we have achieved so far—an opportunity that the Government fully intends to take. During our first term, we intensified the most important education reform programme in a generation: the curriculum for excellence. We also undertook a thorough examination of higher education and consulted, through our green paper process, on a sustainable Scottish solution to the funding challenges that are facing our universities. Because of their high ambitions, the process of change to realise curriculum for excellence and improve Scottish education in both those spheres is unfinished business. Therefore, to complete the reforms we must maintain momentum. This term I want to move to reform the broader post-16 education system, many parts of which have remained untouched for decades. The college sector, for example, has remained virtually unchanged since devolution—indeed, since incorporation in the early 1990s, when local accountability was weakened and competition encouraged. Some of that has, over time, led to wasteful duplication. That can no longer remain the case. Today, I have published “Putting Learners at the Centre: Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”, a pre-legislative paper that outlines my proposals for the reform of post-16 education. The title that we have chosen reflects our overarching ambition to radically improve the offer to learners and to make the whole system work better for them. Education has many different and important purposes. The eminent educationist, Frank Coffield, observed: “Our learners become (or already are) not just workers, but ... parents, citizens, consumers ... We need to educate them for all these roles”. Asked what he wanted for his own children, he added: “I want for every child what I want for” my “children: a high-quality initial education, an appropriate vocational education and training, and a job worthy of a human being. For many young people ... their 21 hours per week in college may prove to be their only experience of education after they leave school at 16; so we must use that time wisely.” I absolutely agree with that view. Our reform programme will have at its centre learners and their readiness for work and life in general. As indicated last week by the First Minister, the bedrock of our proposals is opportunities for all. We will ensure that every single young person aged 16 to 19 has a place in post-16 education and training appropriate to their needs and circumstances. We believe that that, together with wider action to improve young people’s outcomes from early years through to adulthood, is the best way of giving them the strongest start in life. We will build on opportunities for all with a comprehensive programme of action based on the eight thematic priorities that I have set out in our paper. The first priority is the learner journey. Scotland needs a post-16 education system in which everyone, regardless of their background, has the opportunity to access and progress through learning successfully. In addition to our new commitment to young people, we will make progression, particularly between college and university, easier—and faster, if that is what learners want. We will also introduce more higher level and technical apprenticeships, and we will modernise the careers service to ensure that, alongside universities and other providers, it plays a full part in raising people’s aspirations from an early age. My second priority is widening access, which is essential to helping everyone get on the right journey. Although most young people stay in learning after 16, too many still do not. We know all too well that that damages their job prospects and, over time, their life chances. Even for those who stay in the system, opportunity is not as fairly distributed as we would like. We will therefore legislate to ensure fairer access to higher education, protect places for Scottish students, and introduce tougher measures to ensure that learners from more disadvantaged backgrounds get the chance to study at university and are able to stay there. Given our specific commitment to young learners, we will improve provision for young learners who have dropped out of learning. That will include the implementation across Scotland of activity agreements, to which I expect youth work and community learning and development to make a significant contribution. The next theme is student support, which is a major factor in successfully widening access. On this, we have made clear our commitment to making the system simpler, fairer and more affordable, which we will do by introducing a minimum income of £7,000 for the lowest-income students, by exploring the introduction of entitlement-based support for non-advanced study, and by building on the success of part-time study by developing better support for part-time students. The fourth issue in the paper is jobs and growth. In order to compete successfully, both here and abroad, Scotland’s employers need a workforce that is equipped with a broad range of skills, knowledge and attributes. Although our education and training system has served Scotland well to date, more can be done. For example, we must strengthen the essential role that universities play in growing our economy through their international contribution. Moreover, we must respond to economic imperatives by better aligning learning and skills with our ambitions for jobs and growth. In practical terms, that means focusing our investment where it has maximum economic and social return and on those people who most need Government support. We will therefore work much more closely with employers to ensure that the training and qualifications courses that are delivered meet their needs. We will prioritise skills development in key economic sectors and sectors where there are large numbers of job opportunities. We will also focus funding on nationally recognised qualifications. In pursuing the latter approach, I of course recognise that some types of access courses that do not lead to recognised qualifications provide a very important first step into formal learning for many people. We will protect those courses. The next item is research, which is a major contributor to economic growth. We must maintain Scotland’s world-leading position in university research and maximise its contribution to sustainable growth, but to build on our successes, we need to go on improving our approach. That will mean focusing our investment on excellence and closer alignment with national priorities, and ensuring that business, industry and the economy are better supported by knowledge exchange, innovation and exploitation of research. My final two priorities relate to how the system can deliver more effectively and efficiently. We have to get in place delivery structures that meet our priorities and which work for learners and employers. They must be sustainable. Do we have the right configuration of colleges? The fact that we have essentially the same arrangement now as we did in 1993 after the Tory reforms that Margaret Thatcher instigated should surely give us pause for thought. Ideally, I would wish to see emerge regional groupings of colleges, with a spread of specialist, higher-level and access-level provision delivered locally; greater collaboration between universities, with the possibility of mergers where that makes educational and financial sense; and closer integration of local skills and employment services, including Skills Development Scotland and, crucially, Jobcentre Plus. There are some good examples where that is already happening, but we need to accelerate the process of change and build the best practice into the system as a whole. Finally, I turn to funding, performance and governance. This Government spends close to £2 billion each year on post-16 education—that is in the region of £50 million each and every week. We therefore have a duty to give learners, employers and taxpayers every confidence that public funds are being invested wisely and are delivering teaching and learning of the highest possible quality. As I have made plain on many occasions, I have particular difficulties with the complexity and lack of transparency of the existing college funding model and with the governance arrangements that apply to our colleges and universities. On that point, I agree with Malcolm Chisholm who, only last week in the chamber, called for the democratic accountability of colleges to be increased. He will agree, I think, that the same is required of universities. We will therefore move to funding models that reflect need and are based on outcomes, will raise standards and performance, and will make the governance of colleges and universities more open, transparent and accountable. Members will be aware that I have established two governance reviews—one for colleges and one for universities. They will report in December and will inform the process. The pre-legislative paper that I am launching today sets out in detail the ambitious steps that I want to take in partnership with universities, colleges, training providers, staff, learners, trade unions, business and others to achieve our vision for post-16 education. Throughout the document, we have outlined our legislative intentions and I expect a bill in the second half of next year, but it is clear that not everything needs legislation. I am ambitious for the people of Scotland, and the proposals—both legislative and non-legislative—that our paper contains will ensure that our ambitions are realised. In reforming post-16 education, I have three key objectives. A reformed system must support jobs and growth, improve people’s life chances and be sustainable. Those are the criteria against which each element of the reform programme will be tested. Reform of post-16 education is urgently needed; some might argue that it is overdue. To compete successfully in a rapidly changing global economy, Scotland’s employers need a high-performing, well-educated and skilled workforce. We do well, but we can do better. We have a duty to learners—and to employers—to ensure that they acquire the knowledge, skills and attributes that we know will be important, whatever direction our economy moves in. In addition, we have a wider public duty to target our investment where it will produce the maximum economic and social return. More than 130 years ago, President Garfield said: “Next in importance to freedom and justice is popular education, without which neither freedom nor justice can be permanently maintained.” That remains as true today as it was in 1880. It is our job to make Scotland’s post-16 system a foundation stone for the successful country that we want to create.

Mr Macintosh has his own grudging style, but I must say that on this occasion he was more grudging than ever. I point out to him as kindly and supportively as I can that the Government is delivering 10,000 more modern apprenticeships than any previous Administration. I know that, despite his aspiration to lead his party, he has never held office, but had he held office in the previous Labour Administration he would have delivered substantially less in education and training than we are delivering now. Mr Macintosh might have noticed the effect of the recession that we have lived through, some parts of which were caused by his own party. At every turn, we have focused on providing opportunities in Scotland, and the pre-legislative paper is exactly about that. If he reads the statement again—and now he has a chance to read the paper—he will realise that the more effective and efficient college system that we propose will deliver more. It will focus on the individual learner and make a guarantee to individual learners that has never been made before. There is every reason to say that that is a good and substantive step forward. A fair-minded politician would have said so.

On the question about greater Government control, let me say that I have no aspiration to run the colleges or universities. However, I have an aspiration to ensure that there is accountability for every penny of public money that is spent. I expect the support of the entire chamber in that matter, and I hope that I will have it when issues are decided on. As I indicated, substantial sums of public expenditure are going out the door on a daily basis. They are invested in the future of our young people, and we must ensure that every penny is spent wisely. Governance reform in colleges and universities is long overdue. I would have hoped that, across the chamber, that fact would be recognised and there would be support for ensuring greater transparency—that being one of the founding principles of this Parliament and something that should be a founding principle of every organisation in Scotland. On support for students and the consultative paper, I am sure that, if Liz Smith has views on how and to whom support for students should be applied, she will give them. As far as I am concerned, the undertaking that we made to students in our manifesto will be delivered. If there are good ideas about how we can deliver it better, I am open to them.

A variety of benchmarking takes place in education and training, part of which is the assessment and examination system in which there is external verification of things learned. It is more difficult in other areas. Christina McKelvie makes an important point. She has been active in the activity agreement pilots in her area. The activity agreements are tremendously important parts of delivery, where we reach out to those furthest from the labour market, who have given up on education and who do not understand the need for education and training, and draw them back into the system. It is important to have strong, external verification of the success of these parts of delivery—success not just in seeing young people get into formal education but in making full use of the third sector in so doing. I expect local authorities and the third sector to collaborate in that way.

There will be no dilution of national standards. The more money we put into the front line, the better. There is huge financial pressure—no one in the chamber can deny that. Our budget is under enormous pressure, and we must make sure every penny we spend is spent wisely and in a way that gets to those with the greatest need. I am certain that, by taking these reforms forward, we will ensure a positive benefit for learners. I remind Claire Baker of the 16 to 19 guarantee, which is central and which no previous Government has made. It will ensure young people have something available that is tailored to their needs. That is as good an offer as can be made, and I am very glad this Government is making it.

Our university model combines teaching and research, and I think that it is successful. We have a uniquely successful series of research outcomes because we value education highly. We see the link between public benefit and individual education. That approach has been abandoned south of the border—I think that they are wrong, but it is up to them to make their decisions. My only difficulty is when such decisions attempt to impinge on what we are trying to deliver. That long-term link has led to the unique situation, where we have five of the world’s top 150 universities in this small country and where 0.1 per cent of the world’s population—which is what Scotland has—delivers 1.8 per cent of the world’s research citations. This is an extremely important area in which we must continue to invest. In recent years, we have had useful and important innovations, such as research pooling, and I am keen to make sure that those continue. Today, I am announcing another £500,000 to support international research activity as part of this process, but we will need to continue to ensure that what is delivered with world-beating excellence in Scotland continues in that way. That requires that we invest where success is and that we invest to intensify success.

The college sector already has good links with employers, but we need to make sure that their purposes and what they are trying to achieve is well aligned with college outcomes. We are developing that approach in curriculum for excellence, and I am very pleased at the close contact that now exists between employers and those who are developing the new examinations in curriculum for excellence. We need to ensure that that closeness remains as curriculum for excellence rolls into the college sector. The positive nature of the outcomes will ensure that we have greater economic success and a workforce that expects to be employed in sectors in Scotland that are growing. That is distinctly possible if we follow the route that I am laying out.

That is an interesting question from Mr McArthur. It is interesting to see the Liberal Democrats defending Margaret Thatcher. The coalition is now complete; there is ideological unity at last. I described further education in Scotland in the way that I did because that is the way it is. A college system was created that has had some successes—I am not saying that it has been unsuccessful. However, when we look at it now, in the second decade of the 21st century, we can see that there is a strong need to change the sector to align it much more closely with Scotland as it actually is, and that is what we are going to endeavour to do. Defending the indefensible—the status quo—is, of course, a classic description of conservatism and is more proof that the Lib Dems have become Conservatives. On the question of EU students, Mr McArthur knows very well that I am working hard, as are my officials, within the EU to ensure that we have a better settlement than we have now. We will continue to do that, and I welcome his views on the matter.

I welcome the mention of the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. We are very fortunate in Scotland in having the SCQF, which gives us a uniquely successful template against which to gauge the progress of each learner and to mark the learning journey. Interestingly, that template has been exported elsewhere. For example, when I was in Hong Kong last year, they were just putting in place a very similar model with the advice of those who are involved in the SCQF. Mr Adam mentioned a very important issue. The movement between school, college and university is particularly crucial. However, the movement between college and university has not been marked by as much success as it should have been. That has sometimes been because of unnecessary duplication. The SCQF indicates that such duplication should not take place, but not all colleges and universities observe that. As our consultation paper makes clear, I am very keen that we have a greater adherence to the SCQF, that those transitions are marked seamlessly and that the learner progresses at their own pace, which sometimes happens faster than colleges and universities usually allow it to happen.

I am very happy to ensure that we work with every local authority and every school to ensure that there are positive destinations. That is what we have been trying to do, and the position has been getting better. The guarantee that we are making is a very important guarantee in taking that forward. I would therefore have hoped that the member would welcome the guarantee and help us to ensure that it takes place. On the activity agreement pilots, I think that the member must have been asleep for the past two or three years. The enormous financial pressure means that, regrettably, much more must be done with existing resources. I have been visiting activity agreement pilots and delivery projects that are delivering wonderfully well—particularly given the pressure on resources—and I pay tribute to how important they are. I think that we should celebrate that. It is always better to light a candle than to curse the darkness.

I very much recognise the point that the member makes. There is a great benefit in studying and learning from elsewhere. The Scottish Government is supporting the NUS Scotland-led work on the year of mobility, and we are providing funding to the EU lifelong learning programme. Opportunities for Scottish students to experience study overseas through the study China and study India programmes have been expanded, and we are ensuring that there are opportunities for technical work placements. Last year, when I was in Finland to look at the Finnish education system, I was impressed to meet a group of students from Dundee College, who were there on placements while undertaking a vocational course in caring. The opportunities are great and we should encourage young people to take them up, because the experience is very good for them.

I agree with the member that the weighted SUM system is no longer fit for purpose and requires to be changed, as I indicated in my statement. It is regrettable that people will have to travel for education and training, but we cannot deliver everything on everyone’s doorstep. What we have tried to do is ensure that there are opportunities for all, and the guarantee that we are making shows that there will be an opportunity for everyone. That is a step forward. We are in difficult times and it is extremely important that we recognise that. It is not enough simply to regret that something is not happening; we must have imaginative solutions to take forward new ways of delivery. That is what I commend to the Parliament in the context of the paper, “Putting Learners at the Centre”.

The Scottish funding council invested £305 million in research across universities in Scotland in the academic year 2010-11. That included support for the Scottish Borders campus of Heriot-Watt University and the Crichton campus of the University of Glasgow and the University of the West of Scotland. An additional £140 million in Government and business research and development was invested in Scotland in 2008-09, the most recent year for which figures are available.

I would be very happy to meet the member. Although the situation is patchy, there are some significant investments. For example, the chemical company DuPont Teijin Films is being supported to invest in a research and development programme in Dumfries that aims to understand polyester chemistry with a view to delivering the desired weatherability. The Agenor Technology investment in information technology is highly significant, too, as is some of the spending on the college and university sector, including that on the new aeronautical engineering centre that has been built in collaboration with the University of the West of Scotland in Ayr. However, I would be happy to meet the member to discuss the issue further.

At the beginning of this year, I consulted on a wide-ranging green paper on higher education. Following that process, I made a statement to the Parliament on 16 March in which I set out how, in the event of re-election, I intended to progress an ambitious agenda of reform. Today, I return to the chamber to set out the next steps, which will be taken in the context of a wider ambition for education in Scotland. My vision and that of the Government is of a sector that plays an important role in delivering improved life chances for young people; that provides the best outcomes for learners; that takes its world-class research base to even greater levels of success; and which makes the maximum possible contribution to achieving greater levels of sustainable economic growth for Scotland. Scottish universities are highly regarded throughout the world and will play a central role in delivering our wider ambitions for Scotland’s future. We want to protect and enhance their international competitiveness while ensuring that they provide opportunities for all. Before the election, I was quite clear that the debate on higher education was sometimes too narrowly focused on fees. The green paper opened up a more fundamental discussion about the role of our universities and how we support them without mortgaging the futures of our students and graduates to pay for it. We will not follow England by putting an unmanageable debt burden on our graduates. On average, Scottish graduates currently have less than half the debt—almost £11,000 less—of their English counterparts. Under the new arrangements south of the border, the average debt of English graduates could be as much as £30,000. The Scottish election established a clear consensus that tuition fees, whether up front or back door, are not the right solution for us, nor is any form of graduate contribution. As Ken Macintosh said in the debate on 16 June, the Conservatives aside, we have solidarity on tuition fees in the Parliament, so it is no longer a live issue for us. In this country, higher education is, and will continue to be, based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. Our first step must be to address the financial challenges ahead of us, which in great part have been created by decisions that were taken in England. I have done everything that I can to maintain stability for our sector north of the border by being clear on two issues: we will not charge fees for Scottish students and we will commit to funding the sector to retain its competitive position. At the start of June, Alastair Sim of Universities Scotland helpfully pointed out that the fees situation in England will not be clear until next month. Moreover, Universities UK has stated that it will not be fully clear until students start to take their places at university next year. It is possible that yesterday’s launch of the United Kingdom white paper may only have added to that uncertainty. I intend to use the best information that we have available over the summer recess to work with the sector through the spending review to begin to put in place a funding solution for the sector, which is why I am announcing what our response will be to higher fees in England and Wales as regards students from the rest of the UK who choose to study in Scotland. I say at the outset that this is not a measure that I take any joy in having to implement. Scotland welcomes students from all over the world. We want them to continue to come here because of the quality of what we offer and the quality of where we offer it, but we must be the best option, not the cheapest option, and we need to move quickly. Our universities are already starting to plan recruitment campaigns for the academic year 2012-13. We must provide clarity for potential students from the rest of the UK who want to make the positive choice to study in Scotland. That is why I am launching a consultation on proposals for secondary legislation to allow Scottish universities to set their own fees for students from other parts of the UK from the academic year 2012-13. From 2013-14, I plan to introduce primary legislation to restrict the fees that our universities can charge those students to a maximum of £9,000 per annum—the upper limit in England. I have agreement from Universities Scotland that universities will voluntarily comply with that cap until the primary legislation is in place. That means that we can expect a range of fees for other UK students—from £1,800 to £9,000—which will give institutions flexibility to target their recruitment. I expect the average fee in Scotland to be lower than that in England and possibly to be around the £6,375 figure that was used in the technical working group with Universities Scotland. We have no option but to act. If we did nothing, students from England in particular would pay only just over £1,800 a year to attend a Scottish university. That compares with five times that figure—£9,000—in their home nation. Action is essential to ensure that Scottish students are not squeezed out by students from elsewhere in the UK. The proposal that I have described meets that objective. Our universities will be able to offer Scottish students the same number of places next year as they did this year. In fact, in time, the arrangement might even allow them to offer more places—I will consider that. I will ensure that the additional revenue is distributed fairly. Universities with high numbers of other UK students will benefit, but we will work with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, Universities Scotland and the National Union of Students Scotland to ensure that the additional income that is generated helps the whole sector. The consultation process will run from today until 2 September, and the relevant secondary legislation will be laid in Parliament later that month. I hope that it will be approved by November. As well as implementing the new fee arrangements, we will continue to explore the feasibility—within the boundaries of European law—of a management fee for European Union students. The issue is complex, and we must take our time to explore fully what might be possible. My officials are continuing to engage with the European Commission and member states, and I hope to say more about the subject later in the year. My aspirations for the sector are much wider than merely financial. For example, modern and transparent governance arrangements must be in place across all our universities as a prerequisite for long-term stability and success. The plans will be shaped by the governance review that I announced two weeks ago. The review is being led by Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski, who has considerable experience of university governance outside Scotland. His review will consider whether an appropriate level of democratic accountability and transparency exists, while the benefits of autonomy and the importance of a strategic purpose that aligns with national priorities are recognised. I am publishing the review’s remit today alongside a call for evidence, so that we can gather views over the summer. I expect to have recommendations by the end of this year and to legislate, where necessary, next year. However, we must go further. In September, I will produce more detailed proposals in a pre-legislative paper that covers not just universities but colleges, skills and training. That will be followed by a period of public discussion and debate, before legislation to reform all those areas is introduced to the Parliament in 2012. Meeting the learner’s needs will be at the heart of those proposals. Scotland’s ability to flourish depends on its people, and I am committed to ensuring that our people—all of them—have the opportunities that they need to improve their life chances, attainment and employability. There will be tough choices. We need to be much clearer about the provision that is on offer—the extent to which it is duplicated and the degree to which it helps people to secure positive outcomes when their learning is complete. Broadly speaking, my reform proposals will include establishing more efficient and flexible learner progression whereby more students are capable of moving seamlessly from school to college to university and into jobs; incentivising learning provision, so that it is better aligned with our ambitions for jobs and growth; creating structural change across the entire post-16 education landscape, so that public funds for education and training are used more efficiently; guaranteeing wider access, including lowering socioeconomic barriers to involvement in education and training; maintaining Scotland’s world-leading position in university-led research; developing revised student support arrangements that are fair and affordable; ensuring that governance in colleges and universities provides greater accountability for public funding and commands greater public respect; and simplifying the funding structures and flows for higher and further education. I am pleased to announce that I plan to hold a review of the governance of our further education colleges, which will run in parallel with our university review. It will examine the quality and relevance of, and potential future contribution that can be made by, enhanced governance structures for our colleges. I am delighted to inform the Parliament that the review will be led by Professor Russel Griggs, who will be assisted by representatives of staff, students, principals and others. Professor Griggs has held many non-executive positions in the public and private sectors and is the chair of Dumfries and Galloway College’s governing body. I believe that, just as for our universities, the governance structure of colleges should pay strong regard to democratic accountability. College governance must be geared to providing world-class leadership, inspiration and scrutiny in order to support the economic and social role of colleges in what will inevitably be a highly challenging future financial climate. I will therefore ask Professor Griggs to make recommendations that will ensure that the governance of our colleges is fully aligned with those challenges. I will also ask him to consider what improvements can be made to the democratic accountability of our colleges. What we teach and what we learn has played an important part in developing Scotland’s people, economy and society. Education plays a central role in improving life chances. Learning, in all its forms and settings, has a wide reach. At one end of the spectrum, it helps those who are furthest from the labour market to move towards employment; at the other, it develops high-level skills and produces world-leading research. Our tradition in education influences how other countries perceive us and how we project ourselves in the world. Our people and our distinctive culture are the richer for it. These proposals for reform are ambitious. They represent the most significant changes since devolution. They will transform for the better the education and training landscape and enhance the life chances of all Scots. The first Earl of Birkenhead, Frederick Edwin Smith, was rector of the University of Aberdeen from 1927 to 1930. In a rectorial address to the university, he stated: “Scotland is renowned as the home of the most ambitious race in the world”. That was a great compliment. It was true then, and it is true now. The Government and I are ambitious for the people of Scotland. Our proposals will ensure that those great ambitions are realised, for education makes ambitions come true.

I will deal with the last question first. There were many questions, so I will work my way backwards. My statement was entirely clear. I used the words “within the boundaries of European law”. We will do our best to make progress on that. What we propose is certainly lawful in Ireland, where it operates, so I would have thought that it would be lawful here, too. For a variety of reasons, I am disappointed in Ken Macintosh’s litany of questions. First, I hope that he will join me in saying that the best solution would be independence for Scotland, because in those circumstances we would be able to treat everybody entirely equitably. We would have our own money, raised through a variety of taxes, and we could choose how to spend it. Unfortunately, we are not in that position. Ken Macintosh might reflect that the difficulties that have been created by decisions south of the border were set in train by the Labour Government, which commissioned the Browne review and clearly supported its outcomes. In those circumstances, if there are problems, many of them lie at the Labour Party’s door. Mr Macintosh talked about the fees that I am setting, but my statement was entirely clear that I am not setting fees: I am giving Scottish universities flexibility to compete with their counterparts elsewhere in the UK. Mr Macintosh is also wrong that, in some curious way, there will be disadvantages. Some courses, such as medicine, that typically attract the highest proportion of students from the rest of the UK are the same length north and south of the border. The fee is an annual fee, but it will be up to the universities to decide how they compete. That is an inevitability. Because of the situation in which we are placed with the limitations on the Scottish budget, I cannot, and nor should I, pay for every single student who comes to Scotland. As I made entirely clear in my statement, the proposals are designed to ensure that the same number of students from Scotland that we have this year—107,000—should be accommodated next year. I want to ensure that we go further. I said in my statement that I will consider lifting the cap on the number of students. The measures are a necessary compromise that has been sought by the universities, with which I have had detailed and helpful discussions. In all those circumstances, the proposals are the right thing to do. I am glad that Mr Macintosh welcomes some parts of the statement, although it would have been more sensible if he had welcomed it all.

Again, the member makes a basic mistake in her questions. I am not setting fees for students from the rest of the UK; I am ensuring that the freedom exists, under a cap, for the universities to do that. Providing that the consultation produces the appropriate responses, we will go forward on that basis, because that is what the universities want. That is the best situation that we can make out of the demands that have come from south of the border. I am keen to stress a number of aspects. In Scotland, we will guarantee widening access, but we will do that by means of the legislation that I have proposed. Many people believe that the proposals south of the border will not guarantee widening access. We have opportunities to make the system work for Scotland. It would be very good indeed if the Tories left the position that they are in, which is unique, and supported the Scottish democratic tradition. On resources to universities, we have guaranteed to ensure that we close the gap, and the universities are happy with that. I commend to Liz Smith a letter that I have had from the convener of Universities Scotland—from Scotland’s universities—which states: “can I reaffirm Universities Scotland’s entire acceptance that in the post-election environment any further discussion of graduate contribution options is irrelevant.” I think that that makes Liz Smith irrelevant, and I wish that she would join the relevant side of the chamber.

It is certainly obvious that many of the difficulties that we face were generated elsewhere. I am trying to decouple ourselves from that situation and create a clear policy that we can follow in Scotland—one that Mr Macintosh had indicated that he supported, although clearly he now has reservations. As long as we have reasonable agreement across the chamber that we have a distinctive and successful policy in Scotland, I want to limit the harm that is done—Mr Hepburn is right about that—by decisions made elsewhere.

With the greatest respect, the member knows the answers to those questions. They were in the statement, and they have been previously discussed. It would be good if the Opposition joined in supporting our initiative within the EU to ensure that we can put a service charge in place. I am happy to offer the member a briefing from officials on the service charge, because we want to ensure that everybody supports it. To use it as the stuff of politics and to bandy it about this chamber will not help universities, the situation or European students.

I will finalise the terms of reference with Professor Russel Griggs shortly. I had a conversation with him yesterday evening about some of the wider issues. He not only has a lot of experience in the further education sector but has worked in the better regulation sector and was part of the UK’s better regulation task force. We want to simplify arrangements to ensure that we have in place governance arrangements that are the simplest possible and which provide colleges’ accountability to a number of communities. At the Education and Culture Committee yesterday, I referred to the concept of nested communities, which includes the academic and learning community of the college, the wider community in which the college is set, and the wider community of people in Scotland who provide education and training to the whole of the nation. In understanding the situation in that way, we want clear lines of accountability to be established. I am sure that Professor Griggs and his team will work on that, just as Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski will work on it for the higher education sector. I hope that they will also work together more broadly.

When I discuss such matters with the UK Government, it is always on the basis that we both want to continue the cross-border flow of students. I had a phone conversation with David Willetts this very morning about a number of issues arising from his white paper yesterday and my proposals today. There is a recognition throughout all the parts of these islands that we want to maintain cross-border flows. They are very important to us all. However, none of us should be in a position of finding our universities or colleges swamped by others from elsewhere, because that would create enormous problems. There is a commitment to continue to support students coming from other parts of the UK. We are also committed to continuing to support students going to other parts of the UK, and of course we pay full fees when we do that. Any student going from Scotland to a course south of the border is paid for through the system and borrows the money to undertake their course. That will continue, and as long as we are all moderate and sensible the good things in the system will continue.

To be blunt, I think that the Liberals are becoming a single-issue party: they just talk about independence all the time. I have a much broader view. If, at independence, we were faced with the problem of having to pay for students from the rest of the UK, I am sure that we would find a way to do it. The Irish way is interesting, as it applies a management fee to every person who goes to university in Ireland, including those from outside Ireland, but provides means-tested access to funding for Irish students, so there is a contribution—a generous one—to students. We could consider that for everybody, but I am keen to continue to explore the matter. Indeed, it is being well explored. As for the variety of other governance and accountability issues, it is extremely important that we recognise the responsibilities of further and higher education and connect them to the people who are being served. If we do that, the system will work exceptionally well.

It is in the universities’ interest to ensure that they set fees at the right time, in the right way and at a level that they believe will attract the number of students that they wish to have. The universities were very keen for me to make this announcement before Parliament rose for recess; indeed, those who attended the two cross-party higher education summits that were held before the election will remember that the universities asked for this issue to be brought forward before the end of June. That is what we are doing. They are now ready to start the process of setting fees and, when we get the secondary legislation after the consultation, they will be able to ensure that they can charge them from next year. I am quite sure that they will do that well and in a timely—and careful—fashion. After all, they want to continue to attract the maximum number of students from elsewhere. Indeed, they might, as will be their right, wish to attract more students to certain courses.

It is quite impossible for me to fulfil the member’s second requirement, because I do not set university principals’ pay. If I did, I might be willing to give the member that commitment; however, given the circumstances, the issue is up to universities themselves. Nevertheless, I hope that they will be mindful of what the public thinks and feels. Indeed, members on all benches in the previous Parliament made it very clear that they were not happy with the way in which the matter had been handled. I echoed that sentiment and continue to echo it and make it clear to the university principals. The member’s question about public audit is very interesting. Although the Scottish funding council requires a great deal of compliance activity, there is very little transparency in the publication of figures. The member is right to be concerned about that. It will be an issue for reform and will be tackled.

I agree entirely. Indeed, on a visit to Finland a year last March, I was very struck by meeting at a technical college in Helsinki a small group of social care students from Dundee College who were on a training fortnight. That link was very useful, and I encourage students and lecturers across the college and university sector to think of places outwith Scotland to make connections with, because such activity is exceptionally important. I am encouraging next year to be seen as the year of outgoing for Scottish students, and I have funded special activities to allow them to study abroad. The more that that happens in Scotland, the better.

Clearly, there has to be some benefit to each university, given that it has to meet the costs of the course. It would be inequitable if we were to do anything else. However, I think that all the universities recognise that there should be an additional sharing mechanism. After all, some of them attract more students from the rest of the UK than others. As I indicated in my statement, that is a matter for negotiation between Universities Scotland, the Scottish funding council and the NUS, but the Government will also have a role in ensuring that there is an equitable mechanism.

Scotland has five of the world’s top 150 universities. I do not think that even France can stand in that league, so we play well out of our league in terms of size. We are also the most cited small nation in the world. We must maintain that, which is why my statement specifically referred to ensuring that the world-class research performance of Scottish universities is maintained. I am absolutely committed to that and will continue to be so.

Murdo Fraser should start being ambitious and stop being so timorous. There is a famous phrase that if you invent a better mousetrap, people will beat a path to your door. If Scottish universities are, as we believe them to be, world leaders in research and teaching and are respected internationally, they will play well outside their league in philanthropy and research funding. They already do so in funding from, for example, the British and UK research councils. There is a variety of other ways in which they can work in that regard. The little Scotlandism of Mr Fraser is famous in the chamber. I am a Scot who is ambitious for our universities and for Scotland. Thank goodness that universities are achieving, because if they listened to Mr Fraser they would achieve nothing.

I welcome the opportunity to lead this debate on education. I regard it as a great honour to be the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. I very much look forward to the coming five years, in which I will be working with my colleagues Angela Constance and Alasdair Allan, who I am sure will make a strong and distinguished contribution to this portfolio and to education right across Scotland. Today I will outline the Government’s vision for how we intend to build on the many successes that are already in place, to further improve outcomes for children and young people, to tackle the problems that still affect education and to overcome current challenges. All that work must be taken forward in partnership, both in the chamber and across Scotland. I welcome back to this task Liz Smith and Ken Macintosh; I welcome Liam McArthur to his new portfolio; and I welcome Alison Johnstone, who I believe will speak on behalf of the Greens. I want to say a word about Des McNulty and Margaret Smith. Previously, I, too, lost my seat after holding a position on the front bench, and I know how difficult that can be. Both those members contributed strongly to the education debates in this chamber, and over the years Margaret Smith and I worked very closely together. We will miss their contributions in this chamber and I wish them well. I look forward to constructive debate and discussion, a collective understanding of the challenges that we face and a collective approach to solving them. I am absolutely committed to improving the life chances of Scotland’s children and young people. The Government’s vision is to achieve that through improving attainment for all and raising and realising ambition for all. That vision is aspirational and challenging, but it is achievable. I stress that I will make changes to our education system only if I am convinced that it will improve outcomes for individual learners. We all know that a greater focus on early years is required. Angela Constance, as Minister for Children and Young People, is working with me and will work with others throughout the chamber to create a fairer start for all. We will continue to implement the getting it right for every child agenda, which will ensure that resources deliver for all, including the most vulnerable children. Our most vulnerable children will see a greater focus on early intervention to achieve stability and improved outcomes. There are hard-edged economic benefits to early intervention. Early and effective intervention can significantly reduce costs to the state, both in the short term and the long term, and it can deliver better results for the individuals involved. We set out clearly in our manifesto our commitment to supporting children in their earliest years, and we have talked about the need for a fundamental shift in philosophy and approach—a shift away from intervening only when a crisis happens towards prevention. Of course, there are some long-term challenges, the biggest of which is to improve life chances for looked-after children. We know that every Administration has said that that is a priority, every Administration has said that it will tackle the issue and every Administration has tried—I pay tribute to them for that—yet I am back here again saying that it is a priority for this Administration. We must break that cycle. It is not just a matter of statistics and targets; it is about life chances for those who have least. We have to have the courage to take long-term action. We will set out a package of measures to take that forward. One of the elements will be to build on our investments in early years by investing in a change fund, part of which will deliver a new generation of family centres, as Susan Deacon recommended in her report earlier this year. We plan to introduce legislation on early years early on in this parliamentary session to ensure that investment in early years is not an optional extra. We also intend to go further, to explore legislative options to ensure that getting it right for every child is firmly embedded in the whole of the public sector. We will consult stakeholders over the summer to define where the legislation can have the most impact and support the most positive developments that are happening. We are very open to views. Because we recognise the importance of the home environment, an early priority will be the development of a national parenting strategy that encourages agencies to work together to support parents. Early years investment supports children’s readiness for the next stage of education: learning in school. Last week, Bill Maxwell, the interim chief executive of education Scotland and senior chief inspector of education for Scotland, advised Scotland’s directors of education that “The challenge we have in schools is not that our schools are failing. The greater challenge lies in the large group of schools which are too willing to accept that their current performance is ‘good enough.’ The key to success lies in lifting aspirations and the performance of many schools that are in effect ‘coasting’ and capable of so much more than they are achieving.” I agree with his analysis. I will add another perspective, which some members have heard many times before: my belief is that the reality of Scottish education is that we have hundreds of thousands of good pupils, taught by tens of thousands of good teachers in thousands of good schools, but we can constantly improve the attainment of every child. We can do that by narrowing the gap between the highest and lowest achieving and by improving the attainment of our highest-achieving children. For example, in Ontario, a literacy and numeracy strategy that seeks to empower and inspire pupils and teachers has seen high school graduation rates increase from 68 to 79 per cent. The inspirational Avis Glaze, who I was lucky enough to meet in Ontario a couple of years ago, and who is one of the key figures in the Ontario strategy, says: “It is about building capacity. Staying as a poor, low performing school is not an option. We are interested in improvement, rather than where schools are at any given time.” I am also interested in improvement for every child. Working with Dr Alasdair Allan, the Minister for Learning and Skills, I want to support schools—all schools—to be excellent and to enable every child to reach their full potential and realise their ambitions. All that will build on the platform of curriculum for excellence, which is the vehicle that Scotland has chosen to underpin the learning journey and beyond. Curriculum for excellence encourages schools to be innovative, ambitious, relevant and supportive of each child’s talents. It recognises the uniqueness of every child and tailors the education experience to every child. This Parliament has been united in its support for curriculum for excellence, and I want it to remain united in its commitment to the delivery of curriculum for excellence. I can confirm that work continues apace—on time and on target—on the development of the new national qualifications. They will be delivered in the way that was promised. We are working hard to ensure that teachers have as much information as they need as we move forward. The new agency, education Scotland, will of course have a key support role for teachers and schools from 1 July onwards. Within the context of curriculum for excellence, we need to make some changes to broad general education. We will deliver our literacy action plan through the literacy commission. I pay tribute to the work that the Labour Party, and Rhona Brankin in particular, did to bring that issue forward. We will have a renewed emphasis on the importance of language learning. As promised, we will bring together Scottish studies, including the Gaelic language, the Scots language and Scottish history and culture, to help our young people to understand Scotland and its place in the world. We will build on glow, the world’s first national school intranet. We are in the process of procuring the next generation of glow, but we are listening to users about what it should do and how it should do it. We will also continue to support Gaelic education. In Edinburgh, demand for places is rising all the time, which has meant that the Gaelic unit has outgrown its current premises at Tollcross primary, which Alasdair Allan, Angela Constance and I visited just two weeks ago. I am therefore delighted that, last week, I confirmed to the City of Edinburgh Council that the Scottish Government will provide capital funding towards the costs of renovating the disused primary school in Bonnington. I hope that the council will make a decision on that later this month. Curriculum for excellence is the bright hope for Scottish education, but the brightest hope comes from our teachers, particularly the young ones who are coming out of teacher training. We must always ensure that their talents and enthusiasms are not dulled through frustration and unemployment. I have spoken several times to the Parliament about my concerns and worries on that issue, which has been the most difficult problem that I have faced in the past 18 months. I have taken steps, through the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers, to ensure that the number of teachers who are being trained is brought into balance with the number of posts that are available. I expect the numbers to be in alignment next year. I very much regret the distress that the difficulties have caused. It is local authorities that employ teachers, but I have taken action to ensure that we do not have that waste of potential. I believe that the root cause was oversupply, but it is a matter that takes a long time to turn round. I will support and develop our teachers. We cannot have significant progress in education unless we work in consultation with the teaching profession. I want to build greater leadership capacity and always to improve the quality of teaching and learning. Following on from the Donaldson review, I will continue to drive forward the ambitious changes to support our teachers in training and to deliver new levels of attainment. That is why we have established a review of teacher terms and conditions led by Professor Gerry McCormac. I do not want to pre-empt the conclusions of Professor McCormac’s work. It is a review and it takes evidence, and I will not comment on that evidence. I look to Professor McCormac and his able team to draw conclusions. I will comment on those when I know them. Education is about creating and sustaining enthusiasm in individuals. The structures that surround education are a means to create success, not an end in themselves. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in the previous session of the Parliament looked at the governance of schools. It did not reach a definitive conclusion, but it set out questions that need to be addressed. I want us collectively to consider those questions, in the Parliament and with our partners, the chief among whom on the matter is the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The partnership approach has led to a sea change on rural education. The legislation that we passed on that was good, but it was not good enough, and it has not worked as well as it should. We are making progress on the issue in partnership. I will soon announce the details of the commission on rural education, which will be a partnership exercise with COSLA and others. Moving on from schools, one of the greatest issues is the 14 per cent of 16 to 19-year-olds who leave school and who are not in employment, training or education. The issue for that age group has existed for too long, although the figures are always being considered and we always try to do as much as we can. It is a matter of life chances. We have to prevent talent going to waste. We have to get it right in the early years and in schools; we have to support the child, the pupil and the student; and we have to balance the needs of the labour market with the individual need. For young people who leave school and do not go on to further or higher education, we must constantly review the avenues that are open to them and where they lead. Skills development should start in school. A young person’s strengths and ambitions should be nurtured and developed to provide clear direction in their journey into well-paid and sustainable work. A young person’s decision to go to college or to undertake training, voluntary work or a modern apprenticeship will be made easier if the skills have been developed and the benefits and outcomes are clearer. We have demonstrated our commitment through the funding of 25,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities for 2011-12, which is the highest-ever number of modern apprenticeships. We have also continued schemes such as the education maintenance allowance and we are committed to do more to help young Scots to find the right training and employment.

I will ask Skills Development Scotland to write to the member with the exact details, but I am aware that we need to provide the bulk of the opportunities for 16 to 19-year-olds, although there is a need to provide opportunities for others. We keep that under constant review. I turn to colleges and universities. Further and higher education has played a key role in our economic success. Parents, pupils, students and businesses in Scotland have for some time been safe in the knowledge that higher education will remain free and based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. I make that absolute commitment. In a rapidly changing world, our universities and colleges continue to innovate. As part of that, I believe that the learning journey that begins in the classroom must continue to be flexible beyond school. The provision in our colleges and universities needs to be delivered in a more coherent fashion and with much greater collaboration than at present. The institutions must be governed in ways that will help them to cope with the challenges of the future. I started that journey with our green paper, and later this year I will set out a wider package of reforms for the whole of post-16 education. However, on the specific subject of university governance, I can announce that I have asked Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski, the principal of Robert Gordon University, to chair a small five-member panel that will undertake a review of the current governance of higher education. That will include unions and students, as well as a chair of court. The panel will publish its remit before the summer recess and will invite views on the subject over the summer. It will present us with its conclusions at the end of the year and we will base our plans on its proposals. I have provided an idea of the ambition that the Government holds for Scottish education. In the Government’s first four years, we started to address the challenges and we had some success, but there is much more to do. For example, I remain committed to bearing down on class sizes in the early years of primary, although progress on that will not be as fast as I would like. If education were fully devolved and we were fully independent, we would be able to focus the sort of resources on education that currently we can only dream about. However, we can do much and we will do it. We will not agree all the time, but my task—and our joint task—is to ensure that we focus on the attainment of all our young people and that we always attempt to enhance their life chances. If we do that, it will mean success not only for individuals, but for Scotland as a whole.

As the member knows, the strike action is to do with pensions. I very much support the unions’ view on the pensions issue—I see no need for the changes—and I think that the teaching unions in Scotland are aware of that.

I can give some reassurance to the member. I spoke to Professor Muscatelli only yesterday about the issue. Professor Muscatelli has indicated that there will continue to be access to liberal arts provision at the Crichton, although in a different way; he is very much focused on ensuring that that provision continues, and that the Crichton grows and flourishes in the way that the member indicates.

I agree with a great deal of the member’s speech, but I want to make two quick points. First, he and I have worked hard to support the Crichton campus. I did so in a previous incarnation in this Parliament and I continue to be committed to the campus and believe that the liberal arts element is important to it. Secondly, I am not an emissary for the principal of the University of Glasgow, but I believe his assurance that liberal arts courses will continue to be offered, and that there is no threat to the university’s presence. Those are important reassurances.

The figures to which the member refers are contained in the joint report by Universities Scotland and the Scottish Government that gives a range of figures. The figures that we are dealing with were agreed with the Opposition during the process and the Labour Party also committed itself to closing the funding gap. Does the member still agree with that or does he now agree with the former Labour education spokesperson, who said that that policy is wrong?

Those were exactly the words that I used yesterday on television—the issue still gives me sleepless nights, but we are working hard to secure teacher jobs.

I am sure that the member would not want to mislead the chamber. It is not a question of a lucky 20 per cent getting jobs. A number of students get full-time permanent jobs; many students get temporary full-time jobs; and, over a period of time, most people will secure a permanent job. I want more students to get permanent jobs quickly, including Jamie McGrigor’s daughter.

As the Parliament will be aware, we are already taking forward 37 school projects, funded by a mixture of capital and revenue finance, as part of our £1.25 billion Scottish schools for the future programme. The forthcoming spending review process will inform the timing of the announcement of the next tranche of projects.

I hope that I am a living testament to the favourable educational experience that is provided there—although there may be different views on that across the chamber. The member, and perhaps the Conservative education spokesperson, would be the first people to criticise me were I to give a too favourable response to the question. I am aware of the concerns of the community in Troon; I am aware of the consultation that took place, which was organised by South Ayrshire Council; and I am aware of the very strong view in the community that a refurbishment of the historic and significant building—the college being the first truly comprehensive school in Scotland—should be undertaken, rather than eating into the sports ground. That decision will be for the community, with the council. Were a proposal to come forward within the next tranche of projects, it would of course be considered with an informed eye.

We made it clear during the election that our next target on school buildings in Scotland would be to continue to reduce the number of young people who are being taught in unacceptable buildings. In the secondary sector, we have eliminated all buildings in category D, but there are still a number of primary schools in that category, which need to be taken out of it. The Government managed to halve the number of pupils in unacceptable schools in our first four years. I want to do that again in the current session. That is our ambition. There are also, of course, issues of demographics and changing populations. East Renfrewshire, where there is stress on existing capacity, is a case in point. We will take that into consideration, but I cannot make commitments at this stage about specifically where and how we will do so.

Proposals for the reform of governance in the higher education sector will be brought forward in due course. Those will be based on the wide-ranging consultation up to and after the publication of the higher education green paper and will be informed by comments and concerns on the matter that have been expressed widely in Scotland in recent years.

I certainly agree with the First Minister, but it would be foolish to disagree with Noam Chomsky on matters of academic import, although I am not sure how well informed he was about the detail of the proposals. I cannot and will not take a position on the detail of any set of consultations, but I will take a position on whether consultations are run in a way that ensures the involvement of the full community of the higher education institution and the community that it serves. That is the position that the First Minister and I have taken on all these proposals, and we will continue to do so. I know that the member has a particular interest in, and is well informed on, these issues. I am very supportive, as I know he is, of the idea from across Scotland of taking a close look at the issues of governance in higher and further education. I will bring forward proposals in that regard.

Universities and further education institutions must have open and transparent systems of governance and must ensure that they are accountable both to the community of the institution—the academic or educational community—and to the wider communities that they serve. Some institutions in Scotland do that very well, but some do not do it as well as they should. The issue requires examination, and I committed myself to that in the green paper. I renew the commitment here today that we will go forward in consultation with all interested parties, including those involved in the present governance, so that we can get a solution for the long term.

I thank the Parliament for the opportunity to make a statement on my proposals to establish a commission on the delivery of rural education and my request to local authorities for a moratorium on rural school closures. In my experience, few issues have united all sides of the Parliament. However, the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, which the Parliament agreed to unanimously in November 2009, did just that. Before the Parliament was established, significant concerns were expressed from many quarters over many years about the procedures that local authorities had to follow in relation to school closures. In particular, there was a feeling that schools were being closed without proper and full consultation with the communities that they served. That resulted in much worry, anger and resentment for pupils, parents and staff. Let me make it clear that, sometimes, schools have to close. Communities change, populations move and, sometimes, buildings become unsuitable. However, common decency, as well as good practice, demands that a closure must command public confidence. The process of decision making must be inclusive and transparent. Ten years ago, in 2001, the Parliament’s Education, Culture and Sport Committee looked into school closures following consideration of a petition. One of the outcomes of that inquiry was an invitation to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to draw up new rules for the school closure process. Unfortunately, that did not take place and, as a consequence, little changed. Schools continued to close in ways that appeared to be based on little joined-up thinking regarding the impact that closure would have on the wider community and its economic and social future. In 2007, in an attempt to address that, Murdo Fraser proposed a member’s bill. Although that proposal related to all school closures, it nevertheless had a particular focus on, and concern about, rural schools and the importance of schools to the wider rural community. It evolved into the consultation “Safeguarding our rural schools and improving school consultation procedures: proposals for changes to legislation”, from which emerged our Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. The delivery of education in rural communities is about much more than just a building. A school can be, and often is, fundamental to the social and economic make-up of a village, township or area. Therefore, at the core of any decisions about schools in rural communities should lie a presumption against closure—a policy that has existed in England for some time. The legislation was intended to make the proposed closure of any school open, transparent and fair. We sought to increase local participation, to create a genuine dialogue between councils and their communities, and to foster a greater sense of trust between local authorities and the people whom they serve. In addition, we put in place a number of special provisions for rural schools. In the case of proposals to close such a school, the council must have regard to three special factors before it moves to consult: viable alternatives to closure, the likely effects of closure on the community as a whole and any changed travelling arrangements for children must all be considered. That ensures that a decision to close a rural school must be regarded as a decision of last resort. In addition, prior to the 2010 act, the involvement of ministers in closure decisions mainly related to issues around occupancy and distance. That act established a more formal role by means of a safeguard, whereby ministers can call in decisions in which they perceive serious flaws in the consultation or decision-making process. That call-in can also be triggered by community or parental request. The key word is process. The 2010 act was and is about not prejudging or second-guessing a local authority’s decision but ensuring that the process, as enshrined by statute, is carried out properly and correctly. At the time of the act’s passing in November 2009, most people envisaged that no more than a handful of cases would be called in. The Government had confidence in a process that the whole chamber endorsed. However, it is clear now that, for all our good work, local authorities, communities and central Government have interpreted the 2010 act in widely different ways. Those different interpretations are hindering the clear policy intention of the act, therefore they now require some action. For example, in the 12 months or so since the act came into force on 5 April 2010, councils have proposed 35 school closures. That reflects, to some extent, the financial pressures that councils are clearly under. However, the act makes it clear that educational benefit must be the basis for closure decisions. Closures that are driven by finance alone are not permitted, yet councils still buttress their closure decisions with financial rhetoric. Of that 35, I have found it necessary to call in 17. So far, four have been given unconditional consent to close, four have been allowed to close subject to conditions and four have been refused. The remaining five are still under my consideration. Another five closure proposals are going through the process and they will be presented for my consideration shortly. For all involved, the process is proving to be unsatisfactory. At the time, we all felt that we were making an improvement to the law, but that improvement has not led to the necessary changes on the ground, or at least not everywhere. Many more proposals for rural school closures are being made than was envisaged. The consultation process is not being followed in more cases than we expected. During the election, our manifesto made clear our intention to strengthen the 2010 act to ensure that consultation is genuine and based on accurate information. In addition, we also want to reinforce the existing presumption against closure and find a revised means of supporting the delivery of education in rural areas. Now we must consider how that should be done. I hope that it will be done with thought, care and regard to all the relevant issues, such as the impact on the community, parental wishes, the welfare of children, joined-up services and better education. However, it cannot be delivered against a backdrop of conflict, confusion and discontent. It is for all those reasons that last week I announced the setting up of a commission on the delivery of rural education. Among other things, it will be tasked with reviewing the current legislation and its application; making recommendations on how to reflect best practice and fulfil our manifesto commitment; examining the links between rural schools and the preservation, support and development of rural communities; looking at the funding issues surrounding rural schools and the delivery of rural education; and thinking new thoughts about the means of such delivery. Most important, it will have licence to look ahead radically and boldly. I expect the commission to make recommendations at the start of next year. I will announce the membership of the commission and its full remit shortly. Input from a wide range of organisations and individuals will be sought to help the commission to undertake its work. COSLA and the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland will be essential participants. To allow the commission to undertake its work within a positive and proper context, I have also proposed a moratorium on rural school closures. That will create the necessary space to allow a comprehensive and fair assessment of the present school closure process and clear thinking on how it can be improved. The moratorium will run for a year. I believe that it is in everyone’s interests to pause and take time to consider the best way forward. Many councils have expressed concerns about how the present process of proposed closures is working, as have parents and members from all sides of Parliament. Therefore, I expect and hope for a positive response from councils, parents and members of Parliament to my proposal for a moratorium. I am pleased to say that a number of councils have already indicated their support. My aim is that we work together across the various interests to find a consensus and solve the problems that affect many parts of Scotland. There is no future in simply digging in to entrenched positions. We all want to ensure that what Parliament had in its mind when it agreed the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 can finally be applied effectively and properly, and that the need for educational benefit is the driving force and the sole motivation behind each and every proposed school closure, especially in vulnerable rural areas. I believe that our rural communities are the fresh air that energises much of Scottish society. I am aware that the closure of a rural school can unbalance and sometimes destroy a rural community for ever. The Parliament has already agreed that action is needed to prevent that; my new proposals reinforce that agreement.

I welcome Mr Macintosh to his new role. I do not know for how long he will hold it—maybe greater things lie ahead for him. With that approach to questioning, my loss might be the First Minister’s gain. I am a great follower of J K Galbraith, who said: “When facts change, I change my mind. What do you do?” The reality of the situation is that facts have changed. We have understood that there are difficulties in the operation of the legislation that require some changes of approach. That is an indication of a mature Government, rather than an expression of anything else. It is clearly true that the 2010 act works better in urban areas. The school that Mr Macintosh mentioned is going through a process, so I cannot comment on it, but it is the case that the legislation has been seen to work more robustly in relation to larger, urban schools than it has in relation to rural schools, because of the particular difficulties with rural schools. I want to address one other issue that the member raised—the circular argument about the moneys from rural school closures. Very good work has been done on that and, indeed, on rural schools in general by the Scottish rural schools network. The chamber has acknowledged Sandy Longmuir’s contribution to that work, and it should do so again. Mr Longmuir has demonstrated to almost all of us that actual savings from rural school closures are very small indeed, and possibly non-existent. Any argument that money that is saved as a result of a closure will be ploughed back into the education service in an area often runs against another argument, which is that it is necessary to reduce the total amount that is spent on education in the area. In some parts of Scotland, I have seen those two arguments in the same document. I do not believe the circular argument that Mr Macintosh asked about, and I find it difficult to believe some of the financial arguments that are made, too. However, I ask the chamber always to remember that the 2010 act requires educational benefit: closure proposals must not be about saving money. Local authorities need to remember that.

I will address both points. On the timescale, I will announce the full remit next week, but, as I indicated, it is wider than simply revisiting the legislation. If we were simply to revisit the legislation in relation to rural schools, we would not approach the matter in the right way. There are relationships between the existence of schools in remote and rural communities in particular and the health of those communities and their prospect of being able to grow and develop, and we need to look at those. However, we also need to look at different methods of delivering education—and perhaps other services, but certainly education—within rural Scotland. In some of the places that I have visited in the past year, I have been struck that no new thinking is going on about how to deliver education, or at least that it is not coming to fruition. We need to look at that. The job is bigger than simply looking at the legislation. That is what the remit will say, and I have outlined that. On looking at all schools, I do think that the process is working better in larger schools and certainly in urban, semi-urban and accessible town areas—there is a range of definitions for schools, as Liz Smith will know—than it has turned out to work in rural Scotland. That is why I am focusing the commission on rural education and focusing the moratorium on the definition of rural schools. If representations were to be made to me about particular issues that have arisen parallel to those aspects, I would consider them, but I have not seen such representations, whereas I have seen many, many representations on the issue of rural schools.

Yes—definitely. One of the issues that I mentioned in relation to the anticipated remit was funding. The element of grant-aided expenditure that is applied to rural schools is byzantine in its complexity, and indeed in a number of cases it has been miscalculated by local authorities. It requires substantial examination and considerable simplification.

I pay tribute to the member’s strong support for the school at Luss, and indeed her general interest in school closures, which is much appreciated. There are two sides to the question that she raises. One is the calculation of capacity. There is no uniform calculation of rural school capacity in Scotland, which is a problem. In the case that she mentions, there are widely different views of the capacity of the school. In another school that I saw recently, there was a difference of more than 33 per cent between the calculations that were made by the local authority and those made by some other local authorities. The other side of the question is that the approach of Audit Scotland and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education has, of course, been to say that we need the best possible use of the investment that is made. However, there is no absolute bar to local authorities delivering education in the way they wish. Rural local authorities have particular difficulties, and it is incumbent on agencies and bodies such as Audit Scotland and HMIE to recognise them—indeed, they do so. My approach to the matter very much chimes with that, and I hope that Audit Scotland and HMIE will be part of the process of examining the situation through the commission. If they are, I hope that local authorities will find no barrier to full participation in relation to the issue that Jackie Baillie raised.

Yes.

That is a very good question from Mr McGrigor. A number of voluntary bodies representing parents and others, such as the Scottish rural schools network and the Argyll rural schools network, are involved. I hope to draw them into the process. Many communities in Scotland have in a sense been radicalised in educational terms by participating in the process. Many articulate parents and members of those communities will want to take part in the process. I will also seek to draw into the process representatives of COSLA and ADES and individual local authorities that have been struggling. I have been publicly critical of some local authorities, but I recognise that some face genuine dilemmas on school closures. I will draw those authorities into the process so that they can express their opinions.

I do. I do not want to stand in the way of communities that are happy with the progress that is being made. In the letter that I sent to local authorities, I made it clear that I thought that where empty schools could not easily be mothballed there was a case for proceeding with the closure process. I can think of at least one school that was recently approved for closure because the community was unanimous in its view that it wanted the children to move to a newer school within easy travelling distance. It is not about imposition. However, there are many places where the community does not want schools to close. Where that is the case, we need to look at the situation again carefully.

The quality of learning for pupils in rural communities tends to speak for itself. The outcomes for almost all rural schools are very good indeed. I can think of a number of rural schools that have been drawn to my attention in recent months that have had excellent HMIE reports. Indeed, one that I know of could not have had a better report. If there is an educational benefit in closing such a school, that is not clear to the parents and the community, because they cannot see how the education of the children could be improved. Any equation that links smaller schools and poor educational outcomes is wrong. We need to be very careful before we go down the road of saying, “It is always cheaper to deliver education in larger units; that’s why we do it.” The analogy that I draw is that sometimes, in some places, we have to deliver services to smaller populations, and that is more expensive. Mr Stewart is a regional member for the Highlands and Islands, so he should know that. If we do not do that, we will end up following the strange logic that we should start closing down some of our roads, because in many areas they carry very few people and go to very few places. There is an additional cost, but that does not mean that it should be resented or worked against; it needs to be budgeted for, but so do alternatives. No authority is looking closely enough at good alternatives to building base delivery of education in the way that we have been doing it for the past 200 years.

Under the ministerial code, I have no involvement in the individual school closure process in Argyll and Bute—that will be handled by another minister. As the local member, I have a very keen interest in the matter and I have attended a number of events with other members here, including Mr MacKenzie. I know that Argyll and Bute Council intends to hold a special council meeting next Tuesday to consider its response to my letter. I do not often write letters that require 36 people to gather in a room to vote on them, but in this case I welcome that. I am quite sure that the meeting will be productive and I hope that its outcome is positive.

I am open to discussing those matters with any local authority that wants to discuss them with me—my door is open to any local authority that wants to do so. I do not believe that the moratorium will have a major or even significant financial effect. Indeed, in one or two places, school closures would cost the councils money in the coming year, therefore I might be saving them some money. Every local authority in Scotland except Glasgow City Council has at least one rural school, and I hope that all the authorities in Scotland that are affected—it is not an enormous number—realise how valuable the moratorium will be in helping them to make informed and productive decisions for the future. Full participation in it will be an investment in the future. If they do not want to take my word for it, they should listen to some of their own people. I have the permission of Penny Armstrong, the chair of the parent council of Sandness primary school in Shetland, to say that, having been through a closure consultation process, she wrote to me last week stating: “It has been evident from our interaction with local Councillors that a number of individuals do not understand the purpose of the Act, and ... fail to take on board the importance of small schools for the sustainability of very remote rural communities.” That issue will be well known to the member, given his constituency. It is absolutely clear that, in community after community, there is strong support for getting more information, letting the commission work and informing future decision making. I hope that every local authority will listen to that.

Mr Robertson will be aware that those schools are presently under consideration, and as I have not yet announced my intention in terms of call-in, I cannot comment specifically on them. However, I agree with him that the drive towards closing schools solely for financial reasons is not only damaging communities but illegal. Every local authority should know that. To be fair, most do know it, but it is necessary now to spell it out in even clearer terms.

The member makes an important point. Section 5 of the 2010 act, which deals with the statement of benefit and the consultation document, is defective—we have discovered that late in the day. I am sorry that that was not obvious at the time, but it was not obvious to anybody in the chamber. The problem is that local authorities do not have to make changes if there are inaccuracies, as a result of which some local authorities have allowed things to go through that should not have. That will be part of the wider consideration of all these issues and more.

I heard that argument put at a consultation meeting just this week. I know of no research that says that there is any disadvantage in being educated in such a school, in terms of either attainment or socialisation.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

During the election campaign, I had the great privilege of appearing with the member at half a dozen hustings. Will he confirm that on no occasion did he give a commitment to continuation of the provision of a vehicle ferry from Dunoon to Gourock? He was asked to do so, but he refused. Will he reconsider his remarks, given that he knows that European law does not permit what he seeks?

There is no silver bullet to the question of how we place funding for universities in Scotland on a long-term sustainable basis. What is clear, though, is that if the Government is re-elected there will be no return to tuition fees, either up front or back door. The joint work that we have undertaken with Universities Scotland has given us a clear estimate of any funding gap and allowed us to explore a number of funding streams, including up to £62 million from students from the rest of the United Kingdom and an estimated £22 million from students from the rest of the European Union. That is before we factor in any other sources, such as philanthropic giving, increased commercial activity or efficiency savings that the universities themselves have agreed are deliverable. The First Minister has made a clear and unequivocal commitment that any funding gap will be closed. We will ensure that our spending plans are balanced to deliver on that commitment.

I would have thought that the member would welcome the renewed commitment that this Government has given to the strong Scottish tradition of free access to higher education—access on the basis of the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. The fact that he refuses to do so reveals his posturing on this issue. He is therefore quite unfit to pronounce on anything educational—or, indeed, anything else.

That is a disgrace.

Indeed.

In December, I launched the higher education green paper, “Building a Smarter Future”. The debate that followed has attracted interest from almost 2,000 people; however, it was simply a staging post in a longer process. I would like to thank everyone who has taken part since we began our discussions on the sustainable long-term future of higher education at the National Union of Students Scotland conference last March. The input and participation of more than 80 organisations have fully justified our approach. Contributions have been both thoughtful and radical. By any measure, this has been a comprehensive examination of the issues. Rather than merely reviewing the challenges, we have been working with the sector to tackle them. This is action, not words. So today I set out my intentions for how this Government will respond to those challenges if successfully returned in May. When I began this process, my aim was to find a uniquely Scottish solution that embraces Scotland’s best traditions as a learning nation. It must also sit with our proud history of the democratic intellect, which has underpinned the global success of this sector for centuries. The foundations for the future must be built on four key principles: excellence, inclusiveness, collaboration and investment—investment for the benefit of society as well as the economy. The overarching philosophy remains that education must be based on ability, not ability to pay. The tradition of free education in Scotland has, of course, been under threat from successive decisions taken in London over the past 15 years. The Labour Government began the move to shift responsibility for funding universities from the state to the student by introducing fees. The Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition at Westminster embraced that approach and has taken it further. This year, we in Scotland will invest a record £1.1 billion in our university and college sector. Over the past few months, we have worked closely with Universities Scotland to establish what level of investment might be required to keep the sector competitive in future. I can confirm today that this Government—if returned—will ensure that the gap required to maintain our competitive position within the United Kingdom is closed. And I can confirm that we will not introduce tuition fees, up front or backdoor, or any form of graduate contribution. I want to turn now to how we will fill the gap. As I have often said, there is no silver bullet, so instead we will fill any gap through a number of initiatives. The first of those is what we charge students from the rest of the UK. In an ideal world, no student attending a Scottish university would pay fees. However, the rest of the UK has fees, and its politicians have the right to make that choice. My main priority is to protect opportunities for Scottish students to study at Scottish institutions. I make no apologies for that. It has been said by some that increasing fees for students coming from elsewhere in the UK is a move to subsidise Scottish education. It is not. Those students are already required by their home nations to contribute to the costs of their higher education. We are simply putting in place a mechanism in Scotland that allows such policies to be implemented irrespective of where people study. That is the reality of devolution. The technical working group that I established with Universities Scotland did, however, identify up to £62 million in additional income from students from the rest of the UK. So I can today confirm that we will increase fees paid by students from the rest of the UK. We will announce the detail in due course. I have long had concerns about the subsidy that we pay for European Union students. The numbers have almost doubled over the past decade—the cost to the Scottish taxpayer stands at £75 million. So I also intend to explore further, within the boundaries of European law, the possibility of reducing that. The respected economists Jim and Margaret Cuthbert have highlighted the system that operates in Ireland, where a student service charge is levelled on all undergraduates—though the Irish Government offers means-tested support to Irish students to cover the costs. I believe that we should investigate that, and any similar schemes elsewhere, in more detail. In doing so, I make it clear that we would support such an arrangement only if we could pay the charge for all Scottish students. If a scheme similar to the one that we understand operates in Ireland were possible, it could generate up to £22 million. We will be looking to universities to make significant, sustained and measurable progress in a number of areas, including philanthropic giving, increased engagement with business, greater efficiencies and more shared services. Those measures could close the gap further still. Universities have accepted that, by applying the same efficiency levels as the public sector, they can achieve savings of £26 million next year. It is true that universities elsewhere will also be pursuing efficiencies, but we expect Scottish institutions to pursue theirs aggressively. My analysis of the technical working group’s figures suggests that a net funding gap of about £93 million could emerge with the rest of the UK in 2014-15. If we take into account the additional measures on UK and—if possible—EU students, without factoring in the £26 million efficiencies, the gap could fall to about £70 million. Let me repeat unequivocally the assurances that the First Minister has given in relation to our commitment on public funding. Any funding gap will be closed. Indeed, to quote the First Minister directly: “The rocks will melt wi the sun before I allow tuition fees to be imposed on Scottish students—upfront or backdoor.” Learning, teaching and access prompted almost the same level of response to the green paper as funding did. I reaffirm my commitment to our four-year degree, although we need greater flexibility in how it is delivered. Learners must have more control over their own learning, choosing whether they want to study over three, four, five or even more years. We must encourage more part-time learning and support better articulation between school, college and university. As part of that, we will continue to develop the Scottish baccalaureate, expanding it into more subject areas and promoting its use to gain advanced entry to university. More specifically, I have asked the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to take forward a project on advanced entry and articulation. It will report this summer, with recommendations on how further to reduce the length of time that learners spend achieving a degree. It will also consider increasing the role that colleges play in delivering higher education. The conclusions of the study will underpin a new commitment to flexible access and study, and a firmer adherence to the Scottish credit and qualifications framework—the SCQF. We will legislate where necessary. I place on record how much I have appreciated the pragmatic way in which university principals have responded to the funding pressures next year and their participation in discussions. We have learned much from each other. I want to support them in their work and to ensure that that work is supported from within their institutions. The historic success of our sector has been built on such an exemplar of democratic intellect, and it is essential that it is protected. If returned, I intend to explore the issue of accountability, specifically the balance between accounting for public funds and preserving the benefits of an autonomous sector—and to examine that issue more fully with university principals, chairs of court, staff and students. As part of that, I will seek to remove the functions of the Privy Council in relation to the governance of Scottish institutions where we can, replacing it with a modern and transparent process. This Government has a strong track record in improving student support. Since 2007, we have reintroduced free education, preserved the education maintenance allowance—the EMA—and increased grants by 25 per cent, but we still have more to do. Therefore, we are working closely with NUS Scotland to develop a simpler, clearer system that moves towards our ambition of a £7,000 minimum income entitlement, starting with the poorest students. We will also seek to establish a binding set of goals for access and drop-out rates. On developing our international position, we will exploit the newly developed branding messages to promote Scottish universities. We will support collaboration across the sector through a fresh round of projects under our innovative strategic investment fund. I intend to strengthen our partnerships with China, India and North America—specifically, I intend to sign a new memorandum of understanding with China’s ministry of education. This Government, which delivered the year of homecoming, will now promote a year of mobility to forge stronger links between Scottish academics and students across Europe and beyond. Scotland is not just a world leader in terms of the quality of its university research; it is a world beater. Our research pooling programme is recognised globally and it is time to take it to the next level by introducing an international dimension to the best pools. The consultation responses supported Scotland maximising the amount of research funding that is won from European sources. We are already engaged with the Commission in influencing the shape of the next framework programme. A priority will be to improve links between business and universities. The final issue that I want to cover is how the sector is shaped to deliver that. The tripartite relationship between Government, the Scottish funding council and Universities Scotland is strong and has allowed us to deliver much—most notably a deal that will mean that student numbers are held steady next year. I confirm our commitment to the relationship, but it will evolve and I will seek reforms to streamline the SFC’s operations in future. On our plans for colleges, I know that there is an appetite for change. Our work will take account of the thinking of all stakeholders, and learners will be at its heart. We will look at matters such as funding and outcomes, collaboration between colleges and other partners, creativity and the role of business. The green paper covered many subjects and I have been able to touch on only a few. If we are returned, we will publish a comprehensive and conclusive set of proposals on all areas before the end of the summer and we will legislate before the end of the year. That honours the commitment that I made to the sector when it agreed to find a way to cope with the budget reductions next year. In his inaugural speech as rector of the University of St Andrews on 19 March 1869, the historian James Anthony Froude said: “There is no occasion to tell a Scotchman to value education ... It is fair all round to poor and rich alike. You have broken down, or you never permitted to rise, the enormous barrier of expense which makes the highest education in England a privilege of the wealthy.” That was true in the mid 19th century. It must remain true in the 21st century. There must be—there will be—no barriers to education in Scotland.

It is almost impossible to deal with a question of that nature, which has no basis in fact. The world in which Mr McNulty lives is entirely mythical. Let me ground Mr McNulty in some facts, which he needs to remember. Why have there been so many difficulties in the sector? There are two reasons. One is the bankruptcy of the national finances, which was supervised—indeed, caused—by Labour. There is also a particular difficulty in the sector. A minister commissioned a study of the sector from someone south of the border, Lord Browne. That is the study that came up with the proposal for fees of £9,000. Who was that minister? I would love to be able to blame the Tories and the Liberals, but on that occasion it was a Labour minister. It was the Labour Party that introduced fees and has gone on doing so. What we have seen is a wrecking of higher education, on the initiative of the Labour Party—

Given those circumstances, it would be better if there was a moment of silence from Mr McNulty, rather than the smokescreen that we have had. Let me deal with what Mr McNulty said about redundancies. If he is prepared to stand with me to recommend to the college sector that there be no compulsory redundancies, let him do so. Unfortunately, he has been silent on that. If he will stand up for the further education sector and recommend that there be no redundancies, not only would I think better of him but so would the people whom he is already betraying.

It is up to the Conservatives to justify their policy of imposing student fees. If they wish to do so, they must do that. Last night, on the BBC television programme “The Big Debate: Education”, the Tory spokesperson explained it as requiring 15 or 20 per cent more resource for Scottish universities. That figure was plucked out of the air and not based on any of the figures that were jointly drawn up by us and Universities Scotland. If the Conservatives wish Scottish students to pay large sums of money and believe that that is the right thing, they must go into the election arguing for it. In so doing, they are likely to breach the great traditions of Scottish education and damage universities. What they should do is join the Scottish consensus—even the late consensus to which Mr McNulty’s shadow cabinet dragged him kicking and screaming—and argue for the strong traditions of Scottish higher education. They should also base that argument on the figures that were drawn up by Universities Scotland and us, which have been made available to all the parties. Unfortunately, the Tories just do not want to read them.

I certainly agree that there is a need for a new system of student support and that we need to simplify the system. We have had many reviews over the past few years. It is important that we get on and take action. The type of policy that I am talking about—moving towards the minimum student income—is the right thing to do. I welcome Margaret Smith’s support for the position of no fees. There is no joy greater than that when a sinner repenteth. It is delightful to see that the Liberal Democrats are on our side on the matter. It is always best to accept good news when it is offered, and I am happy to confirm that there is no intention of charging Scottish students a service charge. The idea that exists on a service charge is interesting. It has potential, but so do the other discussions that are taking place on EU students. I fully understand the concern that exists about EU students. We want them to be here, but we should find the best option not a cheap one and we must ensure that some resource is found.

Yes. I notice that the Conservatives south of the border—indeed, Elizabeth Smith mentioned it last night in her contribution to the TV debate—believe that, by raising fees, they will increase access, which is so extraordinary that it defies belief.

The Conservative party has not tackled some interesting research from the other side of the Atlantic, which shows without doubt that part of the fragmentation of society in the United States is caused by the ever-increasing cost of education. I am absolutely certain that the contribution that we need to make to increasing access is to remove financial barriers. That is axiomatic. However, we need to do other things, too. Members have heard me say before that the issue of access has to be tackled not at the university gate but at the primary school gate and the secondary school gate. A great deal more work needs to take place earlier in young people’s educational careers to ensure that access is built and sustained. The idea that by raising fees we would improve access is nonsense.

There is an agreement—it is a one-year-only deal. That is the agreement that we reached and which university principals are honouring. That is why we need to bring this issue to a conclusion within the next few months. Very shortly, this Parliament will be dissolved and Claire Baker and her party will be able to offer a prescription for the future of higher education. I look forward to seeing what that prescription is in the next 12 months. If that prescription does not do what she wishes it to do, she will have to come back here—if she is re-elected—and apologise, from the Opposition benches.

There is no proposal to introduce fees because we are not able to do that—I have made that absolutely clear. However, there is an issue about whether it is possible to institute a service charge, which is what I have explored. That is what my statement said, and that is what we will try to do. Scottish students going elsewhere have to pay the going rate. We try to support them as much as we can through loans, but that is the reality. My responsibility and the responsibility of members in this chamber is to ensure that Scottish students accessing Scottish institutions are treated in the way that we think will best benefit the short, medium and long-term future of Scotland and those individuals. That is what I have laid out today.

I indicated in my statement that there is a balance between autonomy of organisations and public funding. I discussed these matters with Professor Muscatelli recently. The University of Glasgow has assured me that what it is undertaking is consultation. I am entirely happy to accept that articulation is tied to the issues of wider access and adult education. That must be recognised. It must also be recognised that decisions taken by any university require to be accountable and transparent. The process that the university is going through at the moment—of considering matters—must be entirely open. We need a major push on languages in Scotland. I hope that in the coming election, we will all debate how languages are provided in Scotland and what more we need to do. Certainly we need to ensure that language learning in Scotland rises to a higher plane. We need a map of provision in Scotland. Just as we need a map of provision in the college sector, we need one in the university sector, too, because we need to take out duplication where it exists, if it is unhelpful or overexpensive. We need to balance the debate very carefully. Universities are accountable; they spend public funds and, in those circumstances, must undertake decision making transparently and openly. I know that all those involved, including in Glasgow, will do so.

That is an interesting proposal. Among the many fascinating pieces of material that we received as part of the green paper process were the comprehensive and interesting submissions on the democratic intellect, accountability and governance. I am honour bound to consider those, just as I am honour bound to listen to ideas when they are proposed. If many people are concerned about such matters, we should think about them. The member’s suggestion, which relates to the tradition of the rector of a university taking responsibility for the governing body and being involved in directing that governing body, is an interesting one and should be put into the mix. I hope that we would agree with the principals, the chairs of court, the students and the staff on the strengthening of democratic governance and on universities having the ability to run their own affairs effectively and efficiently in what is a difficult modern world.

If there were a proposal so to do, quite clearly, I would comment on it. As I understand, there is a consultation going on. My concern is that those who, quite rightly, regard the university as their own—the community of the university, the community of the west of Scotland and, to some extent, the wider community in Scotland and beyond—have a voice and can influence that process. I am not trying to avoid the member’s question; I am happy to say to him that continuing education is very valuable indeed. There is a long tradition of continuing education in each university. By definition, that tradition is longer in the ancient universities than it is in others. Ensuring that it continues to flourish is important. How that is done by each university will depend on its resourcing and its decision making. Each university must have a process of decision making that is clear, open, transparent and accountable.

We are dealing with intelligent, skilled and passionate people in every part of the university structure. It is clear that there will be contending ideas and disputes of various types. After all, that is, to an extent, the foundation of our higher education system, which lies in disputation. I hope that two things will be borne in mind, the first of which is the great financial difficulties that exist right across the public sector. The wrecking of the public finances by Labour and the decision by the Tories and the Liberals to cut too far and too fast are causing huge difficulties in Scotland. Not having a normal Parliament with the normal financial powers adds to those difficulties. We must live with that situation. In an ideal—or even a normal—world, we would not have to do so. In addition, there is the issue of autonomous bodies having to make decisions and their being allowed to do so in a responsible way. I hope that there will be discussion, negotiation and consideration, which might lead, in time, to the realisation that this Parliament needs full financial powers to make decisions about the resources of Scotland instead of being told what to do by failed parties elsewhere.

I have had that paper drawn to my attention this morning—not by Dr Wilson—and I will consider it with great interest. From what I have seen of the synopsis of the paper, it suggests to us that the effect of charging ever-higher sums for education is a considerable problem. Regrettably, that is where the Conservatives want to go, for which they must take responsibility. I suggest that we provide a copy to the Conservative spokesperson so that she might see the error of her ways.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with Fife Council about a range of subjects relating to education and children and young people. I met members of Fife Council education department at the opening of Parkhill primary school in September last year. The Minister for Children and Early Years met Fife Council education department in April and May 2009 to discuss child protection services and other issues relating to education.

No, I do not agree because, originally, the short-sightedness lay with the previous Labour administration of Fife, which failed to maintain the centre. The centre faces some fairly horrific costs to replace its sewerage system, and it is under a notice from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Public finances are severely constrained, as a result of Labour misspending and incompetence. In all those circumstances, the centre’s closure is deeply regrettable. However, I am very glad to say that Fife Council has confirmed that alternative opportunities for young people will be offered. I think that that shows the effectiveness of the present Fife Council, as opposed to the previous one.

Our analysis of those figures suggests that a net funding gap of around £93 million could emerge with the rest of the UK in 2014-15. That is based on the assumptions that are set out in the report and Scottish universities earning extra income of up to £62 million by 2014-15 through charging students from the rest of the UK higher fees.

David McLetchie must not get intoxicated by his own rhetoric, even at the conclusion of the parliamentary session. The reality is that this Government has done more to work on, and with, the sector to plan for its future. The green paper process, which was much derided, particularly by Labour, has turned out to be a remarkable success because, for the first time ever, we have a comprehensive set of figures. Universities Scotland might wish to work with the top end of its figures, but I have not chosen to go to the bottom end. Unfortunately, David McLetchie is comparing gross with net and a good lawyer like him should know that he should never do that. We need to make a decision in Scotland about the proper public funding of universities. The Conservatives have made an alternative decision that people should go to university because they have the ability to pay, not the ability to learn. That is totally alien to the Scottish tradition. The Conservatives must answer for that decision, but I will answer for the sustained, long-term future for Scottish universities that I am determined to put in place.

We will see an undesirable effect on access to higher education south of the border. That policy must answer for itself, but its apologists in the Scottish Tory party are being sucked into the swamp of saying that higher education should be provided for the benefit of the individual rather than for the benefit of society. That is entirely alien to the Scottish tradition. We will see a growing divide south of the border, and I do not want to see that in Scotland. It is no accident that we have five of the top 150 universities in the world. That is because of our tradition of more open access, because we value education in the way that we do, and because our universities have democratic governance. I want to preserve those things.

I was entertained to read the account in The Daily Telegraph of how that decision was made. It seems to have left Mr McNulty a little bit surprised, to say the least. Nonetheless, if Mr Macintosh shows the patience for which he is renowned, he will discover that the offer that he has made has certainly stimulated some thinking. Of course, the greater thinking is not about the review that Iain Gray has offered, which is utterly ludicrous considering the timescales involved. The greater thinking is being done about how we make radical change to Scottish universities, and Mr Macintosh will not have to wait very long before he discovers my views on that.

The Scots language is alive and well in Scottish education, I am glad to say. A number of excellent resources have been prepared by Learning and Teaching Scotland, and I recently asked it to consider a new vision that will provide more consistency and focus to the Scottish elements of the curriculum. The study of Scottish texts is already a requirement of national qualifications in English, and the Scottish Qualifications Authority will work with partners to ensure that Scots is given a high profile within the new qualifications that are being developed for curriculum for excellence.

Those are sensible contributions, but we need to join up all the elements of Scots and Scots study in the curriculum. The work of Learning and Teaching Scotland will bring that forward and provide consistency and focus to the whole issue. As that work rolls out, I am sure that the member will be pleased and excited.

As part of the green paper discussions, I have held regular meetings with all the key stakeholders in the higher education sector, including NUS Scotland. Most recently, NUS officials attended the higher education green paper summit meeting in Glasgow on 1 March 2011. NUS Scotland also meets my officials regularly; only last week, they met to discuss how they can continue to contribute to policy development in a number of areas, including how we can improve student support over the coming years.

There is only one party in the chamber that has never voted for fees. I make that point so that it is clearly understood by the wider Scottish population that there is one party that has been consistent in its position on fees and will remain so. I point strongly to the support for students that I am keen to bring forward. In these difficult times, I am conscious that every part of public spending is under pressure, but in the part of the budget that was my responsibility I sought first to ensure that there was no diminution of support for students; we managed to do that. We did not, for example, abolish the education maintenance allowance as was done south of the border, although it was claimed that we had done so by the former First Minister, Jack McConnell, in his Christmas message to the good people of Wishaw. One should not mislead people during the festive season. There was no cut nor reduction to the EMA, which remains central to my plans for student support. The cash value of student support has continued in place, and I worked very hard with my colleague John Swinney to ensure that the support for students through bursaries was increased, which was a measure that the Liberal Democrats requested. We succeeded in that, largely because students themselves were very keen on it. In all those circumstances, student support remains central to the process in which we are engaged, and I want to continue to grow it.

I last met Professor Anton Muscatelli on 18 January 2011. I spoke to him on the phone last Thursday, and I plan to meet him again in the next two weeks.

There has been a considerable amount of discussion about the higher education provision that there should be in Scotland through the green paper process. I think that that has indicated that although each university has a responsibility to make its own decisions, there is also a national interest—I agree with the member there. The proposed changes at the University of Glasgow have led to a large volume of correspondence and extremely strong feeling is being expressed. As the First Minister indicated at First Minister’s question time last week, whatever process the university goes through, it “must be open and transparent”—[Official Report, 24 February 2011; c 3510.] and it must recognise the obligation that the university has to the community that it serves. At the end of the day, it must be a process that commands public confidence. The issue of what is provided and how it is provided is concluding through the green paper process and I look forward to announcing the final conclusions in the coming weeks.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with North Lanarkshire learning and leisure officials. Last summer, I met representatives of the community planning partnership, and the Minister for Children and Early Years has had separate meetings with the council.

My officials discuss details of school buildings with every local authority. We are absolutely determined to do two things, the first of which is to take the maximum number of young people out of unacceptable buildings. In that respect, I am very pleased about the 330 buildings that this Administration has managed to achieve, which is well beyond anything that was planned by any other party. Of course, if any problems are identified in the process of planning a building, my officials will discuss them in detail with the council. If the member wishes to meet those officials to discuss the issue, I will be happy to facilitate such a meeting.

We agreed with the college and university sectors to preserve the number of core places precisely to protect the widest opportunities for students. The basis of that agreement is set out in my letter of guidance of 17 November 2010 to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council.

I appreciate that the member has a long-standing interest in this issue and that he made those points during the process of budget scrutiny. It is important to maintain the diversity of provision in further and higher education in Scotland. These are difficult financial times—my colleague has just made that point—but with those difficulties we must try to preserve the best possible approach to further and higher education. In using the words “best possible”, I certainly agree that we need to avoid elitism and ensure that there is a choice available that really does make a difference to the life chances of young people.

I am very concerned about this issue and I am grateful to Mr Peacock for drawing it to my attention, as others have done over the past few days. There is a very strong indication of considerable concern throughout Scotland. The centre of excellence at Plockton is an example of something very special indeed and it would be enormously regrettable were we to lose it. The funding for the centre is included in the local government settlement for Highland Council. Any decisions made by Highland Council would have to take account of that fact. I hope that Highland Council will be prepared to discuss the matter with me and perhaps with my colleague Fiona Hyslop, who has an interest in it, as soon as possible. I certainly give a commitment to the Parliament that we wish to do so. I had a very brief word with the convener of Highland Council yesterday at another event and I think that he is also willing to discuss the matter. I think that this issue unites the parties in the chamber, so I am happy for our discussions to be supported by Mr Peacock and other members who have a strong interest in the issue.

The total capital support made available to Glasgow over the period 2007-08 to 2010-11 for investment in capital projects totals £792 million, of which £306.7 million is available for non-specific investment in projects such as the school estate.

A very substantial number of proposals have been brought forward in Glasgow and elsewhere by this Government and through the mechanisms to which the member refers. The reality is that by the end of this session, we will have been involved in the procurement of more than 300 new schools. That is a larger number than the previous Administration planned to procure, had it won in 2007. I am pleased with what we have done and we can do more. We will do more in the next parliamentary session, because we will bring even more resource to taking Scottish schoolchildren out of unsatisfactory accommodation—just as we have done more of that than our predecessors.

The 2011-12 draft budget includes £162.1 million of capital expenditure for the education and lifelong learning portfolio. In addition, up to a further £100 million of capital investment in education facilities will be supported via the non-profit-distributing programme announced in the budget.

I am certainly opposed to children being educated in substandard accommodation and I am pleased that this Government has done so much to change that situation in Scotland. Funding for completing the Lochaber high school refurbishment is, of course, first and foremost a matter for the council, which can identify money from the resources that are available to it. I understand that Highland Council remains committed to completing the work and that it seeks to identify further resources from a number of funding streams within its revised capital programme. It is investing significant sums in its school estate. Certainly, where there are problems, we would wish councils to treat them seriously and we would like this issue to come to fruition as soon as possible.

I know that Mr Macintosh will welcome the fact that Scotland’s schools for the future school-building programme remains on track to deliver 55 new or refurbished schools and that no school project has been cancelled. The programme will now be delivered via a mixture of capital grant and funding from the investment pipeline. In all those circumstances, we are pleased that, despite the extraordinary pressure on capital that has come from the coalition Government—a squeeze that would have been imposed by the Labour Party, if it had been returned at Westminster—we are still able to move forward in that regard. I would be happy to meet Mr Macintosh to discuss a specific project in his area, should he wish to do so.

I am positive in relation to trying to support students in every way possible. In the current academic year, we are providing a record level of support for further education student bursaries. Our £84 million represents an increase of 6.2 per cent in cash terms on last year. Our draft budget for the academic year 2011-12 protects that level of investment, at a time when Scotland’s block grant is being cut by £1.3 billion.

I have sympathy for the idea that we should change the way in which we provide student support. Indeed, the green paper on higher education that we published in December addresses that issue. The National Union of Students and others were involved in considering new options. I am open to reform and to what Mr Harvie refers to in terms of finding a better way forward. The issue of support for students is important. If we do not support students adequately, the opportunity that they have to take their education through to fruition is diminished. However, I would like Patrick Harvie to acknowledge that this Government has done considerably more than its predecessors in that regard and is still doing more than is done south of the border. For example, we have not abolished the education maintenance allowance, which has been abolished elsewhere. We are working hard to provide as much as we can. I remain focused on seeing what resources we could still bring to the table on this issue. I am not insensitive to the needs of students and I am constantly looking for opportunities in this area.

Yes, I agree that we should look for better ways to do this, and that is why the green paper refers to better ways to do it. I say with great respect to Claire Baker that I am open to that, that I am looking for ideas, and that my predecessor increased resources year on year. Our predecessors in Government did not seem to be so concerned with the issue. She might reflect on that before she attempts to criticise.

The Scottish Government believes that every child should experience outdoor learning, which we recognise can be delivered in a variety of situations. The Scottish Government provided over £400,000 in both 2009-10 and 2010-11 to promote the use of the outdoors to help deliver the curriculum for excellence for all our young people. In April 2010, we published “Curriculum for Excellence through Outdoor Learning”, which advocates embedding use of the outdoors in learning and teaching to provide powerful learning experiences for all children and young people.

I advise Helen Eadie to keep up with the times. The reality is that although she and others may have a strong emotional attachment to the Ardroy outdoor education centre, its regrettable closure, if that is what the council decides to do, would not affect the opportunity for every pupil in Fife to have access to the outdoors. [Interruption.] Members should know—the hollow laughs mean that some members do not know—that the Ardroy centre is not of the standard that many schools would wish and, as a result, its usage in recent years has been low. It is in close proximity to a number of residential properties and is under a formal notice from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to provide a new sewerage system, which would cost in the region of £300,000. As many of Fife’s pupils as possible will still have access to the outdoors. The closure of the centre would be regrettable, but it would not do what the member suggested, and it was wrong for her to make such a suggestion.

I am just listening to the member in disbelief.

Rubbish.

It has not.

I dealt comprehensively with the issues that Rhoda Grant raises yesterday, and indeed some of the issues were raised in the debate this morning. The reality of the situation is that Rhoda Grant has been stirring the issue for the past seven days. I have known her for a long time and my best advice to her is this: "When in a hole, stop digging."

In all such cases, apart from those from which I have resiled an involvement and insulated myself from the process—a matter that I described yesterday—I consider very carefully the documentation that comes to me and the legislation. In all those circumstances, I then come to a conclusion. The conclusion that I reached about Carloway, Shelibost, Shawbost and Lionel was that the legislation required me to make the decision that I did. I am glad to have done so.

There is no deprofessionalisation or casualisation. I hope that Marlyn Glen was present during this morning's debate. If so, she will have heard from me a comprehensive account of how the issue has been difficult for individuals and policy makers, how we have taken a number of steps to move it forward and how evidence is emerging that we have passed the worst. As I said last night to two young teachers who were present at a highly successful engage for education meeting in Dundee, opportunity is ahead. Dundee City Council's director of education, Jim Collins, was also present at that meeting. He was positive about the contribution that young teachers can make to curriculum for excellence and the health of our schools. The problem has been difficult. Much work has been done to try to solve it. I hope that Marlyn Glen might recognise that, but that will require her to take a fair and objective view of what has taken place.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the issue, as the member will know. It is a pity that she was not in the debate this morning. She might have made that contribution and therefore helpfully contradicted those of her colleagues who were objecting to any interference by me in any school, authority or part of Scotland. That said, I am sympathetic to the issue of music and cultural instruction. I agree that it is no easy option to cut such things; it should not be an easy option to cut such things. I recognise the great difficulties that Scottish local authorities have and the pressures on them—pressures that were forced, of course, by the cuts that the Con-Dem coalition has made too fast and too far and presaged by cuts that Alistair Darling told us would be considerably worse than Thatcher's cuts. There are difficulties, but I have always stood four-square in defence of the arts and culture and teaching music and culture. I remain in that position.

I know that Sandra White knows that anybody would find me a constructive partner were they to wish to do so. I am always happy to work with local authorities on key problems or issues that they have. Many authorities have co-operated on class sizes and delivery and I am sorry that Glasgow City Council has refused to do so. The member is absolutely correct in what she says on teacher numbers. Glasgow City Council has been a significant contributor to the fall in teacher numbers. I recognise the pressure on local authorities, but it appears that the council that the Labour Party is not prepared to criticise is Glasgow City Council. Every other council can be criticised—provided, of course, that it is of a different political hue.

Absolutely—I see one of the guilty parties over there on the Labour benches.

I cannot imagine why.

On an important point of detail, there is no power in the act to call in a decision before it is made. By definition, a document exists before a decision is made. The point that I was making was that the legislation needs to be revisited. I believe that Margaret Smith lodged an amendment to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill on how the veracity of information could be guaranteed in the process.

I am happy to give the member a clear response to that question. In yesterday's statement, I indicated that, although the act works well, some areas require to be strengthened. One such area is the verification of original proposals; under the present act, there is no requirement for inaccurate proposals to be withdrawn. Clearly in this particular case the proposals were inaccurate. In other places, proposals have been withdrawn and reissued. There is a serious case for making a change to the act, and it will require attention.

rose—

This is a serious matter, and I am glad that Mr Rumbles has raised it; Margaret Smith also raised it in a letter to me. I simply say that it is quite clear that it is perfectly possible for any school to offer between five and eight subjects—that is obvious from the material. In order to be helpful, I am happy to meet Mr Rumbles, with Margaret Smith and any other members whom the matter concerns, and to bring along staff from the Scottish Qualifications Authority and Learning and Teaching Scotland to discuss the matter with them. I am also happy to visit the school in Banchory and to talk to parents if necessary, because I believe that there is a misapprehension.

For the record, I can inform Dr McKee that Lord Foulkes went to the Haberdashers' Aske's school.

I thank Ms Alexander for awarding me a promotion, but I have never been the convener of an education committee in this Parliament.

The Liberal Democrats.

Talking of rays of sunshine, I give way to Mr McNulty.

The actions of West Lothian Council and every other council are for them to justify, but I am sure that there are good reasons for what happened. Perhaps those reasons are related to the savage cuts to budgets that have come from the Con-Dem coalition and were presaged by Labour. The next piece of evidence on teacher employment came with the teacher census, which was published on 1 December. That census showed a further drop in teacher numbers, which was immensely regrettable, but the drop was significantly smaller than the previous year's drop. A week later, the General Teaching Council for Scotland published the results of its post-probation teacher employment survey, which quite clearly demonstrated that the four-year falling trend of  post-probation teachers gaining employment has bottomed out and that the four-year rising trend of those not securing employment has peaked. Taken together, I believe that those statistical facts—they are facts—add up to compelling evidence that we have indeed turned the corner. That has been achieved by making tough decisions about student teacher intakes. Having cut intake numbers in 2009 and in 2010, I recently confirmed to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council that I envisage student numbers staying at that baseline level in 2011. The teacher census is also helpful in that it supplements the immediate post-probation employment data that the GTCS survey provides. That census allows us to track probationers each year rather than just in the first year after probation. It is heartening to note that 74 per cent of the probationers who finished in the summer of 2009 were teaching in our schools in September 2010, compared with 59 per cent in September 2009. The motion refers explicitly to rising pupil teacher ratios. Labour is clutching at straws. The pupil teacher ratio in our schools has risen marginally, by 0.1, in the past year, but let us be clear about our success. We have driven down pupil teacher ratios in primary schools since we came into office. Of course, the motion fails to acknowledge the fact that other hugely encouraging data have come out of the pupil census. In particular, it confirmed that local authorities had exceeded the revised target that we agreed with COSLA in the spring of 2010. Opposition parties told me that that target could not be achieved, but it was achieved and exceeded by the local authorities.

I am glad to say that we are making very good progress in that regard, and we are getting much closer to that aim—very much closer than any previous Administration did. I remain confident that that will be achieved in Scotland. Before moving on from pupil teacher ratios, I make brief reference to our agreement with COSLA in relation to next year's draft budget. It commits us to maintaining the excellent primary 1 to P3 pupil teacher ratios. The agreement is also directly relevant to much of what I have said in the past few minutes about teacher numbers, given its firm undertakings on protecting teacher posts. At a time when school rolls continue to fall—it is important to note that—demand for teachers has, of course, fallen. However, local authorities have  agreed that they will provide places for all probationers who require a place under the induction scheme in August 2011, sufficient posts for all those probationers who successfully complete their probation in summer 2011 to apply for, and an overall reduction in the total number of unemployed teachers. Given the very harsh Westminster budget from the Lib Dem-Conservative coalition, cutting too far and too fast, and given the fact that the former Chancellor of the Exchequer said that Labour would make cuts more savage than Thatcher's, the agreement represents a huge achievement for the whole of Scottish education. I turn to the subject of supporting college students, which is also referred to in the motion. We recognise the pressure on colleges in the current climate, but our funding allocation for this academic year represents a substantial increase in student support. The £84 million that was available was 6 per cent up on the academic year 2009-10. In addition to that record level of funding, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council announced on 21 December that it will make available a further £3.5 million for student support this academic year. EMAs, which have not been abolished, despite what Mr McConnell has said—the Government has maintained them—benefit a number of college students, too. I do not intend to say anything more about Argyll and Bute—I gave a very full account yesterday—except this. Yesterday, I was very pleased to see a newspaper report from April 2000 about a previous round of school closures in that area. I was pleased to see it because of the consistency of my views, and I am pleased to endorse this remark: "A school tends to lie at the heart of the community and acts as a magnet. Every time you take one away, you rip out the heart of the community ... One of the great advantages of rural schools is smaller classes and quality teaching. The kids tend to perform very well." I commend that remark from 11 years ago—from George Lyon, who is now the Liberal election co-ordinator, and who has been supporting 25 school closures in Argyll and Bute.

In my book, the manner of defending rural schools does not include voting to close 25 of them. That is a curious definition of defending rural schools.

There are 25 of them. I could give a whole list of the achievements that have been made in education, not necessarily by this Government but by the educational community in Scotland, supported by the Government. Instead, however, I will simply move the amendment in my name. Mr Rumbles has asked me to read it, so I will read it; I think that I have just enough time.

The amendment states that the Parliament "recognises the difficulties caused by the previous administration's unsustainable approach to teacher unemployment; urges local authorities to take full advantage of the resources offered to stabilise teacher employment in this year's local authority settlement; further recognises the fact that the teacher claimant count in Scotland is lower than in any other part of the United Kingdom and is now declining year on year; congratulates Scotland's pupils on achieving a record Higher pass rate in 2010; further congratulates teachers, pupils and parents on the recent international attainment results showing that Scotland has turned the corner and halted the years of decline under Labour administrations; welcomes the focus on the critical early years of education with an increase of almost 20% in nursery provision, increased access to General Teaching Council for Scotland-registered teachers in nurseries and record low primary school class sizes giving more one-to-one time for pupils with their teacher; further welcomes the reduction in primary school pupil-teacher ratios"—[ Interruption. ] This is proving difficult, Presiding Officer; I probably need another minute and a half but, as you are rightly indicating, I am almost out of time. That proves the salient point of the debate: the SNP Government has brought ideas, energy, enthusiasm and achievement to education. They are all there in the amendment, and I am afraid that anyone who would vote against them does not understand the Parliament, education or Scotland. I move amendment S3M-7692.3, to leave out from "condemns" to end and insert: "recognises the difficulties caused by the previous administration's unsustainable approach to teacher unemployment; urges local authorities to take full advantage of the resources offered to stabilise teacher employment in this year's local authority settlement; further recognises the fact that the teacher claimant count in Scotland is lower than in any other part of the United Kingdom and is now declining year on year; congratulates Scotland's pupils on achieving a record Higher pass rate in 2010; further congratulates teachers, pupils and parents on the recent international attainment results showing that Scotland has turned the corner and halted the years of decline under Labour administrations; welcomes the focus on the critical early years of education with an increase of almost 20% in nursery provision, increased access to General Teaching Council for Scotland-registered teachers in nurseries and record low primary school class sizes  giving more one-to-one time for pupils with their teacher; further welcomes the reduction in primary school pupil-teacher ratios since the last year of the last Labour administration; applauds the Scottish Government and local authorities' completion of 330 school projects, lifting more than 120,000 pupils out of sub-standard accommodation by the end of this parliamentary session far outstripping the previous administration's plans; further applauds the positive approach to rural schools demonstrated by the SNP government while noting that the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat administration did not save a single rural school from closure; commends the help given to the hardest-pressed families with the extension of entitlement to free school meals; further commends the range of positive developments delivered by the Scottish Government including 20,000 apprenticeship places, the introduction of the Scottish Baccalaureate, preserving the Educational Maintenance Allowance despite its abolition elsewhere in the UK, persevering with the roll-out of the Curriculum for Excellence despite opposition from Labour, the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives, the promotion of Scottish history and literacy in schools, the reform of the Children's Hearings system, introduction of improved safeguards for vulnerable people through the new Protection of Vulnerable Groups disclosure system, roll-out of kinship care allowances, reduction in school exclusions, improved support for young people through the More Choices, More Chances initiative, record levels of school leavers entering positive destinations such as training despite the recent recession and introduction of the first national literacy action plan; reaffirms Scotland's commitment to free education, established by the abolition of the graduate endowment, and rejects any move to shift the burden of cost of universities onto students' shoulders."

As December dawned, it became obvious to many people that the unprecedentedly long list of formal closure proposals was deeply flawed. Forensic work by the Scottish rural schools network, by the new Argyll rural schools network and by the local media, including The Oban Times , the Campbeltown Courier , the Dunoon Observer and Argyll Online, increasingly exposed the new council administration and the entire process to censure. The national press joined in, with a particularly effective contribution from Ruth Wishart in The Herald . As a result, the council clearly felt under some pressure. On 17 December, the chief executive of Argyll and Bute Council raised concerns about the process with the permanent secretary, who responded to her on 23 December emphasising the clear separation, that had already been publicly announced, to ensure that I would take no role in any governmental decision on call-in or closure. In the same week, an extraordinary attack on critics of the proposals was made on the official council website by one of the council's staff. On 5 January—just one week ago—a special council meeting took place, which was requisitioned by the SNP council group that was  working with the Argyll first group and some non-aligned independent councillors. Its purpose was to hear an authoritative presentation from the Scottish rural schools network on the flaws in the closure proposals, and to persuade councillors to withdraw them because of those errors. A summary of the information was circulated prior to the meeting. That was enough. Faced with the facts and likely humiliation, the Liberal Democrat and independent Administration caved in suddenly and without prior notice. It proposed a motion to withdraw the entire closure package, having been forced to recognise public anger and the mess that it had created. However, two days before the meeting, an e-mail that I had sent in mid-November in reply to one from an SNP councillor from his official council e-mail address was leaked to a range of newspapers. In a piece that was published last week, the Dunoon Observer revealed that my e-mail was sent to it from an e-mail address purporting to belong to a John Mackinnon. The journalist on the paper recounts how he e-mailed the sender back, asking how he had obtained it and whether he was a member of, or worked for, any political party. He got no response. How that e-mail came to be in the hands of the media is a question for others. In what way it might have been linked to the special meeting also needs to be examined, but given the fact that I had already decided that I would play no role in any possible Scottish Government decision on the closures, it was entirely appropriate to share my view as the local candidate with my local party colleagues. Indeed, it would have been inconceivable not to do so. I am also clear that under the MSP code of conduct, it is entirely permissible to take an active role in an issue in another constituency when the member has the agreement of the relevant constituency MSP. I had that clear agreement from the relevant local constituency MSP, Jim Mather. The Government introduced the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill to improve the way in which communities are consulted on closure plans and to insist that closures can only occur when they are of educational benefit to the pupils. That is the that standard that we have set; we will apply it in every community in Scotland. We are not saying that a rural school will never close, but that full consultation and consideration of viable alternatives is mandatory. A fair and robust process that is informed by accurate and verifiable data is the key to the matter. Members across the chamber regularly talk to me about school closure issues in their  constituencies and regions. I am always happy to explain to them that the legislation is not about second-guessing decisions but about ensuring fairness. If I can be helpful to members on such a thing, surely I should also be helpful to those who ask me elsewhere. The SNP Government will go on being fair to communities across Scotland. I can update the chamber this evening about further progress. Today we have rejected proposals from Comhairle nan Eilean Siar to close four schools—Shelibost primary school, Carloway primary school, secondary 1 and S2 at Shawbost and S1 and S2 at Lionel. I have also decided to call in the decision by Shetland Isles Council to close one school—Scalloway—for further consideration. However, I have granted consent to Moray Council to go ahead with the closure of Cabrach primary school because the council has adhered to the process that is set out within the legislation. We should all be proud of the legislation that we have passed to give better protection to vulnerable schools. However, more might usefully be done. I have been reflecting on how the legislation works in practice and whether it should take in issues such as calculation of capacity and the verification of information. I shall now consider what is needed to improve the process further. Since this SNP Government took office, when a ministerial decision has been required on a school closure, half have been refused consent or called in for further investigation by SNP ministers. However, under the previous Labour-Liberal Administration, every time a ministerial decision was required on a proposal to close a school—every single time—those Labour and Liberal ministers closed the school. Let that fact speak for itself. I, for one, am glad to be known as a defender of our rural schools in Argyll and Bute and across Scotland who, I believe, has acted with propriety throughout.

Perhaps I could wish Des McNulty a happy new year, as this is the first time I have had an opportunity to communicate with him across the chamber. I make it absolutely clear that I have never listed a group of schools. There is always the possibility of school closures—my statement makes it entirely clear that no school exists for ever—but it is for others to list those possibilities and for full consultation to take place. I will move on to the second question—there were a large number of questions, not all of which, I am afraid, I was able to get in the time available. My statement made it clear that I sought advice the moment that there was any prospect of the closures, when I first heard about them towards the end of October. My statement gave a clear timeline thereafter. As for the question of direction, I do not direct councillors. No SNP members direct councillors.  Control freakery lies on the Labour benches, not on the SNP benches.

The answer to the final question is no. I do not give directions to any group. As a candidate, it would have been extraordinary if I had not had conversations with a wide range of party members and others about the issue in Argyll. I have given a very full account of the chronology and the contacts. I had hoped that that might have been enough for a fair-minded person. I am somewhat upset that Liz Smith proves herself to be not a fair-minded person.

I understand the embarrassment of the Liberal Democrats on the matter—I want to be very clear about that. I, too, am grateful for advance notice of the Drumbrae issue, which came to me from The Scotsman this afternoon, so one knows to whom it was given before it came to the chamber. I behaved in exactly the same way in Drumbrae as I did in Argyll and Bute. As I said in my statement, I immediately insulated myself ministerially from the decisions in Argyll and Bute. In all those circumstances, as my statement indicated, I acted with absolute propriety and absolutely openly. All the rest—as I heard my friend, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, say from a sedentary position—appears to have been an attempt at a smear, which I regret.

I am happy to repeat that part of the statement. Since this SNP Government took office, when a ministerial decision was required on a school closure, half have been refused consent or called in for further investigation by SNP ministers. In other words, we are active and vigorous. We have always said that the position of rural schools throughout the country is important. They are vital to rural health, but not all schools stay open. That is why we introduced the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, and I am glad that the whole chamber supported it. It is another SNP policy that has been delivered successfully.

I find myself in some difficulty with the nature of that question, given that the politics of the situation have been fuelled by Rhoda Grant on every single one of the past seven days. I hope that the chamber might come together in a positive way and welcome the announcements that I made at the end of my statement. This is the first occasion on which effective legislation has been used to ensure that a number of schools will remain open. I am sure that Rhoda Grant will welcome that. It has also given us the opportunity to consider another proposed closure. That should be welcomed. Perhaps we should also welcome the fact that Moray Council has followed the procedure well and, therefore, has permission to close the school. I think that the 2010 act is working well, so I am sorry that Rhoda Grant did not spend at least a moment in her question welcoming those announcements.

I will start with the member's last question. Those councillors voted to consult on closure. That was a decision that they wished to close the schools. I do not think that the member can get round that. I commend Jamie McGrigor for going to Southend and helping the parents there by arguing for the retention of that school. Unfortunately, he was not backed by the two Tory councillors, who vigorously voted for the closures. Indeed, one of them indulged in a speech that insulted those who were protesting against the closure. I hope that Jamie McGrigor would join me in welcoming the change of heart that has taken place in the council and the new opportunity that has been given. I have often backed Jamie McGrigor's views on this matter and I think that he and I are at one in this regard. Indeed, at the start of the process, he urged me to be more active on this matter. Clearly, one cannot please all the people all the time.

As I made clear in my statement, under the MSP code of conduct it is entirely permissible to take an active role in an issue in another constituency where one has the agreement of the relevant constituency MSP. I had that agreement from Jim Mather. That is absolutely clear.

It is curious that those who have been, quite properly, vociferous in their support of rural schools should endeavour to make this issue a "political football"—to quote an earlier questioner. That is unfortunate, and it is also politically very silly. I would have thought that those who have stood up for rural schools in that way would want to be commended by the population. Instead, they appear to be against the idea of saving rural schools, even though, previously, they must have voted for the legislation. I would have hoped that the chamber would have welcomed the climb-down by the Liberal Democrat-independent administration and the decision on the Western Isles schools—Alasdair Allan is the first to do so—and would agree that the legislation is working well.

That was a helpful question. It was, of course, a question that needs to be addressed to Angela Constance, but I am sure that as she is a reasonable person, she will be delighted to meet Jackie Baillie. I welcome the opportunity to attend a coffee morning in Helensburgh or any other part of Jackie Baillie's constituency.

Of course, the Labour Party had no chance to vote on the matter in Argyll and Bute Council because it has no councillors in  Argyll and Bute Council. However, I would have thought that its candidate would have wanted to place himself on the right side of the issue rather than getting involved on the wrong side. It is for others to say why they have acted as they have done. I do not pretend to understand why candidates of any sort would go against such a clear worry in the community about rural schools. For me, rural schools are at the heart of rebuilding rural communities. Not every rural school can stay open—I am absolutely clear about that—but rural schools make a vital contribution, and we should value and build on that rather than allow them to be cut off all the time.

No, I did not inadvertently leave it out of my statement at all. The timeline started in October, and the information that I gave indicated that the original administration proposed 26 closures. However, there is no greater joy than the joy over a sinner who repenteth. The SNP councillors, who bothered to go and talk to the local communities and who discussed the matter in full, recognised that the original list of proposals was deeply flawed. Moreover, freedom of information material that has been sought and gained by Argyll Online indicates that Isobel Strong, the convener of the education committee in Argyll and Bute Council at that stage, was not fully involved in all the key meetings and was excluded from some of the decision-making processes. I suspect that that was one of the reasons why the group decided that it was well shot of its independent partners. The new Liberal Democrat partners in the council may shortly find that they are not in bed with the happiest or most forthcoming group of people.

The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill had two intentions: to ensure protection for vulnerable rural schools, which are very much the engine of rural activity and development and which create the potential for future success in rural areas; and to ensure that there would be a level playing field, so that parents would always be part of the process and would be given fair information. Parents would feel that nothing was being concealed and there was no deceit and, at the end of the day, they would have a chance to take part in an open and transparent process. Parents and communities have clear legal rights under the 2010 act. They have the right to receive accurate, up-to-date, clear information. They have the right to propose alternatives. They have the right to comment. They are part of the process, and the Government will be rigorous in ensuring that the 2010 act is observed in letter and spirit by every local authority in Scotland.

I am always happy to be enticed by Jackie Baillie, particularly as we get so close to Christmas, but I have to remain unenticed at the moment. Jackie Baillie is aware that, as I have a connection with the Argyll and Bute constituency, it would be quite improper for me to comment on the closures process there. However, the new minister, Angela Constance, has taken responsibility for the matter and I am sure that she will reply very soon to Jackie Baillie's reasonable request for a meeting. I repeat what I have said about the policy intentions of the 2010 act, which applies throughout Scotland. It was intended that there should be a level playing field, and openness, transparency and accurate information are essential. Of course, parents have the right to request a call-in at the end of the process if they think that those things have not been present. That said, I am unenticed to comment on what is happening in Argyll and Bute, and will remain so.

I am happy to do so. A number of criteria can be used for a call-in decision, but they generally relate to the quality of the process that has been undertaken. For example, a crucial question is whether the local authority had considered the alternatives that had been proposed. The member will be aware that I have recently called in four decisions in the Western Isles, one based on my view that alternatives had not been adequately considered. Another question is whether the information that was provided to parents was and remained accurate during the process. Allegations have been made in Scotland that information changed during the process or was deeply flawed at the  start of it and was not corrected. There are various other reasons for call-ins. I feel that there is a Christmas truce and that we might play football across the trenches because Mr Macintosh and I normally disagree on such matters. However, we are absolutely at one, as the chamber was at one, on the policy intentions of the 2010 act—that there should be a level playing field, openness and transparency. Parents may not accept and may be very unhappy about a closure, but they should feel that they have been treated with fairness and respect during the entire process. That is crucial to any decisions that are taken under the act.

As might be expected, the member has jabbed his Pickelhaube straight back on to his head and has returned to fighting between the trenches. There are always difficulties in adjusting education budgets. That is particularly the case when there are savage cuts from Westminster. In such circumstances, I would expect local authorities to work in the spirit and within the letter of the deal that we reached with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which every Scottish local authority has accepted. That deal should provide the framework for moving forward with education. I hope that it will influence the discussions in Aberdeen and everywhere else.

Very simply, the Scottish credit and qualifications framework provides an internationally respected framework for understanding how all levels of examination in Scotland, from the very basic right up to the postgraduate level, fit within a comprehensive system. We are proud of that and we are already exporting it. For example, the Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework Partnership has advised the Hong Kong Government on how it could put in place a similar framework. We also see how the baccalaureate is contributing as part of the whole, for example by allowing advanced standing in university entrance. There is a way in which qualifications ratchet up and do different things. We are developing a robust and effective system.

I can indeed. We will have a report early in 2011 that I will share with the chamber. I am enthusiastic to ensure that the baccalaureate continues to grow, but it must be evidence based.

They want to abolish it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would you reflect, in terms of the procedures of the Parliament, on the process that got us here this morning? A demand for an emergency statement was made by Mr Whitton last Friday morning, which was backed by the Liberal Democrats on Monday, as I understand it. At the start of the meeting this morning, there were four members of the Labour Party and two Liberal Democrats here. I would have thought that you would like to reflect on that abuse of process.

—of which Lord Foulkes is not one. Consequently, we reject the socially divisive view that students and graduates should be forced to take charge of their own education through tuition fees, as does this Parliament, which has rejected fees twice this year. We believe that adopting such an approach in Scotland would discriminate against the poorest, would place barriers in the way of learning and would, over time, massively diminish the potential of Scottish society. It would also directly contradict our long-standing national belief in the commonweal and fatally undermine the social contract that citizens in Scotland have with the state. Undoubtedly, every aspect of our national life faces difficulties at this time. We must consider how, in these most problematic of times, we can continue to support our universities properly. As much as we will be guided by the rejection of tuition fees by this Parliament, we will also be guided by the essential need—which we fully understand—to ensure that the sector remains competitive not just within the United Kingdom, where the issue of parity with England is key, but globally. We have five universities in the top 150 in the world. That is a remarkable achievement, and it must be preserved and perhaps even improved upon. Critically, we must also consider how we do that in the fairest possible way. A properly funded system should recognise the wide benefits that higher education provides for our society, economy, health and culture. A sustainable system has to find the correct balance for sharing the costs of higher education fairly among all those who benefit. Achieving that fair balance is essential. That is exactly what this Scottish National Party Government will do. As far as I am concerned, the Westminster coalition's position is inappropriate for Scotland in three respects. It is wrong because it abdicates the state's responsibility as the primary funder of higher education; it is wrong because it is based on a mistaken belief that the only beneficiary of higher education is the individual; and it is wrong because, when it is considered alongside other moves that are being made on the levels of financial support for students—such as the abolition of the education maintenance allowance in England—it will reduce the opportunities for those from the least well-off backgrounds to improve their life chances by continuing to study once they leave school. There is no doubt that individuals benefit from higher education, but in truth we all benefit from having a world-class higher education sector in this country. It is because of that greater good that we believe that the state must bear the prime  responsibility for funding our universities. After all, higher education is one of our most valuable national assets, and it would be wrong of us not to protect its value and enhance its reputation. That is why the state assuming the prime funding responsibility, coupled with the Parliament's rejection of tuition fees, lies at the heart of the green paper that I am launching today. That does not have to mean that the state is the only funder, but it does mean that any other contribution must be truly progressive and tied to genuine financial benefit and, crucially, it must not create barriers to participation for those from low-income backgrounds. Those issues of funding are important and may command most of the news headlines, but I stress that the green paper is about much more than who pays. That is a crucial point. This debate is actually about what higher education is for, how that purpose can be fulfilled and how, in the 21st century, we can preserve and enhance our world-class higher education sector. Therefore, it is not just about money; it is about who we are and what we seek to be. In that context, there are many issues to consider. For example, we must consider how we can make our institutional funding and student support systems more attuned to the needs of the learner. We must ask questions about the learning journey from school through to university, and seek all ideas on how that might be improved. We must continue to focus on improving access for all, we must encourage flexible routes and patterns of study, and we must celebrate the unique and world-leading innovations that define our system, such as the quality enhancement framework and the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. We must consider how we might build further on the best of what we have to offer, encouraging more pooling of excellence and the prioritisation of interdisciplinary and intradisciplinary collaboration. We must underline how important it is for institutions to work together to promote Scottish higher education overseas. We must ensure that student support is fair and adequate from the point of view of sustaining involvement and securing the best environment for successful study. We must ask hard questions about the nature and number of institutions, and we must cast a critical eye on governance, duplication of provision and the sharing of back and front-office services. Our funding structures also need careful examination, as do the involvement of business and alumni, and the proper place of philanthropy and commercialisation. We must, of course, encourage others to study here and encourage more of our students to study  abroad, but we must never become a cheap option—our excellence must be our beacon, not our price. There are many questions and many ideas in the paper that I am publishing today. The issue is multifaceted, and its complexity demands a thoughtful approach. The issues within the paper have been shaped by intensive discussion and research, and moulded by past experience and future ambition. Not all the ideas are supported by this Government or would ever be implemented by it, but they are designed to move forward the process of decision making and to focus creativity and innovation. They provide the raw materials for a sustainable long-term future for higher education in Scotland. I stress the diversity of issues in the paper for a vital reason: along with the sector, I am convinced that there is no simplistic, single silver bullet that will provide our Scottish solution. The solution will, I am certain, consist of several components, and those parts may not be entirely the same for all our universities. However, the timescale is simple. The English reforms will see major changes taking place in the 2012-13 academic year. Scottish universities must be able to respond to any new challenges at the same time. I would like to build a consensus on these issues, but even if that were impossible, I would still wish there to be absolute clarity on the various solutions that are offered by the parties at the elections next May. That is particularly important because it is, alas, becoming obvious that the Labour Party is once again intent on finding a patch of long grass in which to hide on the issue of Scottish higher education funding and the provision of support to students. Well, today's publication of the green paper means that the grass just got a lot shorter, and it is going to get shorter still. I have established a short-life technical working group with Universities Scotland to analyse and report on the perceived gap between universities north and south of the border. Knowing the exact size of that gap and the likely financial effect of the six potential areas of additional funding for universities that are identified in the green paper are the final missing elements in the task of constructing a complete and successful solution. I will reconvene the all-party summit on higher education before the end of February to receive that information from the short-life working group. I hope that we can agree on a consensus approach for implementation in the second half of 2011, but each of us, fully aware of all the facts, must ultimately choose the policy that we want to espouse and offer it openly to the Scottish people in our manifestos.  I make a clear commitment that the Government will do just that. If successfully re-elected, the Government will legislate in the second half of 2011 to allow implementation within the agreed timeframe. We will ensure that a sustainable long-term future is secured for Scottish higher education. We will offer the young people of this country continued access to excellence, and we will do so through world-class institutions that champion access to education that is based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay. There are three clear questions that a Scottish solution must answer. First, how can higher education play an even greater role in support of Scotland's future success? Secondly, how can we use our current resources ever more effectively? Thirdly, how do we increase funding to the sector to ensure that it remains nationally and internationally competitive? The paper that is being launched today is a major step forward in the process of answering those questions. It will lead us, in a clear and achievable timescale, to the prize that we should all be seeking—a long-term, sustainable solution to the funding of universities in Scotland for the greater good of our people, our economy, our culture and our society.

I do not like to say that I did not recognise a question that was worthy of an answer there, but I will give one. The green paper comprises 51 pages. It contains more information, analysis, questions and answers than anything that has been published since devolution. It is a great pity that Mr McNulty did not acknowledge that and try to move the issue forward with us. For the avoidance of doubt, I place on record the fact that agreement to seek the work with Universities Scotland to look at the funding gap and the six sources of income was reached when Ken Macintosh was present at the all-party summit. He was fully aware of it and he knew the timescale, as did the other spokespeople. What we need in this debate is an honest agreement that we will offer the Scottish people a choice. So far, I am the only one to have offered a choice. I note that Mr McNulty has not done so—[ Interruption .]—though I notice that Lord Foulkes is bellowing like a sea lion, as ever.

Perhaps we were simply not aware how much damage the Conservatives could do in a few short months in government. I acknowledge that Elizabeth Smith has an ideological position. It is the same position as her party's: she wants to move the responsibility for funding higher education from the state to individual students. I recognise that, but I believe that it is utterly wrong. I believe that it is based on false principles and would be enormously damaging to Scottish higher education and Scotland. However, I recognise the position. The paper lays out six sources of funding for higher education. It makes it clear that those six need to be considered and costed in a process that is outlined and agreed with Universities Scotland not just by me but by the Opposition spokespeople who were present at the meeting. Given that, I would have thought that the fair thing to do would be to acknowledge that the six options need to be properly costed. I noted that on Radio Scotland this morning Elizabeth Smith admitted that she had not even had her preferred option costed. It is therefore a bit rich to criticise an agreement that all parties reached with Universities Scotland in a process that was clearly understood. I challenge the Conservatives, as I do everybody else, to commit themselves to their preferred option and put it in front of the Scottish people. If the Conservatives' option is to move responsibility from the state to the student, I know what the reaction of Scotland will be.

That is a helpful contribution. I will deal with the second point first. Whatever figures Mr Swinney announces, he has made a commitment to discuss them with the Opposition spokespeople in the run-up to stage 1 of the budget. As an Opposition finance spokesperson, Mr Purvis will be party to that discussion. Even if the full figures for the funding council were to be published, however, they would not be complete, because we recognise—as the paper explicitly recognises—that there will need to be additional sources of finance. The paper lists six additional sources of finance, and the work with Universities Scotland on putting them into place and understanding the contribution that each of them could make is well advanced and will be part of the cross-party summit. So, within the overall package, that must be factored in as well. We need to know the size of the supposed gap, and work is being done on that. That work could not be started until we knew what was going to happen south of the border, and even some of the figures on that remain remarkably vague. It is difficult to know what the average fee will be south of the border, because we do not know what the institutions are going to charge or what the take-up  will be. Work remains to be done on that, and that complex set of figures needs to be considered. On Mr Purvis's first point, there has been a slow and sustained improvement in access under all Administrations over the past 10 years. However, I am strongly of the view that, to improve access to higher and further education, the work must be done at the school gate rather than at the university gate—indeed, it may well have to be done at the nursery school gate. In those circumstances, much of the work that we are doing on access is moving its focus towards early intervention and work in schools. Some interesting work that has been done in other countries shows how important that is. We continue to work on access to university, but there are important interventions that must be made much earlier. A great deal depends on socioeconomic group, and we need to change that substantially. Some people say that the number of young people who are going to university should be stabilised, but in reality well over 50, 60 or 70 per cent of certain socioeconomic groups go to university and equalising access is important.

Yes. The SNP Government has been consistent in its principles and will continue to be so. I discussed the issues with Lord Browne and believe that there are major difficulties. Nevertheless, I would like the Scottish Parliament to be free to make its own decisions. A range of possibilities that we might have considered are ruled out because of the Parliament's inadequate powers and, indeed, the further inadequacies of the so-called Calman-minus proposals that are coming to the Parliament. It would have been good to have had greater flexibility in that regard. The six options in the paper—the six sources of funding—are where the action will be, and that is where the work requires to take place.

As kindly as I can, I point out to Claire Baker that when her party was in power, its record on this matter was considerably worse than the record of this Government. The work that we are trying to do with the National Union of Students and others—[ Interruption .] Presiding Officer, constant irritating sounds are coming from my left. Could something possibly be done about that? Perhaps we should examine the ventilation system. It is a constant irritation, and it is difficult to concentrate. Scottish students have the lowest level of debt of any students in these islands. I want to see a substantial improvement. That is why student support is at the heart of the green paper, and why it contains important items and proposals. I would have hoped that Claire Baker would join us in welcoming those proposals and declare that she would work with us on them rather than simply complaining. However, I am used to Labour complaints, which are going on even now.

Because, unlike Mr Fraser, I am not hidebound by ideology. I am looking for the best solution for Scottish higher education and the best solution for Scottish universities. That requires us to honour the agreement that we have reached with Universities Scotland, which was agreed to by the parties' spokespeople, to ensure that the six options are costed and put into the mix. The paper that I have announced examines higher education in greater depth and detail than any initiative that has been implemented under devolution. It should provide an enormous step forward. I would have thought that the Opposition spokespeople would want to join us in getting to the stage at which we can understand precisely what will benefit Scotland's students. Unfortunately, Mr Fraser is locked into the right-wing ideology from whence he came and to which he cleaves, even though it appears to have virtually no electoral support in Scotland.

That is an important suggestion, and I would be happy to do so. I am sure that those young people will also be influenced by this Government's commitment to the education maintenance allowance, which has been abolished south of the border but which I think provides a useful contribution, as yesterday's figures proved.

There are a variety of reasons for any supposed inequity—and I think that it is a supposed inequity rather than an actual inequity. I acknowledge the contribution that Scotland's colleges make—I acknowledged it up front in my statement. They provide around 20 per cent of our higher education. That important issue is addressed in the green paper, and some interesting questions arise from it. For example, as the paper indicates, there are those who suggest that a greater proportion of undergraduate delivery should be undertaken by colleges. That needs to be considered, because if it is not it will tend to rule out certain types of skills-based or vocation-based higher education.

The issue in question is not the funding for colleges per se, but the future of higher education. However, there are, of course, implications for colleges, and those will be well  factored into the final decisions on the six options. Although funding for higher education delivery through colleges is delivered differently through a different formula, it is extremely important and will be factored into the discussions.

I have made constant representations, from the period when I was Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution when we had a Labour Government in Westminster, to the present situation in which we have a coalition Government. The Labour Government took and the coalition has taken an incredibly negative view of the issue, which has been exceptionally unhelpful to Scotland. That point has been made not only by me, but by Universities Scotland, college principals and university principals, all of whom have joined me in making representations. We need to keep making those representations, but it would be far better if we had control of the policy ourselves, so that we could tune it to what we need in Scotland. University principals in particular have been outraged at some of the decisions that have been made, and the policy is causing academic as well as financial damage.

To be entirely accurate, although Mr Macintosh was involved in the discussions and suggested that a working group would be useful, the original group was proposed by Universities Scotland. The group is a joint group between Universities Scotland and Scottish Government officials, and it will report by the end of February to the reconvened cross-party summit. I am sure that Mr Macintosh will be at the summit, and I hope that he will be part of that process. The group's remit is to examine the gap: we need to understand its exact nature, and the  information on that is changing all the time. Despite Elizabeth Smith's view that it could all have been done and dusted even before her destructive Government was elected south of the border, the decisions are changing day on day as far as we can see. In addition, the group will examine the options in the green paper, and will comment on them and consider the contribution that they could make to the gap. I am sure that that will include the issue of sustainability, but the issues that the paper raises are important and central, and they do not focus only on the question of whether graduates should contribute, which is such a short-sighted and narrow view that it could have come only from the Conservatives.

I point out to anyone who is covering that point that the cross-border flow amounts to just over 22,000 students coming to Scotland from England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and just over 11,000 going out. If one looks at the relative level of fees that are paid, one can see that the subsidy flows out of Scotland, not into Scotland. Students who go out of Scotland have to borrow the money to pay their fees, which are about to rise very massively indeed. In all those circumstances, I am keen to encourage cross-border flow, to encourage students in Scotland to study elsewhere and to see students coming here. However, it must be on the basis not that Scottish education is a cheap option, but that it is the best option for students. The decision to equalise fees and payments was made in 1998, and it was renewed thereafter by this Parliament. It was agreed previously, and I am sure that there will be continued agreement that it is the right thing for Scottish higher education. I am sure that fair-minded journalists north and south of the border will see it in that way.

I am delighted to see that if we scratch Margo MacDonald, there is still a strong nationalist there—but I think that we all knew that. The reality of the situation is that it would, of course, be much better for this Parliament to have full powers—particularly financial powers. There are constraints, but within the powers that we have I believe that we can make substantial progress on this issue—although not on all issues—and I am working hard on it with my colleagues and with Universities Scotland. I had hoped that we could work on it across the chamber but, alas, I am often disappointed, and I have again been disappointed today, particularly by Labour and the Tories. I hope that we can take the issue forward in a way that benefits Scotland's students, because that is what it is about.

I was in fact quoting Jackie Baillie on the issue of smoke and mirrors, as I think I made clear at the time. I had hoped that Michael McMahon was focused on the very real issue of teacher unemployment and how we resolve that issue. That is what I have been focused and working on. I am sorry that Mr McMahon does not share my concern and that he simply wants to score his usual cheap political points.

There are a number of reasons, one of which is an oversupply undertaken by the previous Administration—I have drawn attention to that many times previously. There is good news, though. By taking some tough decisions—decisions that, as the member knows, have to be taken in Government—we have reduced the number of people coming through teacher training, which has meant that the situation is coming back into balance. I hope that every council will sign up to the commitment that I have made as a result of an agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Regrettably, Labour councils, and particularly Labour-led Glasgow City Council, seem the most reluctant to help young teachers in that regard. Although it pretends that it is not, Glasgow is one of the councils with the greatest reduction in teacher numbers. If those councils sign up, there will be a positive effect on teacher employment and we will get the numbers back into balance.  We then need to keep the numbers in balance to match the needs of Scotland, and not to undertake the type of exercise undertaken by the previous Administration, which misled the people of Scotland and caused much of the present misery.

I pay tribute to the member. He did an extremely effective smoke-and-mirrors job. I would have described it differently had I not heard Jackie Baillie use the phrase a moment ago. [ Laughter .] I pay tribute to Mr Peacock, who worked very hard. I regret that his colleagues are laughing at him. I have a lot of admiration for Peter Peacock. He inherited a situation from his predecessor, who went on to another job and is now a member of the House of Lords. On this occasion, though, Mr Peacock got it wrong. He let a lot of people down. I am glad that Fiona Hyslop and I have worked hard to turn that situation round. It is slowly coming into balance.

Nobody on point 1 of the salary scale is being treated as a minder—that is a complete misrepresentation of the teacher salary scale. Indeed, it demeans and diminishes the young people who go into teaching by implying that anybody who is on point 1 is a minder, which is a complete nonsense. The discussions in the pay negotiations that are now going on through the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers have a series of starting points. They were tabled by COSLA, as the member knows, and the issue in question is one of them. The matter will require careful discussion and negotiation over the next couple of months, but it is based on a request from COSLA. In those circumstances, as COSLA is one part of the  tripartite teacher negotiations, such a request requires to be treated seriously. All requests require to be tested against evidence, which is what will happen. The member represents the situation as if there is no financial problem at all. He should remember that the wrecking of the economy was done by his own party—but we all have to face up to the consequences.

The member should distinguish between work that is being carried out through the Confucius hubs and other intensive work that I was happy to see both in Scotland and in China on my recent visit and some of the other work that is being done. Priorities must be set, and schools are best placed to set those priorities. However, we are encouraging Scottish schools to build links with schools in east Asia and a cluster of schools in West Lothian, led by Deans community high school, in Livingston, is involved in the connecting classrooms east Asia-UK project. In addition, three schools in Edinburgh and East Lothian have recently built links with schools on the Thai-Burma border. Two of those schools have already paid visits to Scotland and representatives from the third school are due to visit in March.

I am unaware of the universities saying any such thing. Let me quote what they have said. In a news release on 17 November, the convener of Universities Scotland said: "This is a tough settlement but one universities can live with for one year, given the very difficult budgetary pressures Scotland faces. It's clear from this settlement that the Scottish Government has sought to protect universities from deeper and more damaging cuts. We are relieved that the Scottish Government sees high level skills and an innovation-led recovery as critical to help Scotland get itself out of these difficult times."  The effort is going in to ensure that the green paper that will be published in a fortnight's time presents the menu of options that need to be considered for the long-term success of Scotland's higher education sector. I pay strong tribute to the universities, the National Union of Students, the University and College Union and the other parties in the Parliament, which are engaging seriously with that process so that we can ensure the very best for Scotland's universities in what Professor King would say—and I would agree—are very difficult times.

In addition to securing the education maintenance allowance—which, of course, has not happened south of the border—we are committed to ensuring that the level of support for students in the coming year remains consistent with this year's level. That has been  very difficult to achieve, but it has been achieved, and I welcome the support of, for example, the NUS for that. In addition, the number of places that are available in colleges and universities will be maintained, which is a considerable achievement, for which I pay tribute to the college principals and boards of governors and the universities.

I reassure the member and the chamber that, as I have said, there are no planned changes to the EMA. The EMA programme overspent in 2009-10 and it was necessary to look at it extremely carefully. I made a commitment to review it in December this year. In the process of the budget discussions, I was very keen to defend the EMA, which I think is highly effective. I am glad to say that that has happened—student support is being maintained. These are exceptionally difficult times, but I know that the poorest in society need the most help. We are targeting them most effectively, which I remind the chamber is not something that others have chosen to do. The fact that we have made it a priority to support students will have an effect on education. [ Interruption .] I hope that the member and all other members, including the one who is shouting, welcome that commitment, because it should be welcomed by the entire chamber.

Like the curate's egg, that question was good in parts. I accept the argument that class size reduction is important, I agree that it is not the only element of good education—good teaching is exceptionally important—and I agree that there should be flexibility for headteachers in many aspects of education policy and delivery. I also know that that question will be raised again in this chamber this afternoon. However, I do not accept that there should be a free-for-all with regard to class sizes. I know that Orkney is an enlightened local authority and I look forward to seeing its director of education at tomorrow's Association of Directors of Education in Scotland conference, but I think that one or two less enlightened local authorities might use any substantial change in this policy to very much weaken the important connection between young people and teachers that the class size policy represents. Mr McArthur should support what we are trying to do, and should not try to trim it.

I cannot confirm that, because it is an erroneous interpretation of the agreement. As the First Minister indicated this morning, the negotiating teams for COSLA and the Scottish Government, of whose team I was a  member, came to an agreement on the document and recommended it. The only people who seem to be carping about it are those in the Labour Party, who seem to wish to sit outside it. This agreement is good news for Scottish education. It has reduced the fears of substantial reductions. It presents challenges, but it also provides solutions. I tend to think that that is what politicians should do—we should face up to problems and provide solutions. I am aware, however, that I have not heard a single solution from the Labour benches in the whole year in which I have held this post.

That has been a core concern of mine. As was announced in the budget statement, the Scottish Government will continue the education maintenance allowance scheme, thereby reinforcing our commitment to supporting the least well-off students in Scotland. In other parts of the United Kingdom, that scheme is being removed. Despite the constraints on our budgets, we will also guarantee that no existing student will experience a decrease in living cost support in the academic year 2011-12. I pay tribute to the universities and colleges, which despite the difficulties of the settlement, have made it clear that they intend to maintain the number of student places. That will help every student in Scotland. Those people are putting the public interest before anything else—which is a lesson for members in this chamber.

I am aware of the examples that the member mentioned, and of others. Clearly, I have a long knowledge of the sector. As the member will know, I and the minister who responsibility for Gaelic discuss the matter with councils, Bòrd na Gàidhlig and parents groups. We are directing available funding to councils in order to make progress and to support them with the delivery of Gaelic-medium education. We should look not just at the one or two places in Scotland where the glass might be slightly empty but at the many places where the glass has filled up pretty rapidly. When I met the parents of children at the Edinburgh Gaelic-medium school recently, we all reflected on how far Gaelic-medium education has come in a decade. There is room for continued progress and I know that there is a demand from parents. If local authorities, parents, Bòrd na Gàidhlig and the Scottish Government work together, we will continue to meet that demand.

That is an interesting question. I have to say that, as we are getting close to the election, there will be an opportunity for all of us to reflect on it. Given the present difficult situation for local authorities, I do not think that it would be reasonable at this stage to put that additional burden on them. However, I look forward to Mr Macintosh telling Scotland's local  authorities that that is precisely what he intends to do. I am sure that the Labour local authorities that are having such difficulty in accepting even the generous offer from the Government of a reduction of only 2.6 per cent will welcome the opportunity to get right behind Mr Macintosh and ensure that they deliver even more for less money. If that is Labour economics, thank goodness Labour is not going to be in a position to implement it next year.

I have not heard a build-up like that for a long time. Mr Macintosh referred to "pointless and condescending verbiage". I apologise in advance for letting him down. The playwright Joan Ure, who was an old friend of mine, once said that Scots do not want freedom of religion; they merely want the freedom to persecute others. Ken Macintosh does not want me to make decisions. I make many decisions and he usually criticises me for making them. He wants me to say something that he can leap on and attack in the way that he tries to leap on and attack things, but I am not going to do that. The curriculum for excellence is probably precisely where Margaret Smith said that it is. It is probably not quite as good as I want to make out, and it is certainly not nearly as bad as Des McNulty and his colleagues want to make out. Their great disappointment is that what they predicted has not come to pass. I will come to that at the end of my speech. The catastrophe that they wanted to see has not happened and, my goodness, that sticks in their throats. I want to deal with the positives in the debate rather than the negatives, and will start with Liz Smith's speech. I want to persuade her that the debate is important. She criticised the fact that this debate is taking place and thinks that there are  more important issues. We all have views on the relative importance of the curriculum for excellence, but there are two very important things to say in the debate. First, it is important to say thank you and well done to teachers and whole school communities that have worked exceptionally hard in difficult circumstances to get to the point that has been reached. That is a basic civility from the Parliament to people whose actions have at times been much criticised. Perhaps they have not had as much support at times as they should have had. It is important for members to thank them and say well done, and I defend using chamber time to do that. The second point, about the long-term nature of the commitment, is even more important. That point relates to the opening of my first speech. I want the Parliament to commit itself to the curriculum for excellence in the long term. There is not much in the Labour amendment that pleases me, but I am pleased that it does not cut out the final part of the motion. We make that long-term commitment.

I agree with Liz Smith. We are trying to deal with many interrelated issues. Indeed, I addressed some of those issues at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee meeting yesterday, and we addressed others in the debate on higher education funding that the Tories brought to the chamber. I will continue to address those issues, and I am not criticising the member's stance, but I defend the importance of making from the Parliament the two points that I have made. That is why the debate is important. There is a strong case for talking about school autonomy and for relating the curriculum for excellence to the autonomy of teachers. I will quote with approval something that somebody said this week. They said: "A debate is required about the role of local councils in schools, but whatever the outcome there needs to be a massive power shift to the school level. This is needed to allow schools to be more innovative to meet the demands of the Curriculum for Excellence. Staff need more professional space" to deliver. I commend the views of Peter Peacock on the issue. It is absolutely clear that we need to  have that debate in the chamber. It is related to the delivery of the curriculum for excellence. We need the Parliament to commit itself to the curriculum for excellence in the long term. Liz Smith made another point about transitions through school. I encourage her to go and see the transitions at the Rothesay joint campus, which is a good example of where the curriculum for excellence has been introduced without doors. It is said that that campus provides education from three to a degree, because of the nursery and Argyll College provision. It is useful to see how a whole school can deliver the curriculum for excellence right across the age range. I take Margaret Smith's point about the SSTA. Many members have raised the SSTA issue. I am keen that it takes up membership and comes back to the management board, but I must make the point that it is impossible to be a member of a committee that has voted unanimously for proposals and then call for industrial action against those proposals the following day. That simply cannot happen. I am glad that the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers has now joined the EIS on the management board. I would welcome the SSTA back.

No, Mr McNulty, I have heard your views on the issue. The SSTA is welcome to come back, but it needs consistency and we need to know that we are all trying to get the best out of the process, rather than one party grandstanding for its membership despite having supported something in the committee. That is not acceptable.

On Monday, all the directors of education in Scotland met. Each one confirmed that the curriculum for excellence programme is on track and said that they needed no delay in the implementation timetable. So the SSTA's representation of the issue is not what is actually happening. I repeat that I am absolutely open to discussions with the SSTA on that issue or on any other issue. I meet the unions absolutely regularly. Margaret Smith raised the issue of the national assessment resource. The assessment framework was published in January and stated then that the national assessment resource would be available from autumn 2010, which was achieved.  There have been several mentions of the exam timetable. The programme addressed the criticisms. It focused initially on rolling out the experiences and outcomes across the curriculum areas between 2008 and 2009. Teachers were therefore able to concentrate at precisely the right moment on how their teaching and classroom practice should develop and extend their children. In the past half year, the programme has focused principally on supporting teachers with assessment and on how to achieve rigorous and robust standards for assessing a child's progress. The published timetable shows that, in early January 2011, draft course outlines for the new qualifications will be published. The team of SQA qualification advisers have established links with every local authority to answer their questions. The actions on the new qualifications are taking place well over three years before the current secondary 1 children will take the new qualifications. That is a published programme. It has been agreed over the long term. It is in implementation. It should not be misrepresented or misunderstood. It is actually happening.

No, I will not. I will come to Rhona Brankin in just a moment, but I want to do so via Karen Whitefield and several other members. I am astonished by the members, particularly Labour members, whose time was taken up with lambasting the Government for the budget difficulties that Labour created. I remind them of that memorable note from Liam Byrne, the former Chief Secretary to the Treasury, that said, "I am afraid there is no money." It was Labour that spent the money and whose irresponsibility virtually bankrupted the state, and now its members tell us that budgets have to be put in place. That is hypocrisy of a giant dimension. I have to say that the most offensive thing in the debate was that those members were so blind to that fact. There were other things that particularly concerned me. Des McNulty's speech lasted 10 minutes and 58 seconds—I counted them in and I counted them out. During that time, we heard nine minutes and 10 seconds of complaint and then there was the merest ray of sunshine. He said that he would become optimistic, but even the optimism was pessimistic. There was not a single thought about how we might take forward the curriculum for excellence. What we have had from Labour this morning is regrettable, and we have not had it from the other parties. I accept that there are difficulties still to be overcome. We are actively working on those and I welcome the co-operation and work of those parties that want to do so. What  we had from Labour was cynical and wrong. Labour members wanted the curriculum for excellence to fail and they are really furious that it is succeeding. They are spitting tacks. What we heard from Des McNulty was astonishing. Halfway through his speech, I realised exactly where I had heard it before. We now have an education policy from Labour that is based entirely on the negativity of the staffroom cynic—the person who does not want anything in education to succeed and who is desperate to stop it. That is what Labour education policy has come to. We have the utter cynicism of a party that, in local government, has slashed teacher numbers. [ Laughter .] It then turns up in the Parliament and, with a tinkling laugh from Rhona Brankin, pretends that that has not happened. The reality is that the Government has worked tirelessly to deliver the curriculum for excellence. I am certainly open to the criticism that there is much more still to do. That is why I am happy to support elements of the Labour amendment, because there are issues that are still to be resolved. However, what we have seen from Labour today is a bankrupt education policy. Even Claire Baker's good speech could not save Labour from that. We have the absolutely extraordinary stance of a party that, having set up the literacy commission and having seen a Government work with that commission to achieve a literacy action plan, proceeds to denounce it, not because it is not the right plan, but because that party does not want anybody to do anything good in Scotland. Labour failed for so long and now it does not want anybody else to succeed. That is disgraceful.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. According to the standing orders, it is unacceptable to misrepresent a member. I do not know that.

By Labour councils.

I know of that coincidence of dates, but I can assure Robin Harper that I will open the conference, and I know that a colleague of mine will be present. We are very proud of the fact that that conference is taking place in Scotland, and of the eco-school movement, which Scotland leads.

Well, that is the end of Labour.

No, they were not. They were caused by inaction by the previous Administration and Mr Macintosh's colleagues. I did not want to be so churlish as to say that and break the positive spirit, and I regret that Mr Macintosh has done so. I revert to the positive Mike Russell, which is my natural default position. Summary versions and professional practice guides for key documents have been produced and distributed to practitioners. Simple fact files—I have some with me as a visual aid—to help explain the changes to parents, employers and others have been published and made widely available. I wrote to the parents of every primary 7 child going into secondary 1 to explain what was taking place and to encourage them to ask questions. The work of teachers and all those employed in our schools has paid off. The alleged catastrophe did not happen. Our pupils are still learning and teachers are still teaching—better than ever. The consensus that curriculum for excellence is the answer to the problems that we all agreed on at the start of this session of Parliament continues to grow—it is extending as more and more people see the curriculum in action in our schools. We can now see the rewards of the work that has been carried out across early years, primary, secondary and special schools and colleges and their partners to make curriculum for excellence a reality. There is a transformation in the links between early years services and primary schools. The number of partnerships with the third sector and parents to help children broaden their achievements through schemes such as the Duke of Edinburgh's award has grown. Ever-growing partnerships between our schools and colleges help all children but especially those in need of more choices and more chances. We see a new confidence in the professionalism and leadership of teachers. People can turn to the engage for education website and see the blogs of Richard Coton, headteacher of Monifieth high school in Angus. He talks about going live in August 2009, a year ahead of the national timeline. He talks about it being a lot of hard work but says that the staff have shown professionalism and commitment. After a year and a half of detailed analysis and evidence, he believes strongly that pupils in the school are doing better and are growing much further as a result of curriculum for excellence. It is not just Scottish teachers; international commentators spoke at September's Scottish learning festival. Richard Gerver, co-founder of the international Curriculum Foundation, described curriculum for excellence as "spectacular". Eric  Booth, the well-known international educator and author, said that the changes were "historically unprecedented" and that curriculum for excellence—he was paying tribute to schools here—is an "unbelievable accomplishment". Of course the job is not complete. There are difficult situations ahead. I understand fully the concerns of those representing teachers and others about the future and I have maintained a strong dialogue with them. I acknowledge the constructive and helpful position that the Educational Institute of Scotland has taken at every stage throughout the past few years. It has questioned, challenged and criticised, but its commitment, together with its principled and reasonable approach, has led to significant improvements in the implementation programme. The management board has managed this incredibly complex programme with true determination and it is much better equipped to do so given that we continue to widen its membership. The board, like me, is clear that as we move ahead, we will require serious thought as to each step that we take, which is being given. We are supporting the programme in every way we can, but we agree that the implementation of the programme is not an end in itself. Curriculum for excellence is a methodology. It provides the starting point for all attempts to improve learning. I have made it clear that I welcome and support all those who are ambitious for further improvement. Ambitious subject experts such as those in the Royal Society of Edinburgh and many others are being listened to. I regularly meet those who have views that challenge curriculum for excellence. As part of my 10-point plan, I established 18 excellence groups and asked them to report to me in early 2011 on how we can make further progress in developing excellence in every subject area in the curriculum. Ambitious parents need our support, too. Our partners in the national parent forum want to consult parents in every local authority to get their views on how parents can become fully engaged, not just in the improvement of their child's education but in the improvement of the education of every child in their area. I will support those consultation efforts as I support the forum—I spoke at its conference last week. I am ambitious, together with parents, teachers and the whole community, to tackle some of the endemic problems. As I said when I launched our literacy action plan, poor literacy skills are a result of deep-rooted societal issues within Scotland, but our early years services and our schools can make a real difference. We know that, so let us use curriculum for excellence to demonstrate our optimism and confidence in those  services and to help to turn around unacceptable statistics. I am ambitious for our teachers. The Donaldson review's findings will progress positive and far-reaching issues for initial and on-going teacher education and development and will help us to overcome the difficulty of teacher unemployment. Much has been done, but much remains for us to do. Last month, I announced the creation of a new agency—the Scottish education quality and improvement agency—that will bring together the support and challenge functions of HMIE and Learning and Teaching Scotland in a new body that will have at its heart the need to ensure that curriculum for excellence is supported to achieve our ambitions. We must examine the structures through which education is delivered and ask whether they conform to the ambitions of curriculum for excellence and give our schools the best and most effective arrangements for implementing curriculum for excellence. Can we help our schools to maximise the resources that are available to them in difficult times, to give the best possible educational experience? For example, are schools using information technology to the best effect, not just to engage and interest their pupils but to ensure that the options for their pupils are as wide and varied as they can be? Those questions will exercise us now and over the next few years, but we must talk about our system's strengths—what has really worked in it and what we can build on to ensure that it works better. I visit many schools and meet many parents and teachers. I will touch on what I learned on four recent visits. In West Linton, I attended a parents evening in the old primary school, which is soon to be replaced by a new primary school—one of the 300-plus schools that are being built under the Administration. The parents there were keenly engaged in and keenly questioning of curriculum for excellence, but any doubts that they had were swept away not by me or even by Scottish Borders Council's effective curriculum for excellence officer but by the children, who put on an inspiring short performance that demonstrated how they learned. At Paible school on the island of North Uist, I saw the best demonstration of the four capacities that I have ever seen—an ever-changing noticeboard that was full of pictures that the young people had taken, which illustrated what it was to be the four elements in the four capacities. It showed how it was possible to be a successful learner, a confident individual, a responsible citizen and an effective contributor on the island of North Uist. In East Kilbride, I saw challenged young people who linked their capacities and their interests by  celebrating the musical "The Sound of Music" and ensuring that they understood the world through the eyes of the characters in that film. Those young people have tremendous difficulties, but their joy and enthusiasm in the classroom were infectious. On the first day of the school term, I visited Cardinal Newman high school in North Lanarkshire, whose young teachers I had heard make a presentation at a conference on teacher education. The teachers were so excited about their prospects of teaching differently that I had to go to the school. I found a school that was fully engaged in curriculum for excellence, which was not listening to the naysayers and the doom-mongers, which knew that what was happening among its teaching workforce and its young people was a step forward in Scottish education and which was determined to deliver the best in Scottish education. Those are only four out of many schools. In each one, I see the importance of curriculum for excellence. Yes, there is more to do; yes, the exam timetable must be adhered to—we are doing that; and yes, we must listen to and respect concerns. However, we have something that is of great importance. It is not just me who says that; the whole Parliament said that in 2002 and 2003. We now have the opportunity to stick to that commitment and to continue to do the right thing for Scottish education. I move, That the Parliament congratulates the teaching profession and all who work in or are part of school communities for their unprecedented efforts in successfully continuing the roll-out of the Curriculum for Excellence across all primary, special and secondary schools from August 2010; recognises the need for a long-term commitment to the Curriculum for Excellence, and confirms that commitment from this parliament.

I am sorry—I want to make progress, and I do not have much time. I just wanted to make that point, because it is important. In response to Christine Grahame's speech, I accept that the work of the Scottish funding council is germane in this regard. We should bring together business and science, and encourage an interrelationship. I accept the strictures that Bill Wilson mentioned with regard to focusing only on  applicable research, but there should be a better combination. This year I have had the privilege of visiting a number of companies that have had assistance from the Scottish funding council and from universities to work with PhD and post-doctoral students. Two of those companies in particular stick in my mind. One is Flextricity, which is a company that is a virtual power station. If members do not understand that concept—as I did not until I went—they should go and see the work that a number of PhD students from the University of Edinburgh are doing with that most exciting technological company. The second company is Toshiba Medical Visualization Systems Europe, which has an international centre based in Edinburgh. It has a very close business relationship with universities in Scotland, which is very encouraging and works extremely well. It is clear that there will be concern in the scientific community—as there is throughout Scotland—about the outcomes of the United Kingdom spending review. That review froze resource spending in the UK's science budget, which was not as bad as had been feared, but which nonetheless amounts to a real-terms cut of 10 per cent over the spending review period. The impact of that will be felt everywhere in the United Kingdom, and certainly in Scotland, given that we secured 12 per cent of UK research council funding. The cuts on capital spending will be severe and could translate into a cost of around £25 million in Scotland, in that one area alone. I discussed those issues with the deans of science—whom I meet regularly—just last week, and I am focused on ensuring that we get the best deal that we can for science and technology in Scotland. We will publish our own draft budget next week. I cannot go into any detail on it now, but there are some very hard choices to make and everyone will be touched. Those choices are forced on us as a result of the 11 per cent cut in the Scottish budget in real terms during the next four years. In making our choices, members can be sure that ministers will recognise that the science base in Scotland is a very valuable asset to our economy. I take Bill Wilson's point that it is also valuable to our wider intellectual life. We will therefore aim to maximise the contribution of Scotland's world-class science base to economic recovery. Our research base, like any other sector, must face up to the challenge of becoming more efficient and delivering best value for money. However, as a responsible minister, I recognise how important it is. We set out our strategic framework for science in 2008, which contained our vision of a Scotland  that is a magnet for talent and investment and a powerhouse of technology, innovation, enterprise and—yes—ideas. I think that our science base is achieving that. An independent study that was published earlier this year showed that we continue to lead the world on many indicators, particularly in research quality. Scotland's research is number 1 in the world in terms of its citations per gross domestic product. That thought is so good that I will express it in another way just to repeat it: we are ahead of all other nations of the world in our research quality in relation to GDP. It perhaps comes as a slight let-down to say that we are only second in the world in terms of citations per paper. Those are astonishing achievements for this country, and they have been sustained over a considerable period of time. However, they are not the only indicators of success. We are forming highly influential partnerships with world research leaders. The link-up last week between the University of Glasgow and New York's Columbia University is an example of that. The University of Strathclyde has a hugely important science link with Caltech and Stanford University, and we have more than 40 of our fundamental physicists working at CERN. Next month, a group of teachers and schoolchildren will visit that model of high-tech activity to be inspired and, I hope, provide inspiration.  That brings me to the next generation. We have our action plan on science and engineering education and, through our science centres and other science engagement programmes, we focus on supporting others. The uptake of science in our universities is on an upward trend. There has been an overall growth of 14 per cent and a growth of 40 per cent in physical sciences and 60 per cent in biological sciences. I could go on, but the clock has caught me. That great scientific invention means that I must sit down. Science is taken seriously by this Government and, on the evidence of this evening's debate, by the chamber, too.  Meeting closed at 19:00.

I am very pleased that the 2010 act, which members unanimously supported, empowers parents in precisely these circumstances and that that empowerment is being assisted by other groups. I pay tribute to the Scottish National Party group on the council, which decided to press the other councillors for a delay, and I am glad that the councillors agreed to it. I praise the rural schools network on its information campaign, which has laid bare some of the arguments on the importance of providing  information, and the website forargyll.com on its tremendous job in bringing together information. Most of all, I praise the communities themselves. They need to know about the rights, protections and defence that they have through the 2010 act, which, as I say, was introduced by this Administration. When any such proposals are made, they should be well-informed proposals of last resort. Even then, communities have substantial rights that they should know about, and I am taking steps to ensure that that information is available to every rural community in Scotland.

Even I am staggered by that question—and I have very low expectations of Mr McNulty. I am staggered that he should be so blind to the effects of mismanagement by his party when it was in government and I am staggered that he does not realise that the financial pressures that we are all facing were created by that mismanagement.

However, I am not staggered by the fact that Lord Foulkes is, as ever, shouting. It is, like the bellow of a sea lion, a constant that is ever with us—and as inarticulate. I am staggered that, instead of trying to assist the community on the island of Luing, which is what we are all trying to do, by making it clear that it has rights and can stand up to this situation, Mr McNulty wants to exploit it. That is the reality behind Labour holding its conference in Oban. It was only in Argyll because Labour wanted to exploit Argyll. However, the people of Argyll see through Labour, just as the people of Scotland will.

No, I do not agree with that, because that is not what will happen in the organisation.

I hope that the member will welcome the changes in Scottish education that are dictated and driven by the introduction of the curriculum for excellence. I hope that, as we develop the merger, he will not nit-pick or try to destroy the opportunities that it presents. I hope that he will support whole-heartedly the idea that, when we have bodies that support, encourage and  develop Scottish education and allow Scottish education to reflect on and judge itself, the merger is the right thing to do. I will publish the information that it is necessary for us to publish to take forward the process. It will be an open and transparent process. It would be nice if members of the Labour Opposition supported Scottish education, rather than constantly wishing it worse than it is so that they can warm themselves on that possible view—a view that turns out not to be true.

There is a basic incompatibility between being involved in developing the curriculum for excellence, advising, assisting and challenging—that is what members of the management board do—and calling for strike action in those local authorities that continue to implement the curriculum for excellence. It is impossible for one body to do both. I have made it clear that I value the SSTA's contribution to the process and I would like it on the management board, but it must choose whether it wishes to challenge, support and take part in the process or to wreck it. That is its decision, and it must make it. I am pleased to be able to announce that the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of  Women Teachers, which styles itself as the fastest growing teachers union in Scotland, has agreed to serve on the management board, and I welcome its contribution, which it made today for the first time.

I hesitate to accuse the member of shedding crocodile tears, but I am close to doing so. Labour's attitude on this matter has been shameful. There is a real problem in teacher employment, the roots of which lie in many different places. One of the most significant and strongest roots is the foolish, unjustifiable decisions that were made by the previous Administration. Another difficulty that has arisen is in the employment policies of local authorities, especially Labour local authorities. However, on every occasion that I have addressed the issue—whether facing the crocodile tears of Opposition politicians or the real concerns of unemployed teachers and parents—I have made clear that I find it a very difficult and  intractable problem that can be addressed only by the expenditure of very large sums of money by local authorities whose decisions make clear that they do not wish to employ more teachers. Perhaps we could have across the chamber a recognition that not everything can be reduced to the simple, aggressive soundbite of opposition. Everything requires serious consideration—

My point has been made for me by the shouting member who has just contributed. Not everything can be solved by the shouts of the Opposition. Problems must be solved by intensive work and a realisation that the Labour members who made the mistakes should take some responsibility for them.

I am sorry that the member is confused. She clearly does not know that 20 per cent of higher education is already delivered by the college sector. She clearly does not know that articulation from college to university is a major factor of college development. I am sorry that the member has fallen into the trap, but that in no sense judges or invalidates the very strong vocational and skills education activities of the colleges. Those activities sit happily side by side. The question was about "the range, quality and relevance of courses on offer". That is of course of great importance, and it is being reviewed. I hope that the SFC will be involved in a mapping exercise to ensure that we know what is taught where. To try and invent a conflict between the higher education role of colleges and their vocational role is wrong, in my view.

There is a good and constant question about assessment and examinations in the college sector. There is always keenness to ensure that the system works. The Scottish qualifications framework is well established, and it is a good template against which all examination activity should be measured. Review of the whole system is not necessary, but it is important to ensure that examinations speak to employers, in particular, about the quality and extent of achievement.

I am sorry that Rhona Brankin is not in her usual place, but I am glad that she is in the chamber, as I would like to commend her and others in the Labour Party on the establishment of the literacy commission, which has been a valuable innovation. It is important to note, without being in any way complacent, that the need to improve literacy is not unique to Scotland. It is a persistent problem throughout the United Kingdom and internationally. The literacy skills of the majority of people in Scotland compare well across the world, but poor literacy among a minority is unacceptable. We know that the majority of children in Scotland develop a good grounding in literacy skills in early primary education. However, a minority do not and, as pupils progress through primary and into secondary, the proportion that achieves expected levels of literacy decreases. That must be addressed. We know that the overall Scottish adult population has a good level of literacy skills. Although around 25 per cent of the adult population would benefit from improving their literacy skills, only around 3.6 per cent of the adult population have very limited capabilities. Those results are encouraging, but we still have work to do to reduce the numbers of people who have issues with reading and writing. We also know that literacy skills are linked to socioeconomic status and levels of deprivation, with those from more deprived areas experiencing lower achievement. Our ambition must be to break that link in order to create a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish. The evidence suggests that there need to be a number of priorities across learning: breaking the link between poor literacy levels and deprivation; improving the skills of the few who have difficulties with basic literacy, particularly those who are vulnerable; ensuring that young people progress successfully from basic to advanced literacy skills; and raising advanced literacy skills for all.  The literacy action plan sits within the context of existing policy frameworks, and it is important that it does so. The curriculum for excellence is clearly one of the key routes to drive forward improvement, but the broader education system and wider socioeconomic policy are also important. The early years framework, the curriculum for excellence, the getting it right for every child agenda and our adult literacy and numeracy strategy are of central importance as the national policy frameworks through which we will deliver our vision. What happens to children in their earliest years is key to outcomes, including the improvement of educational attainment in childhood, adolescence and in adult life. There is a strong relationship between early life experiences and how children learn. Positive influences in the early years are important and will improve a child's life chances. We will ensure that literacy development is a key priority for our youngest children as they take their first steps into learning, helping to stem the problem of poor literacy early on. We will encourage our early years delivery partners, including those in health and social work as well as in education, to develop new and innovative approaches that will lay the foundations for literacy development for our most vulnerable children. For school-age learners, curriculum for excellence is already under way. It will ensure that young learners develop the basic literacy skills that they will need to thrive in the 21st century and move beyond those to gain the more advanced skills that will help them to reach their full potential. Curriculum for excellence inevitably has literacy at its core. Literacy is mainstreamed across all subjects and it is the responsibility of all practitioners to work on it with our young people. The new Scottish qualifications are progressing with the development of new literacy units, which are available to those in our schools and adult learners. The units will help to develop literacy skills and ensure that learners' attainment is recognised. We must acknowledge that early identification of a child's additional support needs and learning difficulties is important in breaking down barriers to literacy and attainment. We will therefore encourage all local authorities to ensure the early identification of support needs for each child, and encourage all early years practitioners to be aware of and act on the personalised assessment and the learning and support needs information. I expect that, for each child, any barriers to literacy will be identified early and appropriate support to overcome those barriers will be put in place. Interventions are most effective before a  child falls behind, and it is important that we work together to ensure that no child does so. We know that as learners progress into adulthood some will still need support to develop their literacy skills. Adult learners have different needs, motivations and personal circumstances, and there are critical transition points at which the provision of support is more important. Those include leaving formal education, finding a job, re-entering a community after a period in prison and becoming a parent. To reach the diverse range of adult learners, we will continue to offer a variety of learning opportunities, with flexible delivery methods and learning programmes that are relevant to learners' lives. The recently published 2009 Scottish survey of adult literacies provides a good basis on which to move towards a refresh of our existing adult literacy and numeracy strategy, which we will launch by the end of the year. We will build on collaboration with our partners and service providers to strengthen our support for adult learners, particularly those in our most deprived communities. We will build awareness of and access to the appropriate services, ensure that our practitioners are well equipped to support learners and continue to monitor and evaluate impact. The action plan highlights the importance of supporting young people and adults in the justice system to help to improve their future prospects. That will include prioritised screening for offenders who are likely to have profound and particular literacy difficulties. Beyond the learning environment and community, there are other key influences on literacy. Employers, for example, have a role in developing vocational literacy skills so that employees can improve their chances in their professional and working lives. The media, and the broadcast media in particular, can have a strong influence on how we use language, and it has a broader impact on literacy. We will engage with the media to discuss their role and responsibility in contributing to our vision. We want to develop a strong reading culture in Scotland, where reading is a valued activity from the earliest age. Sharing books in a family environment and the love of reading that it creates enriches the family experience immeasurably, is likely to be passed from generation to generation and has a major beneficial impact on individual outcomes. We will continue to work with partners to support measures to develop Scotland as a literate, reading nation and continue to encourage Scottish writing and publishing activities, on which much Scottish reading depends.  At this time of challenging financial circumstances and huge pressure on resources, it is more important than ever for all of us to work together to improve literacy for all, with a determined focus on the most vulnerable. We must use our combined resources productively to ensure that we achieve our vision for literacy in Scotland. We will facilitate a broad partnership, including with those agencies that are outwith the formal education sector. We need involvement from all services—including health, justice and employment—that can make a positive contribution to our vision. We will identify the key support relating to literacy that is currently being delivered by agencies and institutions. That will enable us to make the most effective use of resources, target future work more effectively on priorities and encourage interagency working throughout the country. We have worked closely with many partners to develop the plan, and we will continue to do so as delivery of it progresses. We want to maintain the momentum that was begun by the Literacy Commission and followed up by the launch of our plan. We will establish a standing literacy commission to facilitate and oversee the delivery of the actions that the plan contains, and I give a commitment that we will report to the Parliament on progress over three years. I commend the first literacy action plan to the Parliament.

I thought that I should reply, Presiding Officer, although I accept that the question was scarcely worthy of it. I regret the tone that Mr McNulty has taken, although I suppose it is typical, and I am used to it after 11 months in my post. The Administration has worked hard with the literacy commission, and the people whom Labour chose to lead it, to develop a plan. We are already implementing parts of it because, as I said at the beginning, it focuses the work and attention of a range of agencies on the priority that literacy has become. There is no downward spiral of anything in Scottish education. What we have is a commitment to take forward the key issue of literacy as a priority, as I said when I responded to the literacy commission, but to do so across Government, across agencies and within the curriculum. We already have a number of actions that are bringing those together and focusing on the curriculum for excellence. It is all in the document, which has been welcomed by those who work in the sector. I am sorry that Mr McNulty thinks that the production of Scotland's first-ever literacy action plan is simply an excuse for him to tediously repeat his political prejudices. I do not think that it will be seen like that by those who are keen on improving Scotland's literacy and I deeply regret that he takes that attitude. I had believed that he might behave differently on this occasion, but then I suppose I would never be disappointed by the low level of Mr McNulty's ambitions.

I thank Elizabeth Smith for those important questions, which serve to highlight where the issue is going. With regard to specific plans for teaching training, I have discussed the issue with Graham Donaldson on one occasion. Indeed, I indicated to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that I have continued a dialogue with Mr Donaldson throughout his review of initial teacher education. Some interesting information is emerging that although primary teachers in particular might be confident in teaching and pedagogy, they lack confidence in specific skills, which might well include certain aspects of literacy. The issue will feature in Mr Donaldson's review and I expect that we will be able to take it forward. As for assessment, I have a particularly strong interest in ensuring that early interventions take place. Where literacy problems arise as a result of learning difficulty, which is the case in many, though not all circumstances, we should be in a position to assess that difficulty as early as possible and assist children in setting things right. I think that that is one of the key tools that we can use. Indeed, some local authorities are already doing so, and I encourage other local authorities to do the same. I find it profoundly wrong that in one or two places in Scotland it is still possible for a young person with a learning disability to fail to have it diagnosed throughout their entire schooling. Anyone who has heard Sir Jackie Stewart talking about his school experiences will know that that has happened in the past and that the earliest intervention that we can possibly make in identifying learning difficulties and disabilities and helping young people with them will pay profound dividends.

The standing commission will play a strong role in sharing good practice and I look forward to its work. In its new incarnation within the newly merged organisation, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education will also play a strong role in ensuring that literacy and numeracy, which now form a core element of the curriculum, are observed. The fact that literacy and numeracy are no longer being put to one side or seen as a specialist matter, but actually form part of the curriculum, is actually a very important innovation in Scotland, and we should not forget that. As the plan indicates, I am keen to take that a step further and ensure that the practice of early identification grows. A number of local authorities are carrying out that work and I am happy to provide information on those that we know about; after all, some hide their light under a bushel while others do not. We will also want the standing commission to encourage the practice to spread elsewhere and I am very happy for the chamber to debate the issue and examine other means of ensuring that it happens. It is crucial to what we are trying to achieve.

I tend to agree with the member, but I am trying to be generous. I hope that, as the questioning continues, Mr McNulty will be seen to be an aberration in this matter. However, I will not say anything more about that, because I hope that we will have a positive  response to what has been my positive gratitude to Rhona Brankin and the Labour Party for the establishment of the literacy commission. I responded warmly to the commission. I met it on the day that it published its report. We had a debate on the commission in the chamber. I took the issue forward, the commission has been involved in developing the plans, and I have paid tribute to it. I see an opportunity for us to work together to get things right, and I hope that we can do so.

Wendy Alexander raises an important issue. We know that there are unacceptable dips in performance at various stages of the educational journey. One of the many purposes of the curriculum for excellence was to show that they had been smoothed out and high standards had been maintained. We need to ensure that work is done on assessing and following up literacy levels from the earliest stages in primary schools. It is not enough, as has happened until now, to shine a spotlight on primary 6 or 7; rather, we need to check literacy levels and, if there are shortfalls, ensure that we make them up. We need earlier assessment in primary 1 or primary 2. If that is coupled with the assessment of learning difficulties, we will get a good, personalised picture of the individual child in the very early years of primary school and will then be able to follow that child through personalised learning. To ensure that high levels are maintained, they can be checked later on in primary school and again at the crucial stage after the transition from primary to secondary school. It is a matter of the combination of the curriculum for excellence and the methodology, and ensuring that education is personalised and literacy is integrated as a core activity in all education. We hope that that will be picked up. The member will know that there tend to be rises after dips, which is interesting. Transition seems to create inconsistencies as well as other difficulties, and emphasising better transition will certainly work out well. It is rather interesting that  one tends to find that transition difficulties are not nearly as great in schools with a single campus and a flow-through. There are issues to do with change. Wendy Alexander asked questions that it is correct to ask. A lot of work is being done and will continue to be done to address those questions.

That is an interesting question. I know that Kenny Gibson is tempting me to be partisan, but I do not want to be and I will not be. It seems to me that, from 1999 to 2003, the Parliament decided that there was a problem with Scottish education in general. Those who remember the national debate on education, in which Wendy Alexander was deeply involved, and the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's inquiry into the purposes of education will know that broadly similar conclusions were reached in that debate and by the committee. It was concluded that there was over-examination and over-inspection in Scottish education, that it was too shallow and that not enough connections were being made. Therefore, it was agreed that Scottish education needed to change. That change started in 2004-05 with the introduction of the curriculum for excellence, and the change is working its way through. However, education is like the proverbial tanker—it takes a while to turn round—so I do not think that we will see the effect of the change in improving education in Scotland for some time. That is not to say that standards of education in Scotland are low, but they could be higher. I think that the curriculum for excellence will make the difference. All successful education systems throughout the world have two characteristics in common. One is that they rely on the highest quality of teaching and the second is that they have a consistency of policy and a consensus about policy that is not short term. If we stick with curriculum for excellence and do not succumb to the temptation of being partisan about it, and if we can get it  operating well, which we are trying to do, we will achieve long-term benefits. I appeal to the Parliament to accept that advice.

The member raises two important issues. On pre-school screening, there are arguments for screening early, but also arguments against. One of the arguments against is that some learning disorders and difficulties do not develop and are not identifiable until later on. I am by no means ruling out that suggestion, as it is an interesting development. I would like to continue to debate it with the standing literacy commission to consider whether it is possible. Curriculum for excellence provides the framework for assessment. Having literacy at the core of curriculum for excellence means that there will be personalised assessment of what has been achieved, of capability and of how to proceed. That is a rigorous process, but I am happy to meet the member to discuss further how we should do that. I want to ensure that the member's connection with the literacy commission is renewed with the standing commission, so that she can continue to make her points. I know that she has a commitment to the issue.

I said to Elizabeth Smith that I have spoken to Graham Donaldson about precisely that matter, but I just confirm that I have spoken to him about the confidence of people who undergo teacher training in their teaching skills—the pedagogy—and about their lack of confidence in specific subject skills, even in primary. We are concerned about that, and I am sure that Graham Donaldson will take that forward. On the other issues that the member raises, I am absolutely certain that, with the standing literacy commission, we can consider the matters and make progress on them productively. The standing literacy commission will focus the work of a range of organisations. LTS, the SQA and HMIE have been key players in developing the plan and they will be key delivery agents. I expect them to show the strongest commitment to getting it right.

I decided early on in my tenure that the existing plan needed to be refined. We have tried to make sure that it fits in with the examination system in the fourth year and that there are specific freestanding units. That is going well and I am happy to let the member consider the advice on the qualification that I am currently receiving from the management board.

There are statutory requirements in relation to school days and, in particular, the amount of time for which children are taught through the year. I am aware of South Lanarkshire Council's proposals and I confirm that the council, like every other council, must follow the robust and updated procedures that the Government laid out. There is also guidance under the 2010 act, which is very clear and suggests that, when such matters are being considered, local communities should be encouraged to come forward with ideas and alternatives. I stress that there should be a process of consultation and dialogue, not of dictation, as South Lanarkshire Council—and every other council in the same situation—moves forward.

That consultation would normally have to be undertaken. The general principles also apply. In the difficult circumstances in which a proposal is made for any closure, it is important that there is a genuine process of consultation, that the process is open and transparent, that the views and representations of parents and the community are taken into account and that alternatives are considered in a constructive and imaginative manner. Those are prerequisites for moving forward.

That is not uncommon, although in fact it is not what we are doing. International comparisons are important, but I have a responsibility to reduce the burden of surveys on teachers and pupils. Taking Scotland out of the TIMSS and PIRLS—the trends in international mathematics and science study and the progress in international reading literacy study—removes the burden from 12,000 pupils and 450 schools, and directly saves the public purse more than £850,000. Information about how our schools perform is available through Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and the planned streamlined set of key statistical products covering areas such as attainment, leaver destinations, absences and school buildings. There is a wide variety of reports at local and national level. There is also the examination system and reports back by teachers themselves. We will drive up standards by ensuring that the curriculum for excellence succeeds and by putting money on the front line as opposed to putting it elsewhere. PISA is the gold standard of assessment surveys, and it is entirely consistent that we would maintain that. We are taking Scotland forward in a proportional and affordable way.

Classroom teachers and most of the teaching unions find this a positive step forward. Since the start of devolution, we have had a commitment to tackle the burden on schools of overassessment, overproduction of statistics and too much bureaucracy. I am pleased that we are moving forward on that commitment, which my predecessors who served in the Scottish Executive between 1999 and 2007 also made but did nothing about. I am glad that progress will now be made.

I thought the old fogey tendency in the Tories had died away, but clearly it is alive and well and young in the Scottish Conservative party. I, too, noticed the sign and had the same initial reaction. I then gave it a moment's thought, something that I commend to Murdo Fraser. In order to include the full and proper grammar, a notice board would need to have been built that was wider than the entire motorway. Perhaps Murdo Fraser will consider the public spending implications of that and reflect accordingly.

I have been working very hard with officials and members of the literacy commission to ensure that the literacy action plan is comprehensive, can be taken forward quickly and fulfils the ambitions of Scotland. The situation in Scotland is essentially the same as that in most other developed countries. That said, we need to improve literacy as quickly as we can. I am focused on that. The plan will be delivered shortly. I am happy to say that it will be not a Christmas present but perhaps an autumn bonus.

I will deal with the Labour contribution—or lack of it—in the first part of my summing-up and I will then deal with those who were prepared to contribute positively to the debate, which seems to have been everybody else in the chamber. I exempt most of Hugh Henry's speech, because I thought that he, as a former education minister, addressed some of the crucial issues. Later in my speech, I will touch on the issue of the four-year degree, which he raised some very interesting points about. In today's debate, Labour was the dog that did not bark. It yapped a lot, but it did not bark, and there was not a single—not one, zero, nada—policy contribution from Labour members. Indeed, what Labour said was not only dismal but factually wrong. For example, student support has not gone down; it has gone up in a variety of different ways. More is being provided in difficult times than Labour ever provided.

No, I will not. You have been wrong so far and I will tell you—I will tell Ms Baker how she is wrong. I was almost carried away, Presiding Officer. Funding for universities is not down; it is up. We have provided a record £1.1 billion for our universities this year. Participation has gone up under the SNP; it went down under Labour. The sector supports the approach that I have taken; it does not reject it. Indeed, the NUS says so specifically in its briefing for the debate. All the things that Mr McNulty said would not be in the green paper, I included in my opening remarks. If he had listened, he would have discovered that they are the key issues and are recognised as such. Not only does Labour fail to listen to the sector, it does not even listen to its newly elected leader who, this week in Manchester, told the Labour Party that it was just not credible to approach everything on the basis of oppositionalism or demanding more money. He could have added that it is just not credible to oppose everything simply because the SNP says it. There is no new thinking. Everything is as usual. It is simple oppositionalism and inconsistency. In a parliamentary answer to Claire Baker on 9 March, I laid out the procedure that I was going to follow to build a sustainable future for Scottish  higher education. I repeat once more the offer that I made in my opening speech: I would welcome Scottish Labour's contribution to that thinking. That offer remains on the table. It is regrettable that, throughout the debate, it has seemed that Labour has nothing to contribute.

No, I will not. I come to the serious contributions to the debate. I commend Alex Johnstone first of all. He made a distinguished contribution to the thinking on the matter. There is a need to consider more broadly based, more flexible systems. Such a contribution needs to be made to the green paper and I would welcome it. David McLetchie raised an interesting point. He spent half his speech trying to write history once more, in effect. He and I were at university together and I know that he has expertise in telling the story his way.

No, I am sorry. David McLetchie is right to raise the issue that the problems that the Browne review will pose are about substitution, not addition. That is a change from the position a year ago, when the expectation was that whatever review took place south of the border would provide additional resource. Real challenges now arise out of the situation and we will have to consider the Browne report carefully. That is one of the reasons why the timetable for what we are doing is driven externally. For the Labour Party to fail to understand those drivers is bizarre. It shows that it understands as little about higher education as it does about school education. Mike Rumbles raised an interesting point about loans at non-commercial rates and the issue of Scots studying south of the border. I will consider those matters carefully. There is a place in the green paper to consider them because, as I indicated at the beginning of the debate, the paper will consider student support.

That is an interesting point. I broadly agree with what Anton Muscatelli said last week. He said himself that his assessment of the timescale had been misquoted. We have about 12 months within which to put in place the solution and it will have to implemented for two or three  years from introduction because some of it will not be immediate. However, there is an opportunity to do that. The external factors that drive that timetable are of concern. We have to take into account the Browne review, the cuts by the coalition south of the border, which are going too far and too fast, and the incredible mess that Labour made of the public finances. However, Anton Muscatelli's timescale is about right. I am working to that timetable and working hard on it. Elizabeth Smith mentioned the number of graduates. That is an interesting issue, which Hugh Henry also raised. There is nothing that should not be discussed in the debate, but let us focus on what Universities Scotland said about the matter in a letter that, I think, all spokespeople have had: "According to the CBI and Bank of England, most growth in employment over the past 15 years has been at graduate level. ... the CBI's 2010 report on education and skills ... reported that the majority of employers were concerned about the ability to fill high-skill posts, and projected a 55% decline in demand for lower-level skills". Most tellingly of all, the proportion of graduates in Scotland "is low in comparison to many competitor economies and the equivalent figures are 31% for the USA and 24% for Australia." We are rising from 21 per cent. It is not as simple as saying that we have too many or too few graduates, but there are issues.

That is true. Vocationally focused higher education, to which I referred in my opening speech, is important. Colleges deliver 20 per cent of higher education. We have to debate and discuss the issue. The articulation between colleges and universities is key for us all. I commend that comment and Hugh Henry's view on the four-year degree. I make it clear that, as I said in my opening speech, the four-year degree is not the absolute answer to everything. However, I counterbalance the argument that there is something abnormal about the four-year degree by saying that it is actually the norm and that it plugs us well into the Bologna process. Flexibility is an issue: if a student wants to take two, three, five or seven years to complete a degree, I understand that. The universities have to be more flexible.  Although universities have a good record on efficient use of public money, I agree with the speakers who said that transparency and restraint are important. Universities are individual independent institutions, but no university principal in Scotland is in doubt of my view about the need for restraint in what is, in essence, public sector pay and I would not support those who have gone too far. I commend the example set by the new principal of the University of Aberdeen, who has substantially reduced the overheads of his office since coming into office. Gavin Brown's comment on variable fees was interesting. However, an up-front tuition fee and a deferred tuition fee are, in fact, the same thing. The Government does not support tuition fees. Bill Wilson and other SNP speakers who made the point that independence would give flexibility of funding and better higher education are bang on. We should take that away from the debate.

Will the member give way?

No. I want to make progress. So, we have about 12 months to take this issue from where we are now—we are not at the beginning—through to a conclusion. That is the agreed and accepted timetable across the sector. As the debate proceeds, we will hear a range of competing views, as we should, because there are many views on the subject. Let us try to start with what we agree on. I think that all members recognise the valuable contribution that the universities make to Scotland. They contribute to our economic growth, to enhancing our culture and to enriching our society. Our university sector punches above its weight globally. That is best illustrated by the fact that we publish 1.8 per cent of the world's research citations, despite having less than 0.1 per cent of the world's population. In 2008 alone, our record on citations rose by a remarkable 21 per cent. Our universities are not simply world class; they are world beaters and are part of a Scottish success story of which we should all be proud. Another area on which we can agree is that we need to find a solution to address the predicted reduction in public spending and the questions posed by the Browne review, from which, as I have said before, we cannot hide. However, our obligation is to deliver a Scottish response—a uniquely Scottish solution to funding universities and university students in Scotland. The need for us to reach a consensus was set out perfectly by Professor Sir Tim O'Shea, principal of the University of Edinburgh earlier this year when he said: "My own gut reaction in situations like this roughly goes: 'Why don't the people involved in this all sit down together and try and think it through'. You can bring in consultants, you can set up an independent review if you want to, and in a way, that lets you off the hook. I would much rather the people that are there in it get together." That is why, since March this year, I have been speaking to representatives across the sector, listening to what they have to say and considering the ideas that they are presenting.

Now we are in a situation, with the Browne review and the pressures on public finance as a result of Labour wrecking the economy, where we have to make some tougher  decisions. However, I was quoting university principals expressing their views and it behoves the whole chamber to listen to them. Over the course of this year, I have met university principals individually and as a group. I have met business leaders and representatives of staff and students. I have met leading thinkers on higher education funding and I have spoken to United Kingdom ministers and Lord Browne about the situation in England. It is my intention to bring together many of the ideas that featured in those discussions into a green paper that we will publish before the end of the year and which will present a menu of options for consultation. In the early months of next year, I want there to be a wide-ranging debate across Scotland on what the component parts of that solution should be. In considering those options, we must remember that there is no silver bullet; there will be many parts of an eventual Scottish solution. Today is a welcome staging post for that debate and I hope that the chamber treats it in that way. I look forward to building on the consensus that we have already achieved in Scotland around our shared opposition to tuition fees—both up-front and deferred—and to continuing to discuss inside and outside this chamber the new ideas and fresh thinking that Scotland and the wider world can offer. The green paper must be wide ranging and radical and we must be open minded in considering our options. I will put forward some of the many ideas that are being discussed and which will have to be considered. Let us start with our four-year degree. It is a strength; it is the international norm and I believe that it should remain the cornerstone of the university experience. The breadth and depth of education that students gain at university does not just prepare our graduates for life after university. In the words of Gary Kildare, global vice-president of IBM and its senior executive in Scotland, it delivers "global citizens of the future". So we should stop attacking the four-year degree and start celebrating it. It also puts us at the heart of the Bologna process—that growing together of higher education in Europe. There are undoubtedly ways in which the learning journey can be made more efficient to meet the needs of an increasingly diverse student population. The choices that students make about that learning journey should be crucial, including the time that they take to complete it. Building on the success of higher national certificates and diplomas, what opportunities can be created on the back of the Scottish baccalaureate to allow students to begin their studies in second year? The University of Edinburgh, the University of  Glasgow, the University of Aberdeen, the University of the West of Scotland and the University of Abertay Dundee are all leading the way in supporting that new qualification, but I am interested in exploring how we might encourage it to spread more widely throughout the system.

Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, the University of the West of Scotland and Abertay are supporting the new qualification. I spoke to Tim O'Shea just yesterday about that and other matters. There is enthusiasm to take it forward and I would like to see the Scottish Conservatives get behind those students and the new qualification, because that would help greatly. The question of higher education funding and the role of graduates also needs to be discussed, although it is not the only question of income. As we know, Professor Muscatelli and our National Union of Students president, Liam Burns, have both come out in favour of a graduate contribution of some kind, not a deferred fee, as have my colleagues on the Conservative benches, as we now know. If one examines the detail of those statements, one finds that the methods proposed for that and the ultimate destination of any additional resource vary greatly. Some, like a graduate tax, are alas presently outwith the powers of this Parliament. Nonetheless, this is interesting and important territory and it must be given further consideration.

There is a very important difference, which I think is laid out rather well in the NUS briefing note for the debate. It should not be a deferred fee. That is an important distinction, which I am happy to endorse. As well as focusing on the issue of what graduates might contribute, we should also focus on our contribution to our students. I am discussing the future of student support with the NUS and I am clear that it should form part of the green paper. We continue to work to simplify our current student support system where we can, but we also aim to be more aspirational. In whatever we do we need to ensure that we protect access to university for those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds. We are making some progress, but not nearly as much as we should. We should start to recognise that the real solutions for widening access do not lie simply at the entrance to the university campus; they lie  increasingly at the door of the nursery school and the gates of the secondary school. In our consideration of access, we must also recognise the essential contribution that our colleges make. I acknowledge the point that Elizabeth Smith made. It is too easy to forget that 20 per cent of our higher education students attend colleges. Do we properly recognise the colleges' role in what I would call the more vocationally oriented, skills-based element of higher education? It is essential that we have a map of who offers what provision across the country. There is not such a map, but we need one, and I encourage our universities to play their part in making one. Alongside that map of provision, we should consider developing a map of institutions and the links between them. That will be essential in considering what the respective roles of the Government, the Scottish funding council and the institutions should be. There is an issue about the bureaucracy of funding colleges and universities and whether the Scottish funding council needs to change that and develop. Internationally acclaimed research is really important to us. We must ensure that we take that forward and that businesses at home reap commercial benefit from what is done in Scotland's universities. The knowledge base must support the growth of the country's economy, so another challenge is to increase the rate of knowledge exchange. There is more that needs to be looked at, such as how we can build on the success of our research pooling and the role and definition of impact in the new research excellence framework. Our Scottish solution must recognise not just success—we attract 10.8 per cent of UK research council funding despite having a population share of 8.4 per cent—but the challenge of a future in which there will be a reduction in UK science and research budgets. I thank those who are taking part in the debate and have been for many months. I have been hugely encouraged by the leadership and ownership that is being shown across the sector and by the amount of work and thought that is going into this. I conclude by making a further offer. There is a range of views and there are important contributions to be made. The Conservatives have set out some of their preferred approach and I hope that Labour and Liberal Democrat members—as well as the Greens and our independent member—will be similarly positive. Today, I formally invite all those in the chamber to submit their views. I welcome all ideas that I receive in writing and would be happy to meet to discuss these matters at any time. The subject merits mature political consideration, and  we must all work together to achieve the prize of a sustainable funding solution for Scotland's higher education sector. With that in mind, I move amendment S3M-7109.2, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "welcomes the firm consensus against any introduction of up-front fees in Scotland; notes the ongoing Independent Review of Higher Education and Student Finance in England and Wales; recognises that the Scottish Government will need to consider any potential impact on Scottish universities, and further recognises the Scottish Government's intention to publish a green paper on higher education to explore these issues further."

International comparisons are always useful. They help us to examine good practice elsewhere and to benchmark what we are endeavouring to do. For example, after 15 years' experience teachers in lower secondary education in Scotland have the eighth highest salaries out of 28—their salaries are higher than those in Australia, England, Finland and New Zealand. Teacher salary per hour of net contact teaching is slightly below the OECD average, but the ratio of salary to gross domestic product per capita is above the OECD average. Teachers are well rewarded in Scotland, but of course they are well qualified and they work  exceptionally hard. In the context of the difficulties that we have we should consider the issue constructively, rather than in the rather cack-handed way in which the leader of Glasgow City Council tried to consider it a couple of weeks ago on the front page of The Herald .

I have already answered that question—the Government introduced legislation specifically to tackle the activity to which the member refers. It establishes a presumption against the closure of rural schools by ensuring that a decision by a local authority to consult on a closure proposal is only one of last resort. The 2010 act has belt and braces. It means that the consultation process must be fully open and transparent and that there must be an educational justification for closure proposals; Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education is involved in that regard. There is a process that allows local communities to ask for the decision to be called in, should there be doubts about the consultative process. I well remember the campaign to which the member refers, as I was part of it. Regrettably, although a number of schools were kept open, my  wife's school was not, so I know what effect closures of rural schools have. We are trying to ensure that everyone is treated fairly and transparently. I accept that we are in a time of great financial difficulty, but rural schools are important to the fabric of Scotland and very important to local communities. We are working hard to ensure that they continue to be so.

I will give a number of pieces of advice. The first, which is directed to the people of Scotland generally, is never to vote Labour again because of the mess that it makes of the public finances. These are not Scottish National Party financial reductions—they are a result of the absolute carnage that was wreaked on the public finances by a Labour Government. That Government proposed more than two thirds of the cuts that are now coming through from south of the border. [ Interruption .] Facts are chiels that winna ding—the Labour Party does not like to hear the truth, but it will hear it from me. The reality is that two thirds of the proposals for financial restrictions that are coming from Westminster were proposed by Labour. The remaining third are coming courtesy of the Liberal Democrats, who have become convinced of the wisdom of Tory cutting. That has something to do with the fact that they got ministerial positions, too. Every local authority is facing incredibly difficult decisions. The Government is working hard with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual authorities to confront that situation. Authorities are receiving no help at all from Mr McNulty and his colleagues, who simply cannot accept the reality of the mess in which they and their party have landed Scotland. Over the next few months, the reality of that mess will become apparent and the blame will go where it deserves to go—to Mr McNulty and his colleagues. Ms Karen Whitefield is gesturing, but she is to blame, along with others. So, of course, are the Tories.

I tell Mr Tolson that the first rule of politics is, "When in a hole, stop digging." Mr Tavish Scott got himself into a considerable hole last week with a wholly nonsensical question. Siemens has been working for the past year with a range of partners to develop a wind-turbine technician modern apprenticeship. That programme recently commenced and is being run in collaboration with Carnegie College; 16 apprentice places are being provided in the first year, 12 of which are held by employees of Siemens. Earlier this year, a funding gap emerged when the college revealed that it did not have sufficient funded places left for this year. Scottish National Party-controlled Fife Council stepped in to fill that gap so that the first year of the programme could go ahead. Lorraine Hubbard of Siemens wrote to Jim Brown of energy and utility skills, who was on a part-time secondment to the Scottish Government at the time, in his capacity as chair of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland skills sub-group. She copied that correspondence to Catherine Stihler, John Park and Jim Tolson. On the back of her correspondence, a meeting was held between Hugh McAloon, the Government's deputy director of skills, and Ms Hubbard. After that meeting, Ms Hubbard indicated that she was content with the approach that was being taken, and she has reiterated that she was happy with the outcome of the meeting. In other words, constructive discussion has taken place in order to progress the issue. We have done something; we have not simply misrepresented and moaned, which is the Liberal Democrat position.

Absolutely. We work very closely with private industry, Skills Development Scotland and many others to ensure that the maximum help is given in such circumstances. That is the hallmark of this Government—to take constructive action and to keep things moving. It will remain our hallmark not just for the rest of our first term, but as we go into our second in government.

I thank Mr Park for that helpful question. It is absolutely true that although we have prioritised younger people, we must consider people who are in work and older people. When I was in the Western Isles recently, representations were made to me about the particular needs that exist there with regard to modern apprenticeships for older workers. We are working on that with the help of European money. We will continue to do so, and I will be happy to continue to engage with Mr Park on that issue.

There is statutory provision regarding free school transport. In Scotland, authorities have a duty under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 to "make such arrangements as they consider necessary" for the transport between home and school of pupils residing and attending school in their area. In considering those arrangements, authorities are required to "have regard to the safety of such pupils." Therefore, safety is always a paramount consideration. There is a statutory minimum distance—it is interesting to note that Dumfries and Galloway Council is one of the councils that observes the statutory minimum—of a 2-mile journey for under-eights and, thereafter, a 3-mile journey. However, that does not take precedence over safety. There must be a safety audit of the route to ensure that it is safe. The member will know that there is often considerable dispute about such safety audits. On a number of occasions, I have encouraged parents and local authorities to negotiate on the issue of how accurate the safety audits should be. Nevertheless, there is a statutory duty to be mindful of safety and a statutory minimum distance. As free-standing and legally responsible bodies, local authorities must reconcile those to ensure that they are doing their best.

I am familiar with the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre's work. Indeed, the member and I visited the centre this week, so I have recent knowledge of it. I am impressed by the centre's work with Historic Scotland and a wide range of clients on carbon dating, on some aspects of which it leads the world. The centre's mass spectrometer is one of only two in the UK. That demonstrates that the centre's work is cutting edge. Most impressive of all is the fact that universities are increasingly ensuring that it is central to their plans and operates on their behalf. That shows a desire to share activity and cost and to achieve excellence. Those two aims can go together. That is an encouraging indication for the whole education sector and for the whole of Scotland.

We have provided £115,000 to enable 91 students from colleges and universities to spend three weeks in China.

I certainly will. We are building further educational links through the saltire scholarships for China, the higher education research partnership for PhD studies and the China scholarships for excellence. As my friend the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth knows, we are also building successful business collaborations. The relationship is good, strong and growing.

As I said, directors had committed to repay the loan and there was nothing to suggest at that time that the company would be unable to do so. The Scottish Government made senior EventScotland officials aware of the loan—that was appropriate, and it was done. As I said earlier, there was a clear statutory authority for the provision of financial assistance. No special arrangements, directions or dispensations were put in place. I remind the Parliament that the Auditor General stated that the Government's decision to find a way to assist the short-term cash flow of the company such that the event could go ahead was "not unreasonable". Let me spell out how  reasonable it actually was. A failure to provide the support could and probably would have jeopardised the event and the £10.4 million that it brought to the Scottish economy. It would have cost jobs not just in The Gathering 2009 Ltd but across the tourism sector. The entire Parliament should bear that point in mind. It was deeply disappointing that the private company that was delivering the event encountered serious financial difficulties after the event and that attempts to secure the future of the gathering failed. We welcome the Auditor General's report on what was a complex set of issues and we will consider the findings and recommendations carefully. We accept that lessons need to be learned. However, the Scottish Government strongly defends its decision to intervene both before and after the event took place. We will not apologise for supporting an event that generated revenue of £10.4 million for Scotland and £8.8 million for Edinburgh. The loss of that income would have been a serious blow to Scotland's tourism industry and to Scotland's reputation around the world. It would have cost jobs, perhaps many jobs, and damaged much of the success that we achieved later in the year. I remind the chamber once more of what the Auditor General told the Public Audit Committee on 23 June. He said: "it is also important to place on record that clearly time was not on anyone's side by the summer of last year, because the event was committed to and was about to proceed. The Scottish Government ... would have taken the not unreasonable view that in order to allow the event to proceed it should assist the short term cash-flow problems of the company that was delivering the event."— [ Official Report , Public Audit Committee , 23 June 2010; c 1820.]  I conclude with a further quote from the Auditor General's evidence. He said: "Given the advanced stage that the project had reached, with many tickets having been sold and many commitments having been made by providers of goods and services, it is understandable that the Scottish Government should have done as much as it could to ensure that the company got to the event."—[ Official Report , Public Audit Committee , 23 June 2010; c 1827.] Doing as much as we could is exactly what we had to do. The Scottish Government did all that it could to ensure that the benefits of the event to Scotland and Edinburgh were delivered. That was our job. That was my job. It was done with the best of motives and to the best of our abilities. Had it not been done, the consequences would have been far worse.

A range of interests are involved, including the interests of the event, homecoming and the entire Scottish tourism sector. I have made it entirely clear that our sympathy lies with anybody who has suffered in these circumstances, but I have also made it clear to members—I am sorry that Mr Macdonald did not listen to this—that the situation would have been far worse had we not acted in the way that we did. There would have been very substantial  damage not just to the credibility of the gathering and its ability to take place but to the entire homecoming event and the entire tourism sector, which found homecoming the most valuable thing that it could have had in the year of the Labour-created credit crunch. In all those circumstances, Lewis Macdonald and the entire Parliament need to look at what would have been the effect if we had not acted. We often hear from Labour criticisms ex post facto. The reality is that this Government is facing up to its responsibilities again and again and ensuring that circumstances in Scotland are such that people can succeed. I will make a final point about money. The company had already provided its figures to a number of agencies and others and had received funding from them. My discussion with it in April 2009 was about a short-term cash-flow issue, which was covered by receipts that it guaranteed. The Government and I acted not only properly but out of necessity in those circumstances.

I am familiar with the old trick of endeavouring to raise fresh questions after a range of questions have been asked. Let me be clear: I said, and I repeat, that officials met the directors of the company for detailed discussions about the WorldPay situation and the company's cash-flow position. At no moment could it be said  that the company was anything other than a private company operating in the private environment. The company received—[ Interruption .] If I may be allowed to finish. It received public funding for specific tasks. That is why funding was granted by other agencies, and I have made it clear that that is what happened as far as the Scottish Government was concerned. The company was not being run by the Scottish Government; it was receiving public funding for specific tasks.

If members do not understand that, their knowledge and experience of government is incredibly limited—as we know it to be, and it will remain that way if they continue to make such misapprehensions. As far as WorldPay was concerned, we were sure that the situation was as it had been presented to us, and a short-term loan was given. That was entirely proper in the circumstances. I repeat: officials met the directors of the company for detailed discussions about the WorldPay situation and the company's cash-flow position. That was the basis on which the loan was granted.

The purpose of the short-term loan was quite clear. I have addressed many of the points that the Auditor General raised, and I have made it clear that there are lessons to learn from the project. However, if that loan had not been given, the event would not have taken place, as a result of which there would have been considerably more damage. None of the questions that I have yet been asked has addressed that point. Opposition members are very good with 20:20 hindsight, but it is fortunate for the Scottish people that they are not running the country, because the country cannot be run in hindsight.

That is substantially true. Very little was done, right across Government. All of us who came into Government that year discovered that there had been many fine words but very little detailed planning. I could quote curriculum for excellence, for example, but I will not do so. We had to get on with the situation, however, and we refocused this excellent project on real, achievable goals. The homecoming turned out to be an immensely successful contribution to Scottish tourism last year, as masterminded by my friend Mr Mather. It was obvious at homecoming events, again and again, that the tourism sector viewed them as essential. If we had followed the course of action that members from around the chamber have, with hindsight, urged on me, that would not have been true.

The Scottish Government knew in the autumn that the company could not continue. The company was not trading insolvently when it went through this process. I find Sarah Boyack's position absolutely extraordinary, because the jobs that would have been lost are in her constituency. She was at the gathering and saw it take place. Even though she knows that if it had not taken place, the result would have been catastrophic not just for the event but for the homecoming, she continues to argue the point. It is quite clear that at the time of the discussions about the short-term loan, the gathering was a work in progress, but it was in progress. All the partners were involved in it and the independent company that was delivering it, which had been contracted to do certain things, was doing those things. The date on which I or anyone else discovered that the company could not fulfil its promises was in early September. That was made clear in the Auditor General's report, and I am happy to confirm it.

I have made it absolutely clear that we made senior officials in EventScotland aware of the loan. That was appropriate and that was done. The wider question is how much more widely that information should have been made known. It is obvious that at the time, given the commercial nature of the  event, it was quite proper to share the information with EventScotland but not to share it more widely. It would not have been helpful to share it more widely. I am surprised that Murdo Fraser pushes the point so hard. What would have happened if the event had been jeopardised at that stage? He must answer that. Jobs would have been lost, the homecoming would have been damaged and there would have been collateral damage in the tourism sector in the north, south, east and west of the country. I have still not heard a single member address that issue.

It is quite clear that Jeremy Purvis knows nothing of the circumstances in which Government operates—[ Interruption .]—nor do the Labour members who just laughed. It would be quite impossible for such a loan to be made unless there was statutory authority for doing so. Advice was given on the matter. On the basis of that advice, I regarded the provision of a loan as the best possible option, and I do not back away from that. There was no other way. To deal with the ridiculous phrase "secret loan", which I am glad has now been dropped, there is no way that loans can be made in secret from Government; it is complete nonsense. The reality is that it was done in a proper way, by statute and completely legally.  Jeremy Purvis began his question with another piece of nonsense. He said that the Government would have provided a loan "regardless of the trading conditions of the company", which is complete nonsense. The company was a work in progress; work was being done. There were agencies working with it that were contracted to do things for the Government and for others. In those circumstances, there was every indication that the gathering would be delivered. The gathering, of course, was delivered. Members on every side of the chamber attended it and commented on how successful it was and how well it had gone. The reality is that I knew of the difficulties, as others did, only in early September 2009.

I think it does. I entirely agree, and I will go further; I have always found Rob Gibson to be very helpful. The convener of the Public Audit Committee made a very dismissive remark in his interrogation on the gathering about tying tartan round things, which was an unfortunate way to look at it. I am at ease with my own culture, as I hope every member in the chamber would be. I do not fully understand the self-loathing that comes across in some of the statements.

There was no secret loan. The loan was made in the appropriate way by statutory authority and communicated in the way that it should have been. There was commercial confidentiality involved in the work of a private  company; I am sorry that the member does not understand that, but her track record—and that of her party—on understanding any of this is severely defective.

The homecoming was an undoubted success, and I regret that there have been so many attempts to tarnish it by members in the chamber. I will quote—very briefly, Presiding Officer, because I know that you want me to be brief—two individuals. John Shevlin, the manager of the Macdonald Holyrood hotel, reported in January 2009 that all his 156 rooms had been booked for the period around the gathering by members of clan Donald from North America. He said "Although we expected there to be an increased interest because of Homecoming, we never thought there would be as much as this". There are members in the chamber who would not have wanted that hotel to have a single room booked because they are—in retrospect—against the decisions that were made. I find the second quote rather touching. Betsy Mitchell Shepherd, from California, said—[ Interruption .]

Yes, I can hear that Jeremy Purvis is getting overexcited; I advise him to calm down. He should hear this quote and reflect on it. Betsy Mitchell Shepherd from California, who attended the gathering said: "My ancestors came to the US from Dunoon in 1889 and I've always been truly proud that I am of Scottish descent ... The joy and excitement I felt ... filled my heart and soul with happiness." If only there was something like that in the chamber, rather than the grudging, curmudgeonly  attitude towards the gathering and the homecoming. [ Applause .]

I will at no stage regret the fact that any school in Scotland is excellent. However, the member raises an important issue. From time to time, there is pressure on all schools. Building in the environment and catchment area of a school can increase that pressure. Negotiation and collaboration are required between all the agencies involved. I will keep a careful eye on the situation.

I am aware of a range of good practice. I find the figure that the member quoted  somewhat questionable. Language skills are, of course, the underpinning skills that children need to move on. I am addressing the issue of literacy and numeracy, including the assessment of language skills, baseline assessment, and the way in which we address learning difficulties, particularly reading difficulties. All of those are rolled into two things—the approach that we take to the curriculum for excellence and, of course, the priority that we give to literacy and numeracy. I pay tribute to the work of the literacy commission in that regard, because literacy is a lifelong issue. If we can tackle in the earliest years issues of literacy and possible difficulties with acquiring language and reading skills, that will pay huge dividends in future years. I hope that the member will watch this space, because a great deal of work and thinking are going on regarding the matter.

I certainly believe that early intervention is the key to a great deal of what we are trying to achieve collectively as a Parliament and as a nation. We had a successful event yesterday called the children's summit in which we brought together those who are involved in early intervention and early years provision to ensure that we keep our focus on those areas so that we can continue to improve the life chances of every child in Scotland. The good point that the member makes will be borne in mind during that process.

Fife Council has advised the Scottish Government that it is well aware of its responsibilities for playground supervision. I understand that, although the dedicated post of playground supervisor is being removed from the council's establishment, playground supervision will not cease and, indeed, cannot cease under regulations. All headteachers are reviewing arrangements for deploying support staff in their schools. In that, as in all matters, they are expected to deploy resources with health and safety as the main priority. Local authorities have a statutory duty of reasonable care for the safety of pupils who are under their charge. Local authorities must ensure that, in primary schools with a roll of 50 or more and in special needs schools, at least one adult supervises pupils when they are in the playground at break time. I repeat that Fife Council is aware of its statutory duty and is expected to make appropriate alternative arrangements to ensure pupil safety in the playground.

There is no growing casualisation of the teaching workforce. Such a phrase was first used and continues to be used by Labour and it is inaccurate. Of post-probation teachers, 86.5 per cent—an estimated 2,600—have found employment as a teacher in Scotland. That is an increase from 72.5 per cent in October 2009. Job opportunities for teachers occur throughout the year. They did so this year and last year and they have always occurred in that way. The teacher vacancy survey shows that 354 vacancies were advertised on 19 February and the COSLA jobs portal shows that 280 teaching posts were being advertised on 1 June. We are working hard to drive down teacher unemployment figures. Elements of the issue have always been difficult to deal with but, however serious the financial situation becomes, we will continue to work on teacher employment as a priority. I hope that good will across the chamber will support that activity.

I am inured to people earning more than I do; I am sure that Lord Foulkes is inured to people earning even more than a member of the House of Lords does. However, he makes a crucial point, although we should not exaggerate the issue. Universities, in particular, are autonomous institutions. In some cases, the majority of their funding does not come from the taxpayer, although in others it does. The key issue is transparency. I agree with Lord Foulkes that transparency is an absolute and should not be gainsaid by any of the universities' actions. At this time, when there is very substantial pressure on public funds, all parts of the public sector—including those that are not totally within the public sector—need to be aware that they are being watched and that the Scottish public is judging how they spend their funds. As a Government minister, I am very aware of that. I am sure that people in other parts of the sector are aware of it and hope that all will live by that rule.

I am aware of the sub-committee's good work. I was unable, alas, to meet the sub-committee when I was last scheduled to do so because of a most regrettable clash of parliamentary business. I think that an important contribution is being made by the individuals involved, whom I am encouraging to talk to Learning and Teaching Scotland and to a range of other providers. I personally will have conversations with one or two of those involved shortly. I believe that everyone should work together to make this happen. Scots has an important place in the curriculum and should be taken forward as one of the issues that broadens and deepens Scottish education.

This has been a somewhat dismal debate. That is what I expected, so I am not disappointed. I want to set out at the beginning of my response that the truth of Scottish education is that, as we speak in this political bubble today, hundreds of thousands of good pupils are being taught by tens of thousands of good teachers in thousands of good schools. That is the reality in Scotland. It is a reality that I support, and it is one that the Parliament should support. The judgment on the Parliament is when it fails to do that and, indeed, when we have education debates that run entirely contrary to the principles of education. Every teacher whom I know wants to ensure that there is positive reinforcement so that those who are allegedly not doing well will do better. Instead, we have just had negativity. Andrew Welsh got it absolutely right—I congratulate him on his speech—when he called the Labour speeches a rehearsal for the next election. That is exactly what they were. As a former critic, let me say exactly what notices I would give them. To start with, the casting was deeply unconvincing. The lead was very weak indeed and the supporting performances were often over the top. The script was badly written. I do not think that anybody will book the performance for a four-year run. However, I have two exceptions to talk about—two impressive performances that were potential Oscar winners. I want to be serious about them. I find it quite extraordinary that I am saying it, but Rhona Brankin's speech was important and searching in terms of what we need to talk about in the chamber, because she addressed real issues of literacy. The action plan will come forward and it will be a national action plan. It will not come forward in June, because I have asked the management board to intensify work with officials and others, including the literacy commission, for example to look at—[ Interruption .] It is unfortunate that any member, including Richard Simpson, should attempt to make jokes about this important issue. He is doing so from a sedentary position, which is most unfortunate. The role of learning difficulties needs to be taken into account in the action plan. I agree  entirely that benchmarking is important, and we need to have a real handle on the scale of the problem. Statistics on adults will be published in July. We need to see the issue as wider than just an issue for children. Hugh O'Donnell's point on the technological connections is correct, and there is a lot of discussion about that. We need the national plan, and we will have it. I am grateful to Rhona Brankin for raising it. I also thank Elaine Murray for her speech. There are many good schools, including in Dumfries and Galloway, in which I maintain a strong interest. I look forward to seeing her there yet again. We work hard on a range of issues of science in schools. Professor Anne Glover, the Government's chief scientific adviser, has established a science and engineering education advisory group, which I have been involved with, and which is looking at teacher confidence in science, examples of good teaching, links to the CFE, and indeed the idea of enthusiasm for science. I will ask Anne Glover to engage with Elaine Murray on those issues, because I thought that she made a positive contribution on them. The rest of the Labour contributions were like the present world cup football games. They were full of annoying and distracting noise. Labour members really are the vuvuzelas of Scottish politics. They engage the lungs and not the brain. I want to go through a list of points that were raised, but let me start with two points. Claire Baker, Margaret Smith, Ken Macintosh, Karen Whitefield, Mike Rumbles, Cathie Craigie, Rhona Brankin, Elaine Murray, Hugh O'Donnell and, I anticipate, Des McNulty all demand more public expenditure. Where are they? What have they been looking at in the past few months? The reality of the situation means that that will not happen. The more they argue in the chamber for more public expenditure, the more foolish they will seem. I want to be entirely clear about the Government's—

No. I really must make progress. I will take the member in a moment. The Government has delivered, we are delivering, and we will go on delivering real educational progress in Scotland.

No. I want to finish this point. We have delivered record funding even as Labour's squeeze took hold. We have delivered the smallest ever class sizes in Scotland, and when difficulties arose in that policy, we negotiated. We did not stamp our feet as Labour seemed to want us to do. We have delivered substantial progress on PE. More children are  having free school meals, and I am absolutely not ashamed of that. More schools have been built or refurbished, and we have prevented further damage to the public finances by stopping the ridiculously expensive and ruinous PPP. [ Interruption .] I will come to Mr Rumbles in a moment; I hope that he is waiting for that. There has been successful support for the curriculum for excellence, despite Labour's attempt yet again to undermine it. We have more CPD and a review of teacher education. I could go through that list again and again. I am very proud of the fact that this Government has delivered and will go on delivering in universities and schools. When the going gets tough as a result of Labour's catastrophic management south of the border, which is affecting us all, we will continue to work. I am sorry that Mr Macintosh and Karen Whitefield have such a complete misunderstanding of the secondary curriculum.

I do not want to take an intervention from Mr Macintosh; I want to tell him where he got it wrong in his opening remarks. The qualifications will be built on prior learning, there will be no artificial split between S1 and S3 and S4 and S6, and there is for the first time a coherent curriculum. As Mr Macintosh knows, it is not the Government's duty to be centrally prescriptive on these matters. Karen Whitefield used the phrase "jobs vacuum". What an extraordinary position to take. Of course teacher unemployment is a problem in Scotland, but it is significantly lower than elsewhere in the UK. The figure is 5.3 per cent in Scotland; 7.4 per cent in England; 8 per cent in Wales; and 11.8 per cent in Northern Ireland. Moreover, 86.5 per cent of post-probation teachers have found employment as a teacher in Scotland, while less than 1 per cent of post-probationers have left the teaching profession and have no intention of seeking teaching employment in future. This Government has taken and continues to take action, and I think that in these matters there should be a realistic recognition of facts rather than an indulgence in fantasy. On school buildings—

I have a great deal to cover and I am almost running out of time.

I, too, regret that I am running out of time. I would be happy to go on getting rid of  the myths that we have been listening to all morning. With regard to the myths that we heard from Mr Rumbles, funding for Mearns academy and Ellon academy will commence in 2012-13. That is not what he said. Given the standard procurement, design development and consultation timescales, not to mention issues related to identifying appropriate sites, it is very unlikely that the council—even if it wants to—will be in a position to commence either project earlier. I am pleased to say that on 2 June 2010 the provost of Aberdeenshire, Councillor Bill Howatson—I am sure that Mr Rumbles will want to talk to him, as he is a Liberal Democrat ward member in Mearns—said: "Today's announcement will be welcome news for the communities served by Mearns Academy ... Clearly a lot of work has been undertaken to progress us to this stage and I am grateful that Aberdeenshire's needs have been recognised in this round of funding."

I hope that Mr Rumbles is about to withdraw his criticism.

The date of 2012-13 is what has been confirmed and recognised. Aberdeenshire is the only council in Scotland—

The member should listen to this. Aberdeenshire is the only council in Scotland to have been awarded funding for two secondary schools. Indeed, the funding needs for all the schools mentioned in today's Press and Journal article have been widely known since 2005. I regard Mr Rumbles's position as quite extraordinary, particularly given the fact that he supported PPP projects whose cost in 2008-09 represented more than 4 per cent of Aberdeenshire's gross revenue expenditure on education. Unfortunately, he has supported proposals that are impoverishing the council that he is talking about—

—and now he is blaming somebody else. As the member says, that is indeed shameful. Claire Baker's point that Labour's school-building momentum has been lost is also the opposite of the truth. That momentum is what is leading to the millstone that, by 2020, will  consume 10 per cent of education budgets. She needs to think about that very carefully indeed. The curriculum for excellence is vital and there is huge support for it. It is moving ahead in a constructive and positive way. Where problems exist, we are addressing them; I am working with every school and teacher in Scotland who has come to me with problems and I would welcome the involvement of all parties in the chamber in that regard. Karen Whitefield is right: where there have been genuine concerns, I have addressed them. Indeed, I will go on addressing them. However, we have to address genuine concerns and listen to what people outside this bubble are saying. There are many such quotations that I could use. Last night, at a parents' event at Trinity academy here in Edinburgh, the headteacher, Alec Morris, said, "Curriculum for excellence? My reaction is: bring it on." That shows the Scottish education system's enthusiasm for what is happening, and the people who are involved in it would not recognise the system that many members have described this morning. That is sad but, as is so often the case, the reality is outside this chamber.

We heard not a single serious point about education from Ken Macintosh. I want to describe what is happening and what still needs to happen in Scottish education and why that is a serious matter. It should be treated seriously, not in the way that Ken Macintosh and his colleagues are treating it. I begin by focusing on the curriculum for excellence, which should be at the heart of the  debate. A lot of criticism of the curriculum for excellence is being heard. I always listen and respond to criticism, but I believe that there is a strong relationship between the Scottish Government, teachers' organisations and individual teachers. I foster that relationship through constant discussions and constant listening. For example, at a meeting with the EIS that took place very recently, it convinced me that additional time was needed for curriculum for excellence implementation. I listened and announced last week an additional in-service day in 2010. In my regular discussions with the teachers' unions and others, I continue to address details and difficulties.

I am not taking any interventions from Mr Macintosh. I want to describe what is happening in Scottish education.

I emphasise to members how serious the matter is. The picture of teachers who are not confident and cannot decide how to teach until they receive central Government edicts that some members are trying to paint is a travesty. The picture that Mr Macintosh has presented is a travesty.

No, I will not. I am sorry, but I must address the topic with real seriousness. The principal Opposition party has misrepresented what is happening in Scotland's schools, and it is my duty as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning not to allow that misrepresentation to go forward. This week, I met Frank Lennon, who is headteacher at St Modan's high school. He was quoted yesterday in The Herald , and I quoted him yesterday at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. He is clear, as the vast majority of teachers are, that the curriculum for excellence "provides the best opportunity in a generation for teachers to be freed up to use their creative powers and passion for learning to motivate and inspire young people". At the same meeting in Stirling, I met parents who urged me not to listen to any requirement for further delay. That call has been supported by the national parent forum, which has called on the management board to maintain momentum towards implementation. It has said that it  believes—teachers believe this, too—that the curriculum for excellence offers better opportunities for Scotland's learners. It would be deeply irresponsible to listen to the calls from Ken Macintosh and Labour, which would disrupt the curriculum for excellence and our schools. The wreckers of Scottish education are on the Labour benches—Labour members wish to disrupt the curriculum for excellence and our schools for party-political advantage. Let every parent in Scotland hear that message clearly. Concerns about our education system have been acknowledged since the Scottish Parliament was established in 1999. By 2002, those concerns had led to two major initiatives. I was fortunate to be there at the beginning, as a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, which held an inquiry into the purposes of Scottish education. I commend those members of the previous Scottish Government who had much more serious intent in relation to education than any member on the current Opposition front bench has and who brought forward the national debate on education. Those two initiatives concluded that the Scottish education system was overassessed, too centralised and insufficiently deep, that all the aspects of learning were not joined up and that the system was not moving forward in relation to international comparisons or domestic assessment. There was broad agreement that what Scotland needed was a balanced, modern curriculum that placed excellence at its core. The curriculum for excellence was, and is, the answer to that list of problems. There was, and is, consensus that it is the right way forward, which is why one of my first actions as cabinet secretary was to emphasise my commitment to it. The curriculum for excellence will, for the first time, provide our education system with a coherent route from nursery through to a range of positive, sustained destinations. The curriculum for excellence tackles the challenges of our current system. The current S1 and S2 experience can squeeze out time for what we know helps children to learn and develop. The curriculum for excellence makes connections across the curriculum, making learning deeper and richer. This country began the journey towards the curriculum for excellence with our schools in 2004. However, between 2004 and 2007, not enough was done to take it forward. Since then, when I have visited schools, I have been hugely impressed to hear the enthusiasm for the changes that the curriculum for excellence has already brought about and for how much more teachers plan to achieve. Of course, in any society, there is always resistance to curricular change—that is the history of education. Delays have characterised every educational reform in every country. The  leading educationist Keir Bloomer told me recently that although standard grades were first mooted in the late 1960s, by the time of their introduction, they were in place for the children of the children for whom they were first designed. Resistance to change is understandable, but it is not an option. Equally, we will not take risks with our children's future. The curriculum for excellence management board has assured me—unanimously—that the existing programme plan remains realistic and achievable. I have accepted the board's advice with regard to the timetable for the introduction of the new national qualifications. I remain open—very open—to what the unions and others are telling me about the need for more detail. That detail is being brought forward. I remain open to any member in the chamber who tells me that extra detail is needed. I remain open to practical suggestions—I am not open to the empty rhetoric that we heard from Ken Macintosh. I will continue to monitor implementation closely. Of course, over the entire period that I have been in my post I have listened to concerns. I was the one who asked for the survey to be undertaken. It did not produce the results that Ken Macintosh gave; at least, it did not produce the results of a partial nature that he gave. Where there were messages from the survey—and I listened to them—I responded to them. That is why, before we even published the results of the survey, I brought in what I call the 10-point plan. [ Interruption .] A member on the Labour benches who used to be an education minister is laughing. I can only think that she spent her entire time in office laughing. That is why some of the difficulties exist in the curriculum for excellence today. We are giving targeted support to every school that needs additional help. Between August and December, schools will receive the support that they need as the curriculum for excellence moves into secondary. Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education is spearheading that work in partnership with every local authority and others. Additional practical materials have been published in summarised versions. Excellence groups are bringing subject teachers together with non-teaching experts. All of that is proceeding right now. There will be five regional events that will assist headteachers to share experience. Additional materials for pupils and parents are being produced. For anyone to call communication with parents "desperate" is desperate in itself. I have written to every primary 7 parent, as I should and as my duty demanded. The national parent forum is providing recommendations about what other materials are needed. Another aspect of the 10-point plan is to simplify the means by which we will formally recognise literacy and numeracy. I have acknowledged the  importance of literacy and numeracy as first-order questions. I want to ensure that the curriculum for excellence makes a real difference. Again, it was my duty to ensure that the existing proposals are the right ones for the circumstances. That is precisely what I did. The framework for assessment sets out what we want children and young people to achieve. A strong package of support has been put in place, including £3 million of new money—even at a time when Labour has laid waste to the public finances—and we are building the national assessment resource. I have convened a wide-ranging group of organisations with different perspectives on learning, the members of which are advising me on the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. The group met for the first time on 2 June and will meet again in September. [ Interruption .]

Support is being provided. Teachers who are able to model confidence, motivation and a professional ethos to learners are being encouraged. Teachers are being equipped with new knowledge, understanding and skills. I meet teachers every day who give the lie to the type of teacher whom Ken Macintosh presents. I meet teachers who are enthusiastic about working collegiately to share and improve their practice and that of their colleagues. I meet every day inspired leaders in education and inspired leaders in schools—

I will finish my point, then I will take Mr O'Donnell's intervention. [ Interruption .] I am willing to take constructive interventions. Those inspired leaders are listening to what Ken Macintosh, for example, is telling them and are saying to themselves, "Thank goodness he is not in the education ministry. Thank goodness he never will be."

Indeed, and I deeply regret the situation. The overexpansion of teacher numbers under the previous Administration created the problem. I am endeavouring to tackle the issue in two ways: first, I am always looking to encourage local authorities to employ more teachers if they can, given the circumstances; and, secondly, I have reduced the number of teacher training places. In time, that will have an effect.  That is a practical response to a situation that I am concerned about and think about every single day. I regret that we are there; I want to try to make a difference.

No. I have a point to finish. My time is almost up. I want to make a point about school buildings. Others will talk about the subject. Indeed, Mike Rumbles has already spoken about the circumstances in his area to The Press and Journal . I hope that, when we come his speech, he gets his facts right, because he did not got them right in the P and J. We have continued to build schools and to take children out of unacceptable circumstances. However, we will not mortgage the future. The reality in Scottish education budgets is that so many of the problems and pressures have come about because of the unsustainable nature of private finance initiative costs. The foolishness of the previous Administration in allowing that to happen—[ Interruption .]

—is now being paid for in teaching jobs.

The reality is that there is a direct link between encouraging PPP and PFI—encouraging unsustainable expenditure—and meeting day-to-day expenditure on teachers and other matters. The responsibility lies firmly with the previous Administration and its foolishness—if only its members had the honesty to admit it. In all that we have done and achieved, there is a real test. Labour says that it wants 2,000 more teachers at a cost of £80 million per annum and that it wants to bring back PPP. Of course, there is no money for PPP in the private sector, as we see south of the border, but Ken Macintosh can apparently magic it up. But will he build more schools? The reality is that neither of those things will happen. That is empty rhetoric from Labour. What a tragedy to apply it to the future of Scotland's children. I move the amendment S3M-6580.3, to leave out from "or even" to end and insert: "employment; further notes the unanimous recommendation of the Curriculum for Excellence Management Board, including the representatives of the major teaching unions, that implementation in secondary schools should begin in August 2010; notes the announcement of a 10-point plan to support implementation  including an additional £3 million, tailored help for secondary schools that need it, increased training for teachers and improved practical materials; recognises that the Curriculum for Excellence embodies the cross-party recommendations of the 2002 report by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee into the purposes of education, and calls on the Scottish Government to listen to teachers' and parents' concerns over the new curriculum and reach an early agreement with local authorities and teachers organisations that guarantees the necessary preparation time and resources for successful implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence."

Do not worry, I will. [ Interruption .]

I am closely engaged in the issue. I entirely accept Sarah Boyack's concern; nobody wants newly qualified teachers to be unable to find full-time, permanent employment. A strong discussion is going on to see how we can help at every single part of an individual's professional progression through training into education. However, the sharp point is that local authorities are having to make differences to their expenditure and there are problems in employment. With the best will in the world, let me ask a question that was posed by Hugh Reilly in his column in The Scotsman yesterday. Of course, it  is a rhetorical question. I recognise that question time is for others to ask questions and not for me to do so, but this rhetorical question is worth posing. He asked whether it is true that the Labour Party would "immediately order the hiring of thousands of teachers" if it came into government. Does it recognise the difficulty of doing so? Will it work with everybody to assist in addressing the difficulty rather than trade on it politically? By doing that, the Labour Party is attacking the very people it claims to be helping.

David McLetchie and I, having benefited from the same university education, have one similarity in our approach to the debate: we both view it as important for myth busting. Unfortunately, however, the myths that I want to bust are much more destructive to higher education than the ones that Mr McLetchie wanted to trumpet. I have no doubt that access to universities increased during the period in which the Tories were in power. There are many reasons for that, some of which may even have been to do with the Tories. We have heard some very dangerous myths this afternoon from members on the Labour side of the chamber, particularly in what I can only describe as three very dismal speeches from front-bench members. Those myths deserve to be destroyed. Every Labour speaker has mentioned the need for consensus, which echoes my own desire. However, consensus must be based on facts, and I want to give the facts about a number of things that front-bench Labour members raised, because they need to be corrected. The first is the delusion about resources and funding. The Scottish Government's budget has been cut by £500 million, and further cuts are coming. We must all face that problem.  I was trying to think of a comparison to illustrate the Labour approach—this morning at First Minister's questions, this afternoon and no doubt in the health debate earlier—to the reality of the situation in which we find ourselves. The only comparison I could think of was that, astonishingly, Labour now resembles a group of arsonists who, having laid waste to the Scottish budget and the finances of this entire island, now run about complaining about the heat, the smoke and the sound of fire engines. They are the people who are to blame, and nothing will allow us to avoid that. [ Interruption .]

No, I will not take an intervention—I have listened to Mr Macintosh quite enough this afternoon. I want to tell the truth, which differs from some of the things that I have heard from a range of Labour members during the debate. The second thing that needs to be corrected is the extraordinary delusion of front-bench Labour members with regard to devolution. They have spent most of the afternoon attacking the Liberal Democrats for their inconsistencies north and south of the border. Well, there is an answer to that—it is independence, and I dearly wish that members in the chamber would wake up to it. Even if that were to strain my new-found relationship with the Liberals this afternoon to breaking point, I have to say that for the Labour Party, of any party in the chamber, to accuse others of inconsistency in their stance north and south of the border beggars belief. I come to some of the financial facts. I was astonished to hear Claire Baker say that the Government had short-changed universities. The figures, which I have in front of me, indicate that universities are receiving more this year than they have ever received. The figures indicate that even in the year in which this Government came into office, we continued to honour the commitment that the previous Administration had made. If we short-changed universities in 2007-08, it was because that was what Labour had planned to do in its budget.

I will not take an intervention. We have not short-changed universities. We have continued to increase the resources that are available to universities. On the comparison between north and south of the border, the extraordinary assertion was made that the previous Westminster Government had  somehow invested in universities while the Scottish Government had not. Let me just make it clear that half the universities in England have already had their budget allocations for 2010-11 reduced. In Wales, the cut was such that all the universities bar one received a reduced budget. That is not the case in Scotland. Among that whole range of myths, the final myth that we heard from Labour came from Ken Macintosh—always one to make speeches full of half-truths masquerading as facts—who actually made a point of using the word "crisis". That was an extraordinary thing to do. Incidentally, he also talked down the value of Scottish degrees, which I think was most regrettable. Let me just quote Alastair Sim, who is the director of Universities Scotland. When asked specifically whether a crisis was brewing in higher education, Alastair Sim said, "I don't really think there is." Universities Scotland says that there is no crisis, but Ken Macintosh says that there is a crisis. There are no prizes for guessing which of them I would choose to believe. In all those myths that we heard this afternoon, not a single good argument was given for supporting a review, but three very cogent reasons were put forward by Liz Smith. Although David McLetchie indicated that he hankered after the ability to be true to what he actually felt by just imposing student fees, Liz Smith was, as ever, much more reasoned. She gave three reasons for demanding a review: to be able to discuss the overall number of students in higher education; the need for an holistic approach that brings in business and industry; and her desire for an open debate about the nature of the question, which in other words means that, as the NUS briefing suggests, we should debate the possibilities of postgraduate contribution. Now, I am not taking a position on any of those things. I am not listening to the siren voices of Labour members, who just want me to say something so that they can contradict it. During this afternoon's debate, I was very much reminded of the remark from my old friend Andrew Wilson, who said in the first parliamentary session that, if the SNP had invented the light bulb, Labour would have called it a dangerous anti-candle device. That is precisely what we have heard this afternoon. We cannot say anything but it is contradicted. However, if Liz Smith would like an assurance from me that everything can be included in the discussion and that it will include a wide range of people, I can give her that assurance. Therefore, I hope that I have helped her to withdraw from the pact with the devil—

—which is how Labour described the relationship between the Tories and Liberals in respect of tuition fees south of the border. Let me help Liz Smith to withdraw from that terrible pact and to come and join the forces of progress and reason on higher education in Scotland. Quite contrary to what some have said, I have been absolutely clear about where the debate is going. First, it is vital that we find out what is in the Browne review. It is absolutely unreasonable to say that we in Scotland can ignore that. We need to know what is in the Browne review. However, in the process up to Browne, we need a good discussion about all the possibilities, right across the sector and beyond. That is what is happening. The next thing that we need to do—Margaret Smith called for this—is to assess the Browne review and to discuss it in this Parliament. We will then need to bring forward a range of possibilities—there is no one set of solutions to the problems that face Scottish universities—and to debate and discuss those in a rational and reasonable fashion. Having heard this afternoon's debate, I have some hope that some members of the Parliament are prepared to do that. My real problem this afternoon, if I may go back to where I started, has been the complete lack of reason and thought that we have heard from members on the Labour benches. It is quite impossible to argue that the solution to all the problems is simply to ignore the financial reality that we find ourselves in as a result of Labour's mismanagement of the economy. The right solution is to have the type of debate that I am already engaged in. If Labour members wish to engage in that constructively, I would warmly welcome them, despite their performance this afternoon. If they do not, they are the ones who will be devaluing Scottish higher education and undermining Scotland's great reputation.

However, I will not let that happen. I hope that the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives will also work with me on that. Karen Whitefield may, as ever, shout on, but the reality is that there have been no answers from Labour members this afternoon. The job of this Parliament is to find the answers. We are devoted to doing that. I hope that members will support not just my motion but the amendment in the name of Margaret Smith, because I think that the Liberal Democrat amendment just has it. That will tell the people of Scotland, and elsewhere, that we support our higher education sector, that we know that free access is vital and that we know that we  have a task ahead of us to produce a sustainable future for that important sector.

Indeed. David McLetchie and I had the benefit of such an education at the University of Edinburgh. Does he accept that one of the reasons why so many people went into higher education during the Thatcher years was that there were no jobs for them to go to?

Go on.

rose—

There are no figures attached to the discussions about the pressures that exist, except those that I have given. The overall pressures on the Scottish budget are in great part the result of the Labour Party's mismanagement of the economy. On saying that there should be no cuts, I echo what the First Minister said during First Minister's question time this morning. It is utterly unrealistic to take the stance that Karen Whitefield is taking across every part of the public sector, and I am afraid that the people of Scotland will not believe it.

It is unlike me to pay tribute to the Liberal Democrats, but what Margaret Smith has said is entirely fair. For the avoidance of doubt, I confirm that I will support her amendment, which gets to the nub of the matter and shows the Liberal Democrats' bona fides. I hope that others in the chamber will be persuaded by her speech.

I am familiar with the Labour litany of gloom, but I want to know how much Claire Baker would spend on universities this year and next, and where the money would come from with regard to other public spending priorities. She has an obligation to tell us that, in light of her speech so far.

Mr McLetchie is surprised that I do that, but that is a sensible thing for me to do in my role. It is important that we have that dialogue and then move from dialogue to action. That is the process in which we are engaged. The action will follow once we know what the Browne report has to tell us. I am making my way around Scotland and the sector, talking to, and listening to the views of, students, student leaders, university principals, unions and the entire stakeholder community. I have been accused by some members of holding secret discussions. There is a difference between secret and private. If members want to add their voices to those discussions, let them do so today. I am very open to listening to what members have to say, as long as there is a commitment to that discussion that leads to a collective solution, rather than a simple sloughing-off of the issue on to the great and the good. On 22 June, we will have a student summit at which I will be able to talk to Liam Burns and many of his colleagues about the progress that we have made and what is still to happen.

Those are two very different tasks. As somebody who supported the independent budget review group, Mr McLetchie will know that the task in Scotland—a small country with only 20 institutions—is for the institutions to bring solutions together to the table and to take ownership of those solutions together. That is far better than having some commission of the great and the good telling the higher education sector what to do. I have found enormous support for that approach in the universities. Any member who supports some sort of commission of the great and the good is going against what the  universities themselves believe will work for them, and I do not think that they should do that lightly. I encourage Mr McLetchie and others to raise their voices on their vision of higher education. I want to hear suggestions for future funding. I want open and constructive debate across all the political parties—even debate from a sedentary position, such as Mr McLetchie is still engaged in. I want a debate that recognises the educational, economic, cultural and social importance of Scottish universities and which produces ideas for a Scottish solution that is based on the Scottish core principles of access and excellence and will maintain the reputation and effectiveness of Scottish higher education in future generations. We can do that—it is within our grasp if we work together. There are two ground rules: first, we must respect one another's positions and try to work constructively, and, secondly, access to education must be based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay. I move, That the Parliament commends the National Union of Students' student fees pledge on the basis that any rise in fees in England and Wales would be detrimental to the interests of Scottish universities; congratulates those who have signed the pledge, and believes that student top-up fees should have no place in Scotland.

I have the strongest sympathy for the aspirations of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar in that regard. I have met the convener of its education committee and am happy to offer my support for the initiative. The other authorities are unlikely to take that route but I agree that, unless radical action is taken on Gaelic in Scotland, the prospects for the language look bleak. Anything undertaken in that direction will have my support and that of the Scottish Government.

There has never been, is not and will never be such a policy from any Scottish Government.

Mr Rumbles does not think that that is clear enough but it is absolutely and utterly wrong to say that any authority has ever been coerced into adopting Gaelic in mainstream primary education. I say to Mr Brocklebank, who has a good track record of supporting Gaelic, that to raise the issue simply sows doubt in the minds of people who have shown hostility to the language. There is no need to raise it. The reality is that, even in Comhairle nan Eilean Siar's plan, there is an absolute commitment to English-speaking parents; a capacity for English-medium education will  always be sustained. The promotion and advancement of Gaelic does not threaten any other language; sadly, other languages have threatened Gaelic almost to death.

I agree with the member that the detention of children is thoroughly wrong and should not have continued for as long as it did. The move by the coalition Government is welcome and long overdue. Other ministers of this Government and I regularly spoke to ministers of the previous Labour Government but, although there were often warm words, there was no action. It is action that counts. We need to ensure that the policy of detention of children is eliminated wherever we can have influence, and I will continue to pursue that line. I am sure that members who have more influence with the present UK Government than I have will take that to heart—to be fair to them, they, too, have pursued the issue vigorously.

I raised the issue in my previous post, and I can confirm to the member the thoroughly up-to-date piece of news that Fiona Hyslop, who is now the relevant minister, will raise it with her Westminster counterpart this very afternoon, refreshed and invigorated, I am sure, by the member's urging on the matter.

Of course, the local authority settlement is considerably better than previous settlements under previous Administrations, so I am sorry that the member remains dissatisfied. I can say in a positive tone that we keep the subject under close review. The subject of support for pupils with English as an additional language is discussed regularly with local authorities. Indeed, a further meeting between Scottish Government officials and Glasgow City Council, which will have the issue as one of the topics, is to be held shortly. I recognise that there is a problem of identifying total numbers, but the work that has gone on for a number of years—I am happy to include the work of the previous Administration in that—has attempted to get more robust statistics and to point services where they are most needed. By and large, those services are providing the required results. I have had meetings with a number of organisations and language groups, including some Polish associations, about their particular needs, and I stand ready to do so again.

No member in the chamber who knows me would think that I regard as acceptable the loss of any aspect of education provision, particularly in the creative arts, in which I have spent a great deal of my career, but it is equally unacceptable not to recognise the reality of the situation in which we find ourselves. I will not labour the point of the £500 million cuts that we have already received, although Helen Eadie would have been in a good position to argue the case with the former Prime Minister given that, during the election, I kept seeing pictures of her in his company. Perhaps she could have put the case there and then. As times get harder and harder, it is incumbent on every member to stand up for what they believe in and what should be delivered but also to have a responsible attitude to the problems that we all  face. So far, I have found certain members on the Labour benches deficient in that regard.

I listen all the time to parents, teachers and those who are involved in education. It is misleading to say that the message that the member described is consistent across the education sector. A vast number of teachers and parents throughout Scotland rejoice in the fact that this change is taking place; they are fully engaged with it. I draw the member's attention to a news release from the EIS last Friday, which said: "Scottish education needs CfE to succeed, so we must work together to ensure that this will happen." I remember the inquiry into the SQA; I sat with Cathy Peattie on that inquiry and I greatly enjoyed the period that I spent on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee with her. However, I remind  her of another thing that that committee did: at the end of its period in existence, it held an inquiry into the purposes of Scottish education and laid out in a report what it felt had to change in Scottish education for it to succeed. I reread that report recently; indeed, I discussed it with a group of educationists yesterday and I will talk about it in the weeks to come. It outlined exactly what the curriculum for excellence should be and provided the foundation for it. We were united across the political parties that that was what we needed to do. Therefore, I plead with the member and all the other Labour members to think of those words from Ronnie Smith— "Scottish education needs CfE to succeed, so we must work together to ensure that this will happen"— and to remember the outcomes of the inquiry into the purposes of Scottish education. Let us work together to ensure that the curriculum for excellence is a great success.

Much as I respect Elaine Smith, I am fully familiar with the fact that she could be described as being of the glass-half-empty school of politics rather than the glass-half-full one. I reject utterly the points that she made, which I think are fatuous and wrong. We need to stand against such rhetoric because of the true situation. If the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, who is desperately keen from a sedentary position to engage in the debate, has not seen the reality of education budgets being put under enormous strain by private finance initiative projects, which the former Labour Government thought were the best way to invest in education but which are crippling local authority expenditure, she should look at the facts and the budgets, and then work with the Government to resist cuts from Westminster. I have to say to Elaine Smith—it is about time that she recognised this with her noble rhetoric—that the real enemy is not here but there on the Tory side.

I am sure that members know that Murdo Fraser was moved to the health portfolio today. I will miss his interventions, but not necessarily that one. He is trying to beguile me into agreeing with him on a set of issues, but I will not. Certainly, the work that the SNP-controlled East Lothian Council is undertaking is important in looking at new possibilities. He will find me quite willing to accept that we need to be more imaginative in how we deliver. What he will not find me willing to accept is that a process of Westminster-driven cutting should affect the prospects for our children. In a country that is rich in resources, it is overwhelmingly logical and financially sensible that we should control our own affairs and budgets and spend them to our own priorities, and the great logic of that cannot be overcome either by Elaine Smith or by Murdo Fraser.

There is no reason why the implementation of the curriculum for excellence should do that. The curriculum for excellence is not about changing the basic content of education; it is about changing the methodology. Indeed, in a system that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee endorsed in the first session—a system that is predicated on the professionalism and commitment of teachers—we rely on teachers to do their job well, and that should liberate them to a degree. One of the great problems that we found in the committee's inquiry eight years ago was that too much pressure is put on teachers to do things that they should not be asked to do. They should be encouraged to teach, and that is what the curriculum for excellence does. In all those circumstances, it should be seen for what it is: a positive development in education. I am aware of the workload survey and all the survey work that the SSTA has undertaken. Indeed, when Mr McNulty and I were present at the SSTA dinner two weeks ago, I took the opportunity to talk to many representatives of the SSTA. I support every teacher in the process of implementing the curriculum for excellence and I am putting the Government's money where my mouth is by ensuring that all our resource is devoted to that. I am grateful to Bill Maxwell for the actions that he has taken, as the senior chief  inspector, to enable that to happen and for the announcement that he made last Friday.

I will be happy to discover whether there is any danger to the teaching of maths in primary schools. I have had no indication whatever of that. Indeed, the indications from primary schools of the way in which maths can be integrated into a topic-led approach under the curriculum for excellence are overwhelmingly positive. I hope that Mr McNulty will bear in mind the quote from Ronnie Smith, which I repeat: "Scottish education needs CfE to succeed, so we must work together to ensure that this will happen." Simply matching every bit of progress that we make in underpinning the curriculum for excellence with a new criticism does not meet the aspiration that the Education Institute of Scotland clearly has for all politicians to work together to ensure that it happens and happens well.

I give the member a clear assurance that no school closure can take place in Scotland without the statutory framework being in operation. The Government brought in the statutory framework, which has long been lacking in Scotland, to ensure that there is a clear and transparent process should there be a proposal for a school closure. I will not waste the Parliament's time by going through every paragraph of the legislation, but it is clear that the involvement of parents in a transparent consultative process is at its heart. That means that local authorities have to be up front and honest with every single parent about the reasons for their proposals. They also have to have them looked at by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education for educational reasons. I think that that is positive. The member can be reassured that the full statutory framework will apply. It is, of course, up to each local authority to decide how they take forward their school estate. Indeed, the system that we have requires that to be so. However, the Government has put itself on the side of parents to ensure that any such proposals are subject to a clear and transparent process.

The logic of the member's position defeats me. If there was a requirement to build 24 new schools and that was done, what is the requirement to build another 24 new schools, unless that is proved within the national context? The member should know—

The member will know nothing if she keeps shouting from a sedentary position. The possibility is that I might be able to teach her something.

She doubts it. I really am beginning to wonder whether I should bother answering questions from the member, but I will  persevere, because we need to put some facts on the record. The first fact is that the Government has contributed more to taking pupils out of unacceptable accommodation than our predecessors did. That is just a fact. That is exactly what has happened. [ Interruption .] It is not just the member who has started to scream. Now they are all screaming. That means that I must be getting it right. [ Interruption .] I cannot be shouted down, Presiding Officer, but I hope that you will intervene to allow me to speak without being shouted down. In those circumstances, let me make the second important point. We have put in place a transparent and open process to support local authorities on the issue of renewing their school estate. That continues to take place. The third point that I will make—if you will indulge me for one moment, Presiding Officer—is that there is a real problem with a party that, faced with the difficulties that we see coming over the horizon, which are largely difficulties of its making, finds its response only in screaming, shouting, arguing all the time for no change at all and frequently defending the indefensible, because it will continue to find itself out of tune with reality, Scottish public opinion and what parents want and need.

The first tactic that I would take is to ensure that I was not scaremongering on the issue. Having seen some of the coverage of the issue over the past 48 hours, I have to say that those members who thought that it was to their temporary political advantage to talk up a situation that exists only in a very small number of schools and with a small number of pupils are doing Scottish education a disservice, and that the way in which the question was phrased did education in North Lanarkshire a disservice. When there are cases of unacceptable behaviour by pupils in schools—the number of such cases is not at anything like a record high—that needs to be dealt with firmly and vigorously by the schools with support from the local authority and the Government, but if members honestly believe that the best way for them to make political  progress is to misrepresent the behaviour of hundreds of thousands of good pupils in thousands of good schools, they will damage Scottish education for petty political purposes. I refer members back to the quote from Ronnie Smith. The chamber should rise above such behaviour in the interests of Scottish education and Scottish children.

Regrettably, there are still gaps to be covered, but we should probably dispel any myth about forest schools. I was slightly concerned to hear muttering from the Labour benches when the question was asked. One of the most impressive forest school initiatives that I have seen recently was in Tollcross in Glasgow, where the children were taking part in forest  school activity in a neighbouring park. Forest schools can contribute greatly to—[ Interruption .] There is further shouting from members; I am surprised about that. It is important that forest schools are recognised as contributing to every part of society. If some people cannot get their heads round such innovative education, perhaps I could invite them to go and visit a forest school, which would enable them to discover how important such schools are.

The member knows perfectly well that Labour's recession—the mess that Labour has made of the economy, one might say—has created considerable pressures on local authorities. [ Interruption .] I see that Dr Simpson finds that entertaining. The reality is that local authorities are meeting an enormous number of pressures, many of which are from Labour's recession and some of which are from Labour's obsession with private finance initiatives. Local authorities are trying to deliver to the best of their ability with the support of the Scottish Government. There is good news. I am pleased to say that the number of teachers in Scotland's schools in 2009 was 4.2 per cent higher in primary and 2 per cent higher in secondary than when Wendy Alexander was last a minister. I regard that as progress.

That is a much more intelligent question. The question of accurate statistics in education is a key one and I constantly pursue that holy grail so that we understand fully what is happening in Scotland's schools and do not indulge in the type of playground politics that we have just had from Labour.

I am happy to assure the member that officials will meet her and her constituents to discuss the issue. As she knows, the decision is one for Glasgow City Council. Its consultation, which requested the views of all  interested parties, closed on 26 February and a decision on the course of action has yet to be announced. I am aware that parents have lodged a petition with the Scottish Parliament. Of course, the Government and, to be fair, our predecessors have given strong support to centres of excellence as being the right way forward for specialist schools.

The funding for cultural co-ordinators was always a medium-term measure. It is no surprise, therefore, that local authorities will make their own decisions at a time of great and increasing financial pressure—pressure that has been caused, as I have pointed out, by decisions that were made by the Labour Government at Westminster and by previous Administrations in this place. It is clear, however, that the cultural imperatives that exist in Scotland need the support of local authorities and I encourage them to think strongly about how they support culture in their areas and within education.

I am committed to the highest quality of education in Scotland, and both Mr  Chisholm and I know that the delivery of that comes from local authorities. We are doing everything that we can to support local authorities—with increased resources this year—so that they can meet their obligations. We expect them, as we expect everybody in the public sector, to be forceful and imaginative about how they deliver education. However, if the member is suggesting to me that we should magic out of thin air £80 million to replace the teachers we have lost in the past two years, he will have to tell us where that money will come from. Perhaps he could square that with the way in which his party south of the border—and indeed the other parties in the United Kingdom—talk about swingeing cuts in Scotland. It does not add up from the member and it does not add up from any of those parties.

It is difficult to be certain. The next census may show a continued decline, but at a slower rate, or we may have halted the decline. The way in which we collect statistics on Gaelic speaking is not precise or accurate. We need to  get a better hold on what we are doing and to drive that forward. That is not a criticism of our predecessors or ourselves. It is clear that we need to create a new generation of Gaelic speakers. If we do not do that, there will not be Gaelic speakers in Scotland in a generation or, I suspect, two generations. That is the challenge that the plan addresses. Some of the answers lie elsewhere. I am more than happy to rub noses with Mr Brocklebank, because the Maori nation and others, such as the Hawaiian nation, have addressed the question and looked into the abyss. Languages die every day, week or month in this world. There is no reason why Gaelic should not be one of those dying or dead languages. We as a nation need to take action to drive forward the language and to make it survive. Today, we are addressing the future of the language, which is an urgent matter. We have a plan that says that we can do something. It is focused on education at every level: at pre-school level—involving generational transmission, which is extremely important—at school level and at adult level. At each of those levels, if we take action, if the plan is observed and if Bòrd na Gàidhlig has the resources, we can make the language survive, so I share Mr Peacock's optimism. It can be done, but none of us should be in any doubt that it is a challenge. With the greatest respect to my good friend Jamie McGrigor, it is not a question of whether people can sing in Gaelic choirs. That is wonderful, and there is nothing wrong with it, but the language is at a point at which we have to be honest and straightforward and say that, unless we take certain actions, it might not outlive some of us who are in the chamber today. It is important to be blunt about that. I know that the minister for Gaelic has been very active on this point. When we are blunt about it and place the survival of the language as an issue before the people of Scotland, they respond. I was interested in Mr Stone's point about Caithness and the Mod. We could wax eloquent about the economic benefit of about £2.5 million that the Mod will bring to Caithness, and about the fact that almost every hotel is already booked. We could wax eloquent about the Caithness dialect and Gaelic, which enrich the three-voiced county, just as Scotland is a three-voiced nation. However, the most important thing that people who go to the Mod in Caithness will have to confront is the issue that we are confronting today, which is the point that the Mod might simply be a series of concerts for a dead language, unless we take action to make the language applicable and living in every single set of circumstances.

I cannot imagine being able to socially engineer any Gaelic choir that I know.

It is certainly true that we cannot force Gaelic down people's throats, and given the resources that we have to apply to Gaelic, it would be a waste of money to do so. We have to encourage those who want to learn to be part of the new generation of Gaelic speakers. Television and the new media have a role to play in that, and I hope that they will be part of the activity under the action plan. I will focus on concluding, Presiding Officer, because I know that you want the debate to be finished by half past 4. I will address three points quickly. Dave Thompson made a point about road signs. Transport Scotland is researching the current signage on the roads and ferries in the west, and further progress needs to be made with that. I am pleased that some trains are now branded with Gaelic; that is very positive. Peter Peacock raised the issue of specific grants. We aim to use those strategically for new developments, such as the opening of new Gaelic-medium classes, but the Government is not the only agency that funds Gaelic; there is a wider responsibility. We want to send many signals from this debate today, the strongest of which is that Gaelic will live if we work hard to ensure that the plan is implemented. It is therefore heartening to see unanimity in the Parliament. I know that those in Bòrd na Gàidhlig and other agencies who have responsibility for implementing the plan will take heart from that, but they will also need to see continued political backing at every level if they are to make it happen. They will also need to see the willing buy-in of other agencies. Finally, I echo what everyone has said about the BBC. It is a great disappointment that, despite constant lobbying, there is still delay. It is vital that Gaelic television is seen on Freeview; there should be no further delay, and there should be no diminution of service for other users. The minister  for Gaelic will write to the BBC shortly to tell it about the unanimity in this chamber once again.

As I have said, energy is a specific topic in the eco-schools programme.  Through that, schools assess the impact of energy use and demonstrate plans to improve efficiency. Some of the eco-schools that I have visited have working wind turbines; others experiment with a variety of energy generation sources. The Government funds two school renewable development officers to work with local authorities to promote and support the increased uptake of sustainable energy measures in schools, specifically microrenewables and any accompanying energy efficiency measures. The global footprint resource is available to all schools and should lead to innovation in schools on energy matters. In addition, many schools receive funding directly through Mr Lochhead's department's climate challenge fund, and many wider community projects include the participation of local schools in the climate challenge fund. In all those regards, and many others, the point that Professor Harvie raises, which is a good one, is being met.

We learned the lesson of not being target driven. [ Laughter .] It has been an important lesson to learn, considering the failure of the previous Administration to meet any of its education targets. [ Interruption .]

I like to view these things in a green and organic way. I am sure that the member would agree with that approach, as I know that she is green and organic herself and has those enthusiasms. We are making good progress. Many schools are innovating in this area and are installing new generation sources, from photovoltaic panels to wind energy, and many more will do so in the years ahead.

I have said not that I am satisfied, but that we need to improve the system—by definition, I am not satisfied. I am completely mystified by the connection that the member makes between workforce planning and the issues she raises on the numbers. The reality is that we need the right number of teachers for the right number of pupils in the right number of schools. That was my answer to the question from her colleague last week, to which the member referred. I hope that the member is not suggesting that we have the wrong number of teachers for the wrong number of pupils in the wrong number of schools.

My initial message is not to believe Labour press releases. Even the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities delivered a statement yesterday that chided Mr McNulty for the way in which he had presented something in his press release. The reality is that the biggest fall in teacher numbers in the 2009 teacher census came from Glasgow City Council, which accounted for 28 per cent of the 1,348 lost teaching posts. What the member needs to look at—this is where reality should kick in—is that the cost to local authorities of employing 2,000 more teachers would be roughly £80 million per annum. If the member is committing herself to the wrong number of teachers for our schools at this stage, it will cost her another £80 million, which is yet another spending pledge at a time when not one member of the public believes a word that Labour says about this.

I am not the arbiter of what is fair and reasonable on sports facilities, which is probably just as well for the people of Scotland.  However, I take the member's point and I am happy to ask my officials to investigate the issue and to inquire about the situation with sportscotland and the Minister for Public Health and Sport. Many opportunities are going splendidly well—I was about to say swimmingly well, but I probably should keep off that topic. For example, outstanding work is being done by forest schools in the member's area, but also in the most unusual places. For instance, I saw a forest school project in Tollcross park in Glasgow. I intend to work vigorously to expand the opportunities that are presented by forest schools. I will ensure that the member is written to on the issue that she raises.

Difficult as it is, I am up for almost any challenge—certainly that of telling the truth on behalf of the people of Scotland. Indeed, I have found it to be a truism that the more sense that is being talked in this chamber, the louder the groans that come from Mike Rumbles. Anne McLaughlin's question is immensely sensible. However, before members on the Tory benches think that this is too entertaining, perhaps those Tory members who are planning to contest Westminster seats—indeed, I see that Alex Johnstone is among us today—might like to enlighten the people of Scotland on the point that Anne McLaughlin has made. Both Tory and Labour are saying, "There will be cuts," and both are indicating the need for a special budget after the election, but if that special post-election budget cuts back on education in Scotland those members will need to account for the resulting decimation of Scottish hopes. I hope that members such as Mr Johnstone are listening. Perhaps if he goes to Westminster—

Indeed, he has no chance. However, if he goes to Westminster, perhaps he can take that message very loudly with him.

I agree with Mr Brown that councils should take account of such factors. There is a requirement in the law for councils to provide adequate and efficient education in their areas. By definition, that means that councils should know what is happening in their areas and should plan ahead. I am happy to meet the member or anyone else to discuss the individual circumstances that the member mentions. However, the responsibility lies with the local authorities. Of course, the fact that local authorities are also planning authorities means that we should be entitled to think that one side knows what the other is doing. We are extremely supportive of councils thinking ahead and deciding how they should provide. The debates that we are having in Scotland about how we can ensure that that process continually improves can only help with regard to the member's concerns.

Since coming into this post, I have made it clear that the system of inspection needs to be reformed, to an extent. I am pleased that the new senior chief inspector of education agrees with me. I must pay tribute to his predecessor, Graham Donaldson, who made significant changes in the means of inspection. HMIE began to revise its inspection models in January 2007. The revised models were based on a set of principles, which were agreed with stakeholders after a pilot period, and were fully adopted in August 2008. I will be happy to meet the member to discuss in more detail those approaches to inspection and to facilitate a discussion between him and the inspectorate. The revised models have significantly reduced the pre-inspection demands and focus on how well a school knows itself and is engaged in planning its future and work for its pupils. There is always room to take such issues further and involve people more. With the new senior chief inspector, I have focused on issues to do with small school inspections, in relation to which special considerations must be taken into account. We are making progress. The member will be pleased to hear that later this month I will meet a group of senior inspectors, teachers, parents and others for a discussion about how the system is working and how we can take it further.

At the start of the debate I referred jocularly to the socialist love affair between me and Ken Macintosh. I now report the sense of astonishment that I feel that it has come so far and so fast. I point out that I did not claim that I was a socialist, nor did I assert that he was one. Both are perhaps equally unlikely. I am struck, however, by the fact that for the first time since I took up my role, Mr Macintosh and I agree greatly on some of the difficulties and pitfalls that this debate presents. Our only difference is in how we will approach those as we go forward. Caution is required in the debate. Structures are important, but they are a longer-term issue than some of the shorter-term things that we require to pay attention to and I am happy to admit that. I accept Margaret Smith's well-made caveat that it is important to look urgently at what change is essential. That is the issue here. Are there changes that are so important that they will assist us to make changes to the priorities? Are there other things that would be desirable over time in improving what is happening in Scotland? Are there some things that would be tinkering for tinkering's sake? That is a helpful caveat to inject into the debate, as is the issue of resources. Resources are not limitless. If we are to apply resources to structural change in particular, we need to see that as an investment that will produce a return over a reasonable period.  Those cautions aside, it has been an interesting debate and, by and large, a good one. I was astonished by the range of knowledge of particular things from one or two individuals. Mr McNulty clearly has bought and digested whole the observer's book of Conservative-controlled town halls. He mentioned an astonishing range of minor Conservative spokespeople—it is a slim volume, but Mr McNulty knows it inside out. Mr Purvis has the observer's book of Swedish local authority education spending, which is very full indeed. He made one or two very important points. Christina McKelvie, not unexpectedly, has the observer's book of ABBA hits. She knows that inside out, too. Let us look at the truth about some of the things that we have talked about. I accept that Mr Purvis has a point about Swedish education achievement. On international comparisons, Sweden and Scotland are broadly similar in how they perform—in one or two areas Sweden is better and in one or two areas we are better. Of course, the really significant point is not about where Sweden has arrived, but about travelling hopefully. The purpose of going to Sweden is to find out how it is addressing problems and difficulties and whether any of its ideas are better than any of ours.

That is a helpful remark. We must look at the whole system to see what works and what does not work. Sweden takes the same approach to us. In June 2008, a delegation from Sweden, including the state secretary for education, was here because there were things that they wanted to look at. In particular, they wanted to look at how we support teachers, continuous professional development, initial training, the chartered teacher programme, the Scottish qualification for headship and probationers, because they thought that they could learn from our experience of those things. It is a two-way street. We must not get hung up simply on models of provision. There are models on content, national objectives and national agreements. In Finland, there is an agreement on overall education policy and there are interesting ways of taking it forward. To be even-handed, I point out that Finland, which I am looking forward to seeing on Sunday and Monday, is one of the least diverse European countries in terms of delivery—92 per cent of the schools there are public. Finland is more successful than Sweden in terms of outcomes—it is one of the best performing countries in the world in education—but that success is not due to the  diversity of the system. We need to understand how that works. There are similar models. Scotland has a very low rate of private participation in education. I am of the view that that does not hold us back. There are very high rates of private participation in Belgium and the Netherlands. In fact, the Netherlands has the highest rate of private participation; there is an absolute state guarantee about the right to private education and how the state supports it. We need to look at all those things, but we are not going down that road—it is not a road that this Government wishes to go down. If we are to examine Finland, Sweden, Norway and elsewhere, let us consider the road that we want to go down and how their lessons can help us to do so. That is precisely what I hope to be able to do. One of the most thoughtful contributions to the debate came from Peter Peacock—I am grateful to him for that. He and I agree on a great deal, but not on everything. He is absolutely right that the autonomy of headteachers in how they operate is a key factor in the delivery of school services. Of course, leadership in schools is a key factor nationally and internationally. As Peter Peacock will know from his considerable experience in the job that I now hold, autonomy is the single most important factor in the recruitment, retention and motivation of headteachers. He is absolutely right to stress that we should look at that and see how it would work for every single one of us. There were other interesting contributions. Shirley-Anne Somerville made some telling points about the relationship between structure and content, which Derek Brownlee fleshed out by raising the issue of rurality. There are complex relationships between how the school is structured, how it is managed, what is taught there, the nature of the community that it serves and what the parents do. However, let us remind ourselves of the overwhelming fact that we all know that poverty is what determines most how one will do in education, including further and higher education. Children from the poorest backgrounds have the least chance of success. Although we want to debate this subject, make all sorts of interventions and change all sorts of things, the thing that we need to think about most is how we change endemic poverty in parts of Scotland and how we intervene early enough to ensure that life chances are changed for each child. Smaller class sizes are an important part of all this, because they fit into the mix well. We know that there is growing international interest in what smaller class sizes will achieve even in places such as Singapore and Hong Kong, where there have traditionally been much larger class sizes.  The evidence, which is available to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee as part of its inquiry, shows that those places know that they have to inculcate the skills of the 21 st century—creativity, flexibility and problem solving—into young people, which is best done in smaller class sizes. They are moving away from one of the things that has been their hallmark. We have a lot to learn from each other. The purpose of my going to Finland and Sweden is not, as Annabel Goldie has suggested, just to have a sauna. The purpose is to listen, learn, understand and to try to apply things to our experience so that we can take education in Scotland forward in the short, medium and long term. I hope that we will have a chance to debate that in the chamber in future.

Hear, hear.

Will the member give way?

It would of course be improper of me to give such support. However, although I do not often advise people to do this, if the member goes back through the archives of my writing—one reference has already been made to previous writing of mine—he might find support aplenty for his view. I did not mean and do not want to imply that Marr college has fallen from academic excellence—it has not. However, answers to the questions can be found in the stewardship of previous South Ayrshire Council administrations. In the worst period, the people who ran that council were from the Labour Party. However, this is a debate of consensus, so let us keep the spirit of consensus. [ Laughter .] I do try—I keep trying. The debate is timely, because we are on the cusp of important developments in Scottish education—the curriculum for excellence and the accompanying debate on attainment. The delivery of school education is central to parents' concerns and is vital for every young person. We have a huge collective responsibility to ensure that that delivery happens well. A consensus exists in Scotland about the outcomes that we need in education. I do not think that there is any doubt about that—if there is, we have just to look at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report to know that we have a broad consensus about the outcomes. We are beginning to debate with vigour the delivery methods. There is nothing unusual in that because, in a sense, the curriculum for excellence started as a debate on delivery methods. It started as a question about how we did things in Scottish education, and we were able to come to a conclusion that, together, we could devise a better way forward. I am hopeful that we might be able to do that again in this debate, and I am very much in listening mode in that regard.

That is an interesting question, which will need a lot of thinking about. The best approach would undoubtedly be the one that Margaret Smith suggests. However, if, for example, one party in the Parliament could not agree to any change, the rest of the parties would have to ask themselves whether change was more important than consensus. It is a difficult question. As the curriculum for excellence has showed, the ideal way to move forward is with consensus and I am very keen that we keep consensus on such  developments. The member raises an important point, which we will need to bear in mind as we move forward. The curriculum for excellence is being put in place and we have mounting evidence that, although it is a necessary part of change, it is not sufficient for the change that we need. The Scottish survey of achievement, for example, points us in the direction of the need for changes in Scottish education. The question is what needs to change and how. Let us start again from where we are: Scotland's education is not monolithic in delivery. That assumption is constantly made but it is simply not true. Many of the bedrock pieces of legislation on Scottish education are documents about diversity rather than conformity. I particularly call in evidence the Education (Scotland) Act 1918, which was a uniquely successful way of reconciling difference and allowing diversity to continue. We have a tradition of diversity; if we can ally that to the imperatives of access and excellence, we have some clues about what we do next. It is also important that we widen our horizons and consider what other people are doing. I was unaware that there was a stampede to Stockholm this weekend. I am going to Helsinki first, so I will probably not see Tavish Scott—I am sure that both of us will live with that disappointment over the weekend—but I will focus closely on what has been done in Finland and Sweden and what the Swedes and Finns think does not work for them.

As usual, Mr McLetchie is too good for the likes of me. He has pointed out a major weakness, but I have to say that his party started the problem because it announced to the world that I was going this weekend. Certainly, I am going on Sunday afternoon, but I will be there on Monday and Tuesday—I am slightly nervous about telling people that in case they take advantage of it. I am visiting schools, universities and a range of institutions; I have a very full programme. I do not want to anticipate what happens in Finland and Sweden, as I am by no means an expert and, unlike Mr McLetchie, have not been there. However, I know that an active debate is taking place there, on which we should reflect. For example, there is a debate about freestanding schools versus communal schools, which appears to illustrate that, in the Swedish experience, the key issues in improving performance are not only delivery structures—although they are important—but the quality of leadership; a clear vision and  sense of direction; staff teamwork and participation; effective use of performance; accurate baseline data; and this interesting point: self-evaluation. A distinctive part of the Finnish model is that, as a Finnish educational expert said, it does not allow teaching to get in the way of learning. Assessment in Finland is very light touch indeed and is done only at the conclusion of the educational journey. If we were to say that we wanted to change evaluation totally, would we find willing supporters among Conservative members? I hope that we would at least have an open debate about the issues. Of course, the tradition of assessment in Scotland is different. That illustrates to us that, whatever we learn when we examine what other people do, we must lay that against our experience and traditions and find the right solution. Although visiting Helsinki and Stockholm will be important—visiting many places is important—in terms of educational experience, the most important thing when one comes home from travelling is to think and to ensure that the lessons that one has learned are set against what is happening and what we want to happen. I go back to what we want to happen. We consider other education models not simply because we can lift them and impose them; we want them to tell us how we can do what we want to do better than we are doing it. We want an educational system that prioritises access and excellence. Let us start the journey with those two words. The debate has started well on the basis of the motion and the amendments. There is an awful lot of good will about moving forward and councils that are creatively thinking about possibilities, such as East Lothian Council, are to be encouraged. Nobody knows the outcome of East Lothian Council's journey. A major event will be held in April and the council will then get more detail. It is wrong to say that, because it does not know all the answers, it should not ask the questions—quite the opposite: we should ask the questions and look for the answers. If other local authorities in Scotland—they are the deliverers and many of them do superbly well—have ideas about what they want to change and how they want to change it, they should bring them to the table. They will find that I am an enthusiast for thinking new thoughts. I think them all the time, not only when I am on aircraft or in Scandinavia. Let us think new thoughts, be positive and constructive and do our duty by Scotland's children.  I move amendment S3M-5926.3, to insert after "debate": "; recognises that Scottish education is generally of good quality with many important strengths; believes that any alternative models that are considered should build on these strengths and preclude academic selection as a legitimate criterion for school entry".

I have slight sympathy for the position that Murdo Fraser took. Two paragraphs in the notes for my closing speech, which other people have of course suggested to me, say: "I welcomed this debate ... as it has given us the opportunity to restate the Scottish Government's commitment to international education", which is certainly true, "and to promoting learning in contexts which go ... beyond our ... borders", which is also true, "and to the importance more generally of meaningful, joined-up international engagement", which is true, too. But we then come to a problem. The notes say: "The Government wanted to provide an opportunity for a thoughtful and informed debate that would"— I make a serious point— "be a credit to the recent HMIE guide on international education in schools; and which also reflected the importance of taking an international perspective, in its broadest sense, in Scotland's education system to each and every party in this Parliament ... By and large I think we have achieved this." That is the problem. Perhaps I could take my lead from Christina McKelvie, who talked about glasses that are half empty and half full. I will delineate the parties' approach to the debate. The Lib Dems have been positive—their glass is half full and they are just slightly suspicious of the people who filled it. The Tories' glass is half empty and they are suspicious of anybody such as me who might attempt to fill it. The Labour Party creates the biggest problem. I will be serious in a moment, so what follows will be my only jocular remark about the Labour Party's poor and positively dangerous approach. Labour does not even have a glass—it thinks that the SNP stole its glass. Unfortunately, that is where the Labour Party comes from today. We wondered why First Minister's question time was dominated by what will turn out to be very dodgy pieces of information about skills. The reality is that that was one way of setting up the debate. The Labour Party is so blinded by  oppositionalism that it has lost sight of the prize, which is ensuring that skills and education in Scotland are as good as they can be. Last week's debate about how to develop skills and education was positive and consensual. We have an agreement about that. The curriculum for excellence is the right approach to move that forward. No MSP—especially not me—has real expertise in international education, but others have, and I am sure that they will confirm that the approach of the curriculum for excellence is to join up subjects, to provide opportunities throughout a school and to ensure that literacy and numeracy are part of international education. That is not an add-on or an extra; that is one way in which young people gain experience and education. It is a pity that nobody in the Labour Party has acknowledged that. If Labour members had even read HMIE's report they would realise that what I have described is the case. I will take out just one quotation, which is from a pre-school child who will not be learning Mandarin in the next week or two or learning a language in which to order a beer when travelling the world. That child, who is involved in international education, said: "The world is not big. We went round the world in the nursery. We learned about Italy and what children do" there. "We learned songs and stories. We say words they know. We like Glasgow but we like Milan too!" I suspect that literacy and numeracy were at the heart of that experience. They are at the heart of international education. I will address one or two of the issues that have been raised; I will not have time to address them all. I want to address some of the points that Margaret Smith made. She made some good points, but the pupil teacher ratio in Scotland is improving. If one argues strongly that we need more teachers in Scotland, one has to say where we will get them and how we will pay for them, because Lib Dem councils, Labour councils and SNP councils are all facing real difficulties. [ Interruption .] I will come to why that is the case in a moment. I hear some questions about that.

No. I am sorry, but I have far too much to get through. It is also true that the pass rates and participation in language learning in Scotland are rising, not falling. It is important to recognise that. There are myths about the position, but I am sure that Margaret Smith will accept that there are rises in whole areas of that work.

I would really like to make some progress. I am sorry. The reason there are difficulties in one or two authorities is undoubtedly cuts. Ken Macintosh made much of those. Karen Whitefield is the member who said the most about them. What she seemed absolutely blind to is the culpability of her own party—not once, not twice, but three times. She mentioned all three in her speech. First, this perfect storm of difficulty in some authorities was created by the Labour recession. Secondly, it is exacerbated by Labour cuts at Westminster. If that was not enough, Labour's profligacy on the PPP scheme—Labour putting profit before pupils—has created an enormous pressure on those budgets. [ Interruption .]

The storm came from Labour, and Labour members should hang their heads in shame.

No, I will not. Hugh O'Donnell, on the other hand, made a measured contribution and I commend him for it. [ Interruption .]

In discussing the curriculum for excellence, he stressed the importance of the community context of languages and learning. That is absolutely correct. We will take his comment away and ensure that we consider it carefully. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer. I want to finish with the Labour contribution, such as it was. In the early part of the debate, I described the Labour Party's approach as dangerous. I do not in any sense have difficulty with the type of criticism in the debate. Jeremy Purvis raised some good, honest and true points on the matter. If we are looking for a clue as to what Labour is really up to, we must always look to the disingenuous actions of Ken Macintosh, because he will always go too far. He will always go that bit further because he cannae stop himself. What we heard was extraordinary. He went through a set of criticisms that were, as usual, half truths disguised as facts, then we came to the real coup de grace. I will say what it was.  In this afternoon's debate, we have been attempting to celebrate real achievement in Scotland—real achievement by, and I will list them, Anderson high school, Bathgate academy, Buckie high school, Cauldeen primary school, Clyde Valley high school, Dalmarnock primary school, the children and families department at the City of Edinburgh Council, Fortrose academy, Glendelvine primary school, John Paul academy, Juniper Green primary school, Knox academy, Perth high school, Portlethen academy, Shawlands academy, St David's high school, St Ninian's high school, St John's primary school, St Thomas primary school, St Timothy's primary school, Whiteness primary school, Woodacre nursery school and Woodhill primary school. [ Interruption .]

All those schools were commended in the HMIE report. What did Ken Macintosh say about commending them? He said that we were wasting our time. What a reflection on individual achievement. As ever, we saw him go too far. Finally, let me make one telling point. In the whole farrago of criticism that came from Des McNulty, in that dressing up of naked resentment that he is not in government, there is one fact that he missed out. I do not mind if he lambasts me, even in personal terms, though he did so, but he attacked civil servants in Scotland and their involvement in the process. The curriculum for excellence management board as set up by the Government of which Mr McNulty was a member had only civil servants on it—four organisations only. This Government widened it and brought in teachers and those with real experience and drove it forward. I have here the record of what Labour did on curriculum for excellence. It was nothing—it was essentially a waste of time. Thank goodness this Government has it in hand and is driving it forward.

Nul points.

It is all the better for that.

Will the member give way?

I honestly do not remember whether Margaret Smith was present at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee meeting when, in response to one of Ken Macintosh's many questions, I confirmed that the Donaldson review would consider modern languages. I have since spoken to Graham Donaldson to ensure that that is part of his review.

In just one moment. I am very pleased to welcome to the public gallery pupils from St Ninian's high school in Kirkintilloch and their headteacher, Paul McLaughlin. I was due to visit the school to take part in their activities a couple of weeks ago, but snow and traffic prevented me. I am glad that, if the mountain cannot go to Mohammed, Mohammed can come to the mountain. They are very welcome: they are an example of how things are done well, and I congratulate them. I am happy to give way—

I will give way to the member for Kirkintilloch.

I pay tribute to Mr McLaughlin, and I shall meet him after the debate to hear also, I understand, his considerable enthusiasm for the progress that is being made with the curriculum for excellence. I am delighted that, as an exemplar of that activity, he is here to tell us about it. I will give way to Margo MacDonald.

The member is absolutely right to make that point. That is the condition on which the additional resource to support CPD and staff is allocated. I think that everybody understands that it has to go directly to those tasks.

I will deal first with the politics of the matter, because I want to return from Des McNulty's speech to the consensual and constructive nature of the debate. Des McNulty's speech has been the least constructive in the debate, with the inevitable exception of the speech by Lord Foulkes. I was entertained by Lord Foulkes's accusing Margaret Smith of weeping crocodile tears. That is quite a compliment from a man who has wept a swampful of crocodile tears in his time. Des McNulty's speech was interesting. He is prepared to attack me and the SNP Government, no matter what happens. At one stage, he argued that there needs to be time to develop issues and resolve any problems that there may be, but he then said that there should be no decision on considering the evidence and the time. I regard that as playing naked politics with the curriculum for excellence. His approach is wrong, and his speech was unfortunate. I return to the substance of what we are debating, which is simple. There are two questions. The first is, should we depart from an agreed timetable? The second is, if we are to depart from that timetable—we need to consider the evidence that we need for doing so—when should a decision on that be made? Those are entirely legitimate questions about a complex programme that our predecessors started. Perhaps the programme got off on wrong feet, but we have tried to correct that, and it has been carried through with the advice and assistance of a range of good people. It is regrettable that it has been implied on a couple of occasions, exclusively by Labour members, that people have been doing nothing. I think that Mr Macintosh used the phrase "muddling through", which was unfortunate. In Balfron high school, for example, where I will be next week, the headteacher is vigorously pursuing the flexibilities that the curriculum for excellence creates. It does no credit to her, her staff, the council or anybody else who supports that approach to use the term "muddling through". Many good people are trying to ensure that the approach is the best possible. Sometimes new Labour makes accusations about failing to answer questions, but the problem is that  it does not get the answers that it wants, so it goes on saying that we have failed to answer the questions. The reality is that the process is different from previous processes. It puts much-needed flexibility into education. In the debates in 2002 and 2003, we all accepted that that was needed. The process is harnessing creativity and, crucially, it depends on the individual professionalism of teachers. We should encourage those things in the process, not seek rigid standardisation, which is what Mr Macintosh in particular asked for. The key questions have not gone away. They are whether we should depart from the agreed timetable and when a decision should be made on that.

No. My time is limited, and I want to conclude. I am listening to the evidence, but a variety of people and organisations must gather the evidence. I am, of course, listening to the management board, and I am keen to find out the outcome of its deliberations today. I am listening to bodies such as Learning and Teaching Scotland and the SQA, and particularly to secondary teachers and headteachers; I have made a point of talking to as many of them as possible. Until the process has continued and I know the evidence, it would be wrong to make a decision; if I did, that would be done in an arbitrary way. I accept that a decision cannot wait for ever, but an Easter or 4 April timescale would be arbitrary. I simply ask for flexibility to ensure that I have time to listen to the evidence. In my opening speech, I presented arguments about why a decision might not be necessary and why the implementation should continue as planned. Equally, there are arguments on the other side, some of which are spurious. I am grateful to George Foulkes for confirming that local authority budgets have risen and that local authorities have the opportunity to choose how to spend their money. There is a range of possibilities for them. They face issues such as pay for teachers and the European Court of Justice ruling about leave during periods of absence, which is putting additional pressure on their funding. Local authorities will make decisions on such matters, but one priority that they must have, and they know this, is to ensure that they focus on how the major change in education that we are discussing, which will broaden and deepen education, free our teachers' abilities and introduce great creativity into our schools—it is doing so—is brought about. I am finding additional  resources, even in these difficult times, to allow that to happen. There are increased resources. Karen Whitefield was entirely wrong about that matter. I respect her point of view on North Lanarkshire, but parents are being involved. I launched the parental toolkit in Kinross some weeks ago, and have just seen a tremendous leaflet for parents from a school in Inverness. That leaflet goes even further and tells parents precisely what is happening and engages them. Good things are happening everywhere in Scotland. I accept the legitimacy of the question that the Liberal Democrats have asked. I need to engage with that question and I am doing so; I simply ask for the opportunity to do so in the light of the evidence. I draw members' attention to the position that Mr McNulty has taken and put the Labour Party in. That position essentially politicises the issue once more. Parents and schools do not want that, and secondary teachers, who are at the sharp end of the process, really do not want it.

That word has never been used.

Here is another Liberal Democrat.

Absolutely.

I do not dispute that for a moment. We need to do the best for our children. The issue with which the chamber is struggling is whether the changes that we want to make, which we know are the right ones in the longer term, are sufficiently well developed to have an immediate impact when they are introduced. I accept that that is the issue that we have to discuss. A number of things have to be considered in the balance. The assessment framework that was published last month sets out in straightforward terms what we want children and young people to achieve and how we will know that they are making progress. That is a positive. Work is progressing well between the management board and the SQA to develop the new national qualifications. We know that that, too, is a positive. Significant resources have been put in place. Indeed, we have extended CPD, although that has not been an unqualified success. Last night, I received an irate e-mail from a parent in which they said that it was outrageous that there was to be yet another day on which teachers were not teaching but learning. You cannot win all the time on this front. We are putting in significant resources to CPD—there is an additional CPD day. I have said repeatedly that we will provide additional resources to local authorities to ensure that all the needs are met. The Parliament has to acknowledge the huge range of activity that is under way by the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, local authorities, Learning and Teaching Scotland and others. Of course, in the balance, we also have to consider the views of teachers. I assure Margaret Smith that I am listening to headteachers and others in secondary schools every day. This very morning, before I came to the chamber, I had a long telephone conversation with a senior headteacher. I am having that type of conversation  with classroom teachers and headteachers day in, day out and when I visit schools. I am very conscious of their views. The curriculum for excellence management board is meeting today. Indeed, I cannot attend to hear its advice because I am here listening to the Liberal Democrats telling me to listen to its advice. The board is considering the issue at its meeting today. I am examining the evidence and talking to the stakeholders. I give the chamber an absolute assurance that, if the evidence says, "We want to do things in a different way," we will do them in a different way. That includes perhaps delaying the in-point and ensuring that the system works for those children who enter secondary school this August. There will be no delay for delay's sake, but delay if the evidence proves it. I lodged the amendment in my name because I think that the evidence will build towards a decision some time within the next few months. Easter falls on 4 April and I cannot guarantee that the evidence will have built by that date. However, I give the chamber the assurance that I am looking at and listening to the evidence—I will be very open to all the evidence that comes to me—and, provided that the Easter barrier is taken away, I have no difficulty in supporting the motion. Indeed, I have no difficulty in supporting the other amendments. My only problem in doing that is a technical one: Labour's amendment pre-empts my amendment. I am trying to be unselfish, but I have not got that far. I will support my amendment and not the Labour amendment. The debate is an important one, and it needs to be positive. That is the spirit in which I tried to approach it this morning. I move amendment S3M-5809.3, to leave out "by Easter" and insert: "within a reasonable timeframe over the next few months".

The curriculum for excellence aims to raise achievement through improved learning and teaching. Ensuring that learners can progress smoothly from their broad general education at the end of secondary 3 into qualifications during the S4 to S6 senior phase will be a key part of that. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is working positively with the education profession to ensure that the new qualifications build on prior learning and are flexible enough to be timetabled in different ways while maintaining standards.

We must ensure that every qualification that is available at school is rigorous and contributes to the continual improvement in achievement by young people. I am certain that the new qualifications will do so but, as I have made clear in the Parliament before, I will not sign off any arrangements for the curriculum for excellence or new qualifications until I am absolutely convinced that they contribute positively to the development of Scotland's young people.

I apologise for intervening, as I am only here for the closing speeches, but, as someone who represents the South of Scotland, I recognise what Jeremy Purvis says. How viewers in the South of Scotland are treated is appalling. However, is it helpful to disfranchise one group because another group is disfranchised? Perhaps we should help both groups.

I know that the Scottish Futures Trust is very concerned to ensure that communities get the schools that they think will best suit them. There is always a balance to be struck between the resource that is available and the facilities that can be provided. That is a perpetual tension in life when trying to purchase anything. However, I am absolutely certain that, within that construct, there will be an attempt to ensure that each community can be proud of, use and get the maximum flexibility from the school that is built in its area.

There will, between each local authority and the Scottish Futures Trust, be a constructive and creative dialogue that will endeavour to secure the best building for the community. That dialogue should be entered into with enthusiasm and commitment on both sides, and with recognition of the envelope of resource that is available. That strikes me as being a sensible way to take the issue forward.

I can do much better than that. I met the SSTA recently and spoke about the issue that Alison McInnes has raised and other issues, and I met the EIS last week. I continue to have a useful and detailed dialogue with a range of bodies on curriculum for excellence and how we can engage the whole Scottish education community in ensuring that it is the best it can be. That dialogue is not helped by artificial divisions. What will help is our ensuring that we are all going in the same direction and contributing positively—I stress "positively"—to the shaping and development of curriculum for excellence. The quality of what we get at the end of the process will be directly proportional to the input that we have from all teachers and teaching organisations, everybody in education and parents. We are going in that direction; I want us all to go in that direction. Everyone will find me very willing to work with them if we are working in a positive manner.

I envisage a continuing discussion about what is best for each young person. If Mr Macintosh wants to be part of that process—I hope that he does—let us engage on whether his suggestion would be useful or sensible for the young people involved. I hope that last week we witnessed the end of the type of spat that does not help curriculum for excellence, in which it is suggested that decisions are being made secretly or perversely. There is a management board: I am listening to the management board. The management board consists of representatives of the trade unions, the management side and education organisations, and it is keen to take part. Parents are welcome to contribute, too. Last week I launched a parental toolkit. I want more parental involvement. I repeat this point because it is so important: the reality is that if there is positive input on development of curriculum for excellence, day by day, week by week and month by month, and if we honestly and openly debate how curriculum for excellence is to be implemented, we will have what we are meant to have: a wonderful new system for the 21 st century. Some people think that it could be the best in the world; it will be the best in the world only if we all put our energy and imagination into it, rather than carp about it.

The member knows that I have been on record for many years and in many campaigns to ensure that good and accurate information is provided to parents, and to ensure that if flawed information is provided, the process of closure by an authority does not go ahead. I was a member of the Parliament's Education, Culture and Sport Committee when it conducted an inquiry—in 2002, I think—for which Cathy Peattie was a reporter, on provision of flawed information to parents. The legislation that is due to come into effect in April focuses on the quality of consultation in order to ensure that consultation is open, transparent and honest. Without commenting on the specifics of the case that John Wilson raised, I urge any local authority to ensure that if it has a closure proposal, it acts in the clear light of day, ensures that all the information is available and argues the case in terms of its commitment to good education in the area. Anything else will breed suspicion and will ultimately fail.

The brief answer to that is no. I know that time is pressing, Presiding Officer, but may I make a brief additional comment? I encourage all councils to treat closures at this stage as if they were taking place under the new legislation, which makes it clear that the quality of the consultation and the information that is provided are central to getting the process right. Schools close—that is regrettable, but it happens—and parents must be taken along through the process, confident that their elected representatives are telling them the truth. I want that to happen in every part of Scotland.

I congratulate Andy Murray, who is a product of a good Scottish education, although perhaps not a college education. However, I am sure that colleges will take the lesson on teaching tennis skills, if not on switching-off-BlackBerry skills. Iain Smith's concern for rural colleges certainly strikes a chord with me. Tomorrow, I will be at Barony College to discuss issues that it faces. I commend the rural colleges for focusing—as all colleges in Scotland have done—on the requirements of the recession, for developing new offerings and for ensuring that, although they are under additional pressures, as every college has  been, they are doing their best to cope. We hope to support every college in Scotland to the limit of our ability: we are trying to do that.

I am always astonished by the ability of Labour Party representatives to demand more expenditure when the Scottish Government's budget is being cut by their party at Westminster. Their performance is astonishing. I am aware of the pressures on students, which we do everything we can to address. This year, we were able to go even further than we went the year before. We could go further still if the consequences of the recession were not being made worse by the cuts that are coming from Westminster. That is regrettable.

The debate has certainly been constructive, useful and informative. It is not always possible to say that in the chamber. When we vote on the motion and the amendments, we will show some unanimity. I take the unusual step of suggesting that the Tories seek to withdraw their amendment, so that Parliament can take a wholly unanimous view. It is fairly obvious—[ Interruption .] If I am allowed to make progress, I will explain my request. I have an open mind about some issues in relation to assessing progress on literacy—some issues in the curriculum for excellence still need to be discussed, for example. Testing and qualifications are different. Teachers have, and will have, a role in assessing each pupil's progress and achievements in literacy and numeracy at all education stages—

Can I finish, please? I am explaining why the Tories should withdraw their amendment; I will be happy to take an intervention when I have done that. The teacher's role that I described does not mean a national test, but it does mean that teachers can and will use tests as a method of assessment, so there is a debate to be had about that. That was in the vision for assessment, which was published last September. The framework for assessment is due to be published later this month and the management group is consensual about progressing the issue. If the Tories insist on our voting on their amendment, that will run contrary to the progress that is being made with the curriculum for excellence. It will therefore be useful if the Tories do not ask us to vote on the amendment, but instead wait for the framework to be published, and be part of the progress on implementing that framework. Rhona Brankin is right to say that Liz Smith was—regrettably—overprescriptive after the previous debate. That has changed the atmosphere. If the Tories were to seek to withdraw their amendment, a better debate could be had about the place of testing and assessment in literacy. That would be useful. Several members have said clearly that they think that literacy should be the number 1 priority. I do not disagree, but the language of Parliament is often the language of priorities. We should try to look beneath that and to understand what we mean. I would rather call literacy a first-cause  issue for how we operate and work in Scotland. Its central importance to encouraging and developing each citizen can be illustrated if we consider the effects of what we might call illiteracy—I use the word broadly and I know that it is not the best term to use, but let us just use it. It is axiomatic that, without literacy skills, learning and achievement are impaired or negated. That is a serious educational issue, because it puts up an enormous barrier to an individual's gaining from the educational process at any stage. Without literacy skills, participation in society is impaired or negated: we have heard about several examples. Christina McKelvie talked about voting—without literacy skills, participating in the democratic process is difficult. Without literacy skills, participating in digital society is difficult—Mr O'Donnell referred to digital exclusion. That is another reason why literacy should be a first-order issue for us. Without literacy skills, attention to wellbeing is impaired or negated. I made that point in my opening speech and it remains profoundly true. People who do not have literacy skills do not look after themselves and do not have the tools to look after themselves. Without literacy skills, employability is impaired or negated. Even if someone without literacy skills manages to negotiate their way through the education system, their employability is very seriously affected. Without literacy skills, the chance of offending behaviour and repeat offending behaviour is greater. The correlation between figures on illiteracy and on imprisonment and offending is clear. It is a problem that arises when people do not have literacy skills. Without literacy skills, it is also likely that an individual will live in poverty. That is the case for all the reasons that I have given, and more. Most profoundly of all, without literacy skills, the likelihood is that the individual's children will lack literacy skills. Without literacy skills, people in our society become locked into a cycle of difficulty that leads to impairment in learning achievement, and to exclusion, poor health, poor employability and increased offending behaviour, again and again. Parliament can agree that literacy is a first-order issue for every politician in Scotland. We need to treat it in that way. That is why, as I said earlier, the work of the literacy commission is important. It draws our attention again to the priorities that we need to have in Scotland and how to implement them.

I regret Rhona Brankin's putting the question that way. I am trying to have a consensual debate. I regard literacy as being central to what we are seeking to achieve, but there is a difference between that and some of the methods by which we wish to raise attainment in Scotland, one of which is smaller class sizes. I ask members to accept the bona fides that I give on the matter. We are very concerned about literacy; we regard it as important that we take strong action. I accept what the literacy commission said to me in the meeting this morning: leadership and ownership across the political process and within the education system are needed. We have agreed to take matters forward. I have listened very carefully to all the speeches in the debate and I will ensure that my officials bring all the contributions together. We will then consider what more we need to do. We have said that we will sit down with the commission and agree an action plan. I am happy to see debate in the chamber on that. Members should please accept what I say; let us not divide on it. I turn to some of the important speeches in the debate. On making two references to the curriculum for excellence in her speech, Elizabeth Smith said that it mentions grammar only once. In fact, the guidance on reading and writing is clear in its expectations on punctuation, structure, spelling, vocabulary and accuracy. I regard grammar as being as important as literacy; certainly, it is in the curriculum for excellence. A number of members mentioned numeracy. We should always use the word numeracy in debates on literacy, but we should remember the way in which literacy at the higher order embraces numeracy. We should ensure that it is folded into our concerns. Christina McKelvie implied slightly unkindly that, as an author, Ian Rankin might be self-interested in the debate. As an author, I am self-interested, but I am so in exactly the way that Kenneth Gibson highlighted in his useful speech, as did other members. I refer to reading. I rather like the idea that, here as elsewhere, when a bell rings, we should all take out a book and read it. I hope that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee will consider that innovation. I would love to do that. Ensuring enthusiasm for reading among young people is enormously important. Over the Christmas period, the Scottish Book Trust moved forward on the issue by asking a number of  members what their favourite books are. I know my favourites, one of which I commend to the young people from Moray primary school who are in the public gallery today. It is "The Hill of the Red Fox" by Allan Campbell McLean, who was, of course, a former chairman of the Labour Party in Scotland: I thought that I would make the point before another member did so. That wonderful and exciting children's book had an enormous influence on me. Let us encourage our young people to read by speaking of our favourite books—

I did not hear Jamie Stone's sedentary intervention, but I always regard that as an advantage. Hugh Henry made the important point that one size does not fit all. There should be flexibility. I am sympathetic to his point on ensuring that individual schools can respond to the circumstances in which they find themselves. We will take forward that point. Des McNulty spoke about literacy champions in Glasgow. As a result of the curriculum for excellence, the idea is being replicated across Scotland. The debate has been positive and has shown members' enthusiasm to engage with the issue. I make the commitment that this Government will continue to engage with the issue. I hope that the Tories listen to my appeal for them to seek leave to withdraw their amendment. It would be very helpful if they did so.

I hope that, without saying whether there has been a change in attitude, the member will welcome the fact that, in ensuring that the literacy commission meets the management board, which means that the literacy commission's recommendations are taken into the system, even if there is no willingness now—although I believe that there is some willingness—we are ensuring that the potential exists for that to change.

Just to be absolutely clear, I neither said that nor believe it. The work that is required to be done to continue to build a curriculum for excellence is what will make the  difference. If Elizabeth Smith and others will join in that work, it will be all the better.

I never said that.

That positive suggestion from Johann Lamont that the single outcome  agreement process—a developing process that was positively discussed yesterday at the meeting between the cabinet and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—can continue to develop so that literacy is one of the issues included within it may well be useful and the local authorities that are not already doing that might wish to do it. I agree with the commission's recommendations that successful schemes should commence at an early age and use a range of proven teaching methods and that raising higher-order literacy-related skills should be a priority—I will return to that issue. It is true that there is no agreed definition of functional or basic literacy, but there is a clear understanding of what we as a society need to achieve. Within curriculum for excellence, the acquisition of literacy skills will not only provide every child and young person with the basic skills but will help them acquire the higher-order skills of analysis, interpretation of information and evaluation. Mr McNulty's point about numeracy is an interesting one, because there is a sense in which, when we define literacy in that way, we also embrace numeracy and literacy becomes, in essence, the skills that someone requires to function and cope in modern society.

I do not want to get into what my predecessor or her predecessor or any other predecessor did. I recognise the term, but one of the things that the literacy commission does for us is to extend the terms that we are using in the debate and recognise that there are levels of expectation in society that we need to address. I do not think that we should fall out about the issue. However, I think that there is such a thing as functional literacy, which we need to look at, but the higher-order skills must be there as well. I will focus on the curriculum for excellence, which is the burden of my amendment. For the first time, in the curriculum for excellence every teacher will have a responsibility for the development of literacy skills and to provide a coherent education from three to 18. The curriculum guidance for literacy is concise, thorough and clear about the outcomes that we want our young people to achieve.  Good teaching and learning in primary schools is the best way to provide the platform from which to improve literacy skills. Literacy across learning will enable secondary teachers to help young people better express their understanding of subjects and better explain their ideas in all they learn. Teachers will be freed up from overprescription—they know best how to teach. We are introducing new national literacy qualifications from school year 2012-13 to ensure that those skills are formally accredited and recognised. Our expectation is that most young people will be presented for the qualifications at some point before leaving school. The new qualifications will also be available for adult learners in colleges. Under the curriculum for excellence, young people will therefore learn the fundamentals of reading, writing, listening and talking, including spelling, structure and punctuation and, equally important, they will learn how those skills can be applied critically, across different media. Work is well under way to ensure that there is a detailed underpinning for the curriculum for excellence literacy proposals and I will keep the chamber and Scotland well informed about that. I agree fully with the commission's view on the importance of a child's early years and the importance of early intervention, not only for literacy but for a child's life chances, future health and employability, all of which are tied up with literacy. That is why we are working with local partners to implement our comprehensive early years framework and the associated frameworks that are aimed at tackling health inequalities and poverty. Rolling out the child-centred, personalised and multi-agency support in getting it right for every child should ensure that every child gets the required support. We are, therefore, putting into practice Labour's call for continuous and sustained support for families. We are also supporting local initiatives, such as equally well test sites, the family nurse partnership and Barnardo's you first programme. Nonetheless, I am happy to say to Mr McNulty that if more is needed, we will do more, and we recognise that more probably is needed. Early intervention will mean improved outcomes for each child further down the line, in respect of life chances, health outcomes and educational attainment. Investment in the early years pays dividends for society as a whole, in both social and economic terms. Developing parents' capacity to be the best parents that they can be for their children and helping them in the vital role that they play is another key. That is why we have developed a marketing campaign—play, talk, read—and a  supporting website, showing parents that they can make a difference to a child's uptake of essential skills. Reducing class sizes in the early years of primary school can make a contribution to driving up literacy standards. Every child would benefit from smaller classes, in which more time is spent by teachers on literacy and early intervention. In that way, together with providing the right level and quality of nursery provision, we are ensuring that our children are ready to succeed. There is no dichotomy between the good things that can happen and are happening in some nurture groups and the good things that can happen and are happening with smaller class sizes. I want to ensure that that understanding takes place, and that was part of the discussion that I had this morning with the literacy commission.

I am very deliberately not talking all the time about class sizes. I have discussed the subject in a paragraph almost 11 minutes into my speech. However, I think that there is a link between having smaller class sizes and increasing literacy. I am happy to say that literacy is, of course, a priority, but the means by which we achieve it can be many and varied.

No. Sorry, but I would like to finish this point. The means by which literacy is achieved are many and varied. I accept the literacy commission's recommendations, but I should be entitled to bring to the table other means that I think are important, too. We had a constructive discussion this morning and I do not want the debate to be unconstructive—there is a sort of Pavlovian response when I mention smaller class sizes.

No, I do not want to take a point from Johann Lamont. It is possible to see a contribution being made by smaller class sizes, just as it is possible to see a contribution being made by nurture groups, for example, as driven forward by Glasgow. Let us be generous in our understanding of each other's positions. I am conscious of the time and want to bring my speech to a conclusion. This morning, I spoke to  the literacy commission about a number of specific actions in which I would like it to be involved to move the issue forward. I am happy to say now what those actions are. The management board for curriculum for excellence is of great importance in advising me and driving forward the issues. I have asked the board to meet the literacy commission to discuss its recommendations, so that we can embed them in curriculum for excellence. We will take forward that process, and I was grateful for the commission's positive response. I suggested that the commission meet Graham Donaldson, who is undertaking a review of teacher education, so that he can embed within his review the issue of literacy as a priority. I also said that I wanted to ensure that all teachers would have the opportunity to include literacy in their CPD time, in the enhanced CPD that I communicated to schools last week; literacy should be part of the additional day that we are doing this year, as a taster rather than anything else. I take Mr McNulty's point about the issue being wider than the curriculum for excellence. I have therefore said to the commission that I would like my officials to consider a range of other issues in the report and we will meet the literacy commission again so that we can package an action plan with it around a range of things, including the curriculum for excellence. I am taking each of those issues seriously, moving matters forward and, I hope, involving members of the literacy commission in that way. I have already welcomed, and am happy to welcome again, the literacy commission's report. I agree that we should raise standards of literacy for all in Scotland. I await advice from the management board about curriculum for excellence and the literacy action plan, following its discussion with the commission. I am happy to note the success of the trade unions and others in supporting adult learners. We will continue to work in partnership with the Scottish Trades Union Congress on adult literacy and numeracy. I have noted the mention that has been made of the role of nurture groups. We have funded three pilots in nurture—in Stirling, West Dunbartonshire and West Lothian—as well as a national training event to promote the nurture approach. There is no dichotomy between that and the aim of reducing class sizes. We need to ensure that we continue to learn from the positive outcomes of on-going work with local authorities and community planning partnerships. I commend to members my small amendment on the curriculum for excellence. I understand that our amendment is acceptable to Mr McNulty. We  will support the Liberal Democrat amendment, but we will not support the Conservative amendment—

Although Mr Fraser might point out that we voted for such an amendment the last time, times change. I move amendment S3M-5512.2, to insert after "literacy action plan": "within the context of the Curriculum for Excellence, which has the aim of raising standards of literacy at every level".

I welcome the opportunity to report on the significant progress that the Government has made with its educational agenda, to pay tribute to the tremendous success of my predecessor Fiona Hyslop and to talk about the work that I and my colleagues intend to move forward. When I came into office, I pledged to reset the relationship with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to achieve real progress on key priorities including class sizes. As the Chancellor of the Exchequer's pre-budget report shows, the recession has put substantial and growing pressure on public finances. I have no doubt that we will hear a lot about manifestos this afternoon; however, I also know that there was no Labour manifesto commitment to a rise in national insurance or a rise in United Kingdom borrowing to an expected £178 billion. The Scottish Government and councils are facing an unprecedented budget squeeze and we now know that Westminster has cut the Scottish Government's budget by more than £800 million. [ Interruption. ] The truth is the truth, and facts are chiels that winna ding. The truth is that the Scottish Government's budget has been cut by more than £800 million. [ Interruption .]

We know that Westminster has cut the Scottish Government's budget by more than £800 million. The recession is hitting homes and high streets across the UK but, as we saw with today's fall in unemployment, action taken by this SNP Government to deal with the economic reality has lessened the impact in Scotland. Dealing with reality is the mark of a responsible Government. [ Laughter .] Presiding Officer, that laughter comes from those who will never be in responsible government. It is not good enough for any politician who aspires to government to ignore stark financial realities, and the refusal of Labour members—and now the Liberals—to acknowledge those realities and their party's culpability in them  shows that they have given up being a party of government. The concordat's strength lies in enshrining a realistic, flexible and sustainable approach to the important issues that face local and national Government. The Scottish Government in partnership with COSLA is firmly committed to the reduction in primary 1 to primary 3 class sizes. We firmly believe that delivering smaller class sizes in P1 to P3 is a necessary step towards improved attainment; indeed, evidence and common sense tell us that more quality time with teachers pays dividends, particularly for the most vulnerable children. I accept that Labour, for example, does not agree with that. On 11 September 2007, Wendy Alexander said in The Scotsman : "Class sizes are not a good measure of what matters." I believe that she is wrong, but I accept that there is another opinion on the matter. Then the UK Minister of State for Schools and Learners, Jim Knight MP, advocated teaching classes of up to 38. Speaking at a teaching conference in March 2008, he said that "class sizes of 38 are manageable" and that it was "perfectly acceptable" to have maths classes of 70. However, Scotland does not agree. No teacher agrees. Labour may want classes of 70—Scotland does not. Much progress has already been made. Average class sizes in primary school are at an all-time low of just 23.1, and whether it is improved support for kinship carers, the extension of free school meals or the expansion of nursery place numbers, there can be no doubt that real change for the better has been delivered. Over the past week, intensive discussions between COSLA representatives and the Scottish Government have produced a framework for further sustained progress between now and 2011 on the key concordat education commitments. No one should doubt the strength of my resolve to take forward the class size issue. Over the next few months, I will discuss with a range of bodies, including COSLA and Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, what we might need to do beyond January 2011 for continued, progressive implementation of this vital priority. The framework that we have discussed with COSLA has been submitted to the leaders of Scotland's local authorities, and COSLA will feed back its views with the aim of securing a renewed and strengthened agreement that focuses on delivery at a time of increasing financial pressure on the Scottish Government and local authorities. I am determined to demonstrate the strength of our  relationship by the way in which we take forward the issue. Given the current economic and financial challenges, it becomes even more important to keep our focus on providing effective early support and intervention for vulnerable children and families in Scotland. We have made good—indeed, unprecedented—progress in improving support to kinship carers, but we now need reform of the benefits system if we are to avoid the help that councils give to carers being taken away immediately by Westminster through the reduction in carers' benefits. I hope that members across the chamber will back the Scottish Government's campaign for the benefit changes that are needed to ensure that kinship carers get the help they need. Pre-school entitlement has gone from 412.5 hours per annum to 475 hours, and there is increased access to teachers in pre-school settings, such that, in comparison with the previous year, more than 3,600 more children had access to a teacher in 2009. Our manifesto committed us to piloting free school meals, which we did in 2008. Extending free school meals to the poorest families was implemented from the start of the 2009-10 school year. As a result, we have extended entitlement to an additional 44,000 pupils from hard-pressed families, and increased the number of pupils who are entitled to free school meals by 42 per cent. That is a real achievement. The concordat took us beyond our manifesto pledge. It committed us to free school meals for every pupil in P1 to P3 from next summer. The reality of the recession and Labour's cuts mean that we cannot now achieve that as quickly as we had hoped. Our proposed next step will be to target pupils in the 20 per cent most disadvantaged areas, and we will continue to give priority to intensifying support for the early years for very young children and their families through the effective implementation of the early years framework and the getting it right for every child programme. Those are also real achievements. The curriculum for excellence will raise standards for every child, and will enable every child to become a successful learner, a confident individual, an effective contributor and a responsible citizen. Pupil performance in exams is consistently strong, demonstrating the strength of our broad-based system; I have figures aplenty to quote on that. I am strongly committed to putting in place foundations for improving the long-term health of the nation. That is why, with my colleagues in health, we have already made sure that two hours of quality physical education are embedded in the  curriculum for excellence for every child, every week. We have also gone further than expected with technology. We have invested £37.5 million in glow, which is the only example in the world of an intranet that connects every school in the country. Of course, we inherited problems. We have to address the legacy of crumbling school buildings. Where the school estate is a problem, it is one that we inherited from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Buildings do not decline overnight; they were allowed to decline by our predecessors, although to be scrupulously fair, they also inherited a poor legacy after 18 years of Tory misrule. Around 260,000 pupils were in poor or bad schools when Labour and the Liberal Democrats left office. We set ourselves the target of lifting 100,000 pupils out of poor or bad schools. Well, we met our target in just two and a half years. In our first year, we lifted approximately 59,000 of those pupils out of poor or bad schools.

I am sorry that Liberal Democrat members do not wish to see improved schools in Scotland. That is a mark of their shame in opposition and their failure in government. In our second year, we lifted another 41,140 pupils out of poor or bad schools. That means that 100,000 pupils are now in decent school buildings that were delivered by this Government.

I am just so excited by our successes, Presiding Officer; I apologise. In its 2007 manifesto, Labour pledged to rebuild 250 more Scottish schools during this session of the Scottish Parliament. The SNP promised to match that pledge, brick by brick. Already 236 school projects have been completed since May 2007. No school that was committed to by the previous Administration has been delayed, and we expect to complete in excess of 250 during this parliamentary session. We are meeting the challenge, brick by brick. On my first full day in office, I visited Inverkeithing primary school, which shares a building with the newly established Carnegie primary school while the council builds Carnegie a building. Why do those schools have to share a building? Because under the old Labour administration in Fife, the new school was cancelled. Under the new SNP administration, the new school is being built; it will open in 2011. We  will not stop there. We are ambitious for the school estate and committed to investing in it. We are also making progress in higher and further education. We have restored the principle of free education by abolishing the graduate endowment fee, and we have just announced £30 million of additional measures to increase student income in 2010-11. Those measures will increase the income of more than 75,000 students next year. We have made tremendous progress on our manifesto commitments, but we are not complacent. We know what we still have to do. Where problems exist, we will work with imagination and dedication to solve them. We will work in partnership with parents and teachers to solve them. I would like also to work in partnership with members from across the chamber to solve them. We are determined to continue to make progress despite the hard times, which were created and have been exacerbated by Labour. I look forward to working across Scotland with everyone to make progress on what is a vital agenda. I wish all my colleagues a merry Christmas and a happy new year.

When the Rev Maureen Leitch spoke earlier, she said: "by giving a little kindness you can be the star". I advise Mr McNulty to bring a little kindness to the matter, but let us start with him being kind about the facts. I am pleased to say that we are making good progress on the difficult problem of teacher numbers. Today's claimant count figures show that the number of unemployed teachers in Scotland has halved in the past two months. He asked me what progress I am making—I am glad that so much progress has been made so quickly. We will go on making that progress week after week. [ Interruption .] I am trying to answer each part of the question in turn, Presiding Officer. It would be easier to do so if there were not noises off. Mr McNulty asked what we will do with Glasgow. I intend to meet Councillor Steven Purcell this week. If, like me, he is a reasonable person—[ Laughter .] I know that it is unusual to think of Steven Purcell as a reasonable person, but I do. If he and Glasgow City Council can discuss reasonably what is necessary for young people in Glasgow and how we can make progress on the basis of the concordat agreement and the flexibilities that we have shown, the young people of Glasgow will benefit. Similarly, the young people of Scotland would benefit if the Parliament supported the measures that we are talking about, if it was enthusiastic about change and if it recognised the difficulties that we have got into through no fault of our own—it is the fault of the Labour Government south of the border—in making progress on the issues. Kinship carers strikes me as an issue. The work that my good friend Mr Ingram has done on that is unprecedented. The previous Administration did nothing. That is the reality of the situation. Labour members could still redeem themselves by ensuring that their Westminster colleagues take the necessary actions on the benefits package. I hope that they will do so. We should not be distracted by nonsense from the Holyrood bubble. The reality out there is that there are many good schools, teachers and pupils. I will encourage them for every hour that I am in my present office.

It might be the pantomime season, but I do not treat education as a pantomime.

I advise Mr Fraser and any other member in the chamber to do exactly as I do and to treat the matter with the seriousness that it deserves. I outlined in my statement all our achievements—and there are many of them; I could have spoken for another 10 minutes and still not finished the list. At the end of my statement, I made a commitment to work across the chamber to see what we could do.

If Mr Rumbles will stop shouting, I will be able to answer questions. I will work as hard as I can across the chamber to ensure that the class size pledge continues to be rolled out in a way that benefits children. The information that I have as cabinet secretary came to me when I became cabinet secretary; I did not receive any briefings on education until that time. Given all the circumstances, we all know that we have a big opportunity. The Liberals, Labour and the Tories might wish to live in the Holyrood bubble, but most people in Scotland do not live in the Holyrood bubble; they live in the real world where there are real difficulties. The prizes go to the children and others who work hard to solve problems, rather than trying to make them.

I wish that Margaret Smith would just focus on what she and I agree on. We both want smaller class sizes—I have had that conversation with her—and I want to make sure that we continue to deliver smaller class sizes. The document makes it absolutely clear that the framework creates the opportunity for councils to achieve the target that we have set them in a verifiable way. That is the discussion that we are now having. The door is open; I hope that local authorities will come through it. We will get an agreement that can be verified and we will make progress on that target. I want those lower class sizes; Margaret Smith wants those lower class sizes. Let us get rid of her rhetoric and get some results. The Liberals could be around for a long time and not match the list of achievements over two and a half years that I gave for Fiona Hyslop and her team.

That is the best question that I have had so far. It is also the only question so far that is based on fact, not prejudice. The reality is that yes, of course, we are doing even better. We are doing far better and we will continue to do so. The important thing here is not  shouting from Andy Kerr—that is never important—but that better schools are being provided for young people, and that the people responsible for providing the worst schools were those in the previous Administrations. That is the truth.

It is my policy to ensure that we have the right number of teachers in Scotland for the circumstances in which we find ourselves. If every Labour local authority were to sign on with me to maintain every single teacher, we might be able to do that. If they are not prepared to do so, I will face the reality of the situation in which I will find myself, particularly because of the Labour-exacerbated recession, and I will ensure that a number of things happen. The first is that we will try to ensure that the teachers who are trained get into jobs as quickly as possible. I am very pleased to be the inheritor of the good progress on that that I have reported to the Parliament this afternoon. From an unacceptable start, we are going in the right direction. The second thing that I will guarantee is that teachers who are in classrooms are supported to the ultimate degree by this Government, the new developments in curriculum for excellence and, I hope, throughout the chamber. That is what we should be doing. The third guarantee that I will give is that those who go into training as teachers will get the most modern and the best training that they could possibly get. If Mr Macintosh wants to tie himself to anything else, he may tie himself to what he wants.

I cannot know everything in two weeks—I am sure that the member would accept that. However, I am told that the curriculum for excellence is making very good progress on that ambition and I am happy to ensure that we keep up to speed on it.

Mr O'Donnell will know, because he has been involved in the sector longer than I have, that the big fall in nursery teachers came under the previous Administration. Admittedly, he was not a member of the previous Administration, so he can walk away from that. I am happy to provide the full statistics on numbers of nursery teachers—

Presiding Officer, would it be possible for me to finish without interruption from Margaret Smith? She keeps waving her hands.

I will be happy to provide the information to Mr O'Donnell. I am not avoiding the issue. He will be provided with the information. However, the fact is that the big fall in nursery teachers came under the previous Administration. My statement was not long on anything other than facts, but if there are some facts that I have not covered, he is welcome to them.

I know that this is the subject of a number of inquiries by Mr Henry. I am not avoiding the issue by saying that I know that it is now also the subject of a referral of an accusation that was made about the First Minister. In those circumstances, it would be wisest—because I do not have the information in front of me—to provide the answer in writing and within the context of those inquiries.

Of course. I am happy to confirm to Mr Doris that the commitment in the concordat—which went further than our manifesto—remains intact, but the pace of delivery has had to be altered. That is inevitable, because of the savage cuts from south of the border, about which the only people who are in complete denial are the Labour group and its denier-in-chief, Mr Andy Kerr.

I sympathise greatly with Malcolm Chisholm's point about protecting education and I will do everything that I can do to achieve that, but the explanation of Labour's policy that followed the pre-budget report was less than convincing. On the radio the next morning, the chancellor ruled out sixth-form colleges as part of the educational establishment. What Alistair Darling and Ed Balls have said about schools allows such wriggle room that the commitment has not been made in the terms that Malcolm Chisholm described. I want to protect education, which is our investment in the future. However, Malcolm Chisholm will accept—although he might not agree—that the concordat created parity of esteem between levels of government. Local authorities must make their decisions. They do so on the basis of proposals that they issue for discussion and consultation. I understand that no final decision has been made in almost any Scottish local authority area. Decisions will be taken locally in consultation with local voters. My responsibility is to continue to protect and defend the best in Scottish education, which is very good indeed. The standards in Scottish education are very good. Members who seek to make political points by running down those standards damage Scottish education and themselves.

Yes, of course. Scotland's colleges richly need the support that they have. I have had interesting discussions with representatives of Scotland's colleges in the past fortnight and I will continue to have those discussions. I draw several conclusions from my experiences in the past fortnight, the strongest of which is that Scottish education has such strengths that if problems exist—as they do—they can be solved by the strengths in Scottish education. I intend to encourage those strengths.

I discussed with the curriculum for excellence management board yesterday a range of issues. Nobody around that table said that delivering the curriculum for excellence was impossible. Concern was and always is felt about the situation in which some local authorities find themselves—I had a large-scale education stakeholders meeting yesterday about that. We know—and all members should admit that the Parliament knows—that the overwhelming reason for that situation is Labour's cuts. We need to work together to find a way through that. I am sure that each and every local authority—no matter what its political control is—will act to achieve the best outcomes. The Government will encourage that.

What it requires is to continue the record investment that the Government has been undertaking. If the member had been present earlier this morning, he would have heard me say not once but twice that improvement in education requires us, as a Parliament, to work together to build a consensus and ensure that we all encourage performance—not undermining developments such as the curriculum for excellence but ensuring that we get them right. I look forward to his participation and that of his party. Indeed, I look forward, I hope, to the participation of the entire Parliament.

Absolutely not. I will not accept that in the slightest. Our policies are driving forward improvements in Scottish education. When relationships require to be improved in order to improve delivery, that is what will happen. Once again—and we have only reached question 4—a representative of the Labour Party has demanded more spending. Frankly, it cannot go on like that. If a member of the Opposition, particularly the Labour Party, wants more spending, let them speak to the chancellor about the £500 million cuts.

Margaret Smith was not listening.

I am so overwhelmed by what Ken Macintosh said that I am still mulling it over. I  have heard many bizarre things this morning, but the view that we should respond to the alleged crisis in teacher numbers by going on training more teachers seems to be the strangest that I have ever heard in politics—and I have heard many strange things in politics. I heard some of those things over two or three years when I was a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee with Mr Macintosh. Let us try to take a rational view of what we will all try to do together in education. I hope that what we have heard this morning is, if I may quote, the "end to ane auld sang". I am sure that some members want to harp on about issues in education simply because they think that they will get a political bounce out of doing so, but the opinion polls show that the bounce is not there. Therefore, let us now focus seriously on the politics of ideas, and let us try to bring real ideas to the Scottish education debate with some consensus. Rarely has so much been said in a single morning about the Swedish system of education by people who have no knowledge whatsoever of it. The reality, of course, is that we need new ideas in Scottish education.

No. Let me finish. Let us start from where we are. I made that plea at the beginning of the debate, and I am making it again at the end. As I have said, hundreds of thousands of young people are being taught well by tens of thousands of teachers in thousands of schools. That is the real situation in Scotland. There is a local authority delivery mechanism for education in Scotland, and local authorities and the Government have a good relationship. Let us build on that from where we are, and in the process, let us bring in the fresh air of thinking that is shorn of ideology. We need good ideas. I want to refer to one or two of the good ideas that have been given. I start with Peter Peacock, who made one of the best speeches in the debate. He did so with the tremendous experience that he gained from the job that I am taking on. I hope that I can do that job as well as he did. He opened up the clear divide that exists and talked about whether we should retain tools to direct in relationships with local authorities, or whether we should develop a different relationship with them that relies on a different method, involving mutual respect, to achieve shared objectives. I do not agree with Mr Peacock's argument, but I accept it. Malcolm Chisholm raised the same point well. We need to debate the matter.  We need to bring in fresh thinking and ideas. I heard some fresh ideas from the Labour Party, although not as many as I would like, and one or two from the Tories, many of which I do not like. I am not the father of the Swedish education system, but I am glad about that, because Liz Smith does not even know what it is. I regret that I heard not a single new idea from the Liberal Democrats. Yesterday, I said that I want to reset my relationship with Scottish local authorities. I also want to reset the relationships in the Parliament between the parties on the issue of education. I have already met the education spokespeople. We will disagree and no doubt there will be endless theatre in the chamber, but I want to ensure that we make practical progress on what we want to achieve. I want to point up the key issues that we need to progress. Of course, the reality is that money is an issue; indeed, it is always an issue. We have heard again and again from Labour Mr McNulty's plea for more money. If that plea is to be applied to every policy that we discuss, Mr McNulty might start the process by persuading his colleagues south of the border that we need a more realistic assessment of Scottish financing than has been shown by the removal of £500 million. I see that Mr Whitton, who has not been involved in the debate, wishes to comment on that, but I will not let him, because he has not been in the chamber. I want those who take part in the debate to be people who are committed to Scottish education and who want to be involved in the discussions. I look forward to seeing the literacy commission's report, which I will treat seriously. If ideas come from any political party that have been well worked through and put forward by people who are trying to contribute, I will treat them seriously. I look forward to appearing before the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Some of the best times that I had in the first parliamentary session were as a member of an education committee that worked well. Its members worked closely together. I also look forward to appearing before the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Perhaps when I do so, we will move on from her description of me as Worzel Gummidge. I do not mind that she described me in that way, but I suspect that it was not right to describe COSLA's education spokesperson as an Aunt Sally. That was not helpful or productive. However, I accept it when she says that that was not a cheap debating point. Let us move on, and let us have a relationship based on discussing ideas. I was struck by one or two other contributions to the debate. The issue of post-probationary  teachers is extremely serious. There are a range of reasons why we find ourselves in that position, for example the recession and the cutting of teacher numbers. What local authorities have done is indisputable. There are issues of long-term planning. I am old enough to remember that planning for teacher numbers is a boom-and-bust scenario that has been going on for not one, not two, but three generations. The direct relationship between teacher numbers and class sizes is, of course, another issue. I am concerned about every individual whose potential is being wasted because they are not contributing their all in their chosen profession. Alas, that does not apply only to teaching. There is great disappointment throughout society at the effects of a worldwide recession that, I have to say, is made worse by political decisions south of the border. However, I make a commitment to work as hard as I can to ameliorate that situation, just as I will work hard with my colleagues Mr Brown, Mr Ingram and others to take forward what I see as the key issues in Scottish education. I will return to those key issues later. I am not ashamed in the slightest, as David McLetchie hoped I might be, about being passionate about the idea of class sizes. Why am I not ashamed of that? Because there is incontrovertible evidence that in the early years of school, when children are forming their ideas and their abilities, if we teach them in a way that reflects that contact between teachers and children, they move forward faster and further, not just in primary school or in secondary school but in their life chances. I think that it was Sir Isaac Newton who said that education is not the filling of a well but the lighting of a fire. The job that we must all do in this Parliament, with our collective responsibility for Scottish education, is to light that fire and ensure that young people have the best chances from the start of life, right through. Education is a lifelong process and every individual should benefit. I commit myself to that this morning. I want to do so with the other spokespeople and the other parties in this Parliament. I make that offer. Please do not spurn it. We have had our fun this morning; let us move forward together seriously.

I am happy to provide a copy of the full article to the member and, when he has read it, I am happy to debate it with him. However, if he cannot be bothered to read the full article, he should not simply refer to two lines from it. That does not do him, or anybody else, any good.

No.

I do not recognise that description of the concordat. Does the member think that Liberal Democrat councils and councils in which Liberal Democrats are jointly in power  would recognise it, given their willing signing up to the concordat and their great partnership in it?

Will the member give way?

The member read the extracts accurately, because I was asking for a debate, not advocating an idea. Given that we all want to be shorn of ideological prejudice, will he abandon the ideological prejudice against another thing that makes Sweden so successful: independence? If he will do that, we are moving forward.

One moment please, I want to get going.

Well, I intend to get going; members should not doubt that. In 2003, the previous Administration launched its national debate on education, which was supported by all the political parties and the Education Committee. Ambitious ideas were developed and then introduced under curriculum for excellence. We shared an almost unprecedented consensus across Parliament that the principles and values of curriculum for excellence were and are right for our children and young people. They are right for Scotland and they meet our ambition. What is our ambition? As I have said, it is to have a world-beating education service that draws together pre-schools, schools, colleges and universities, with a commitment to keep moving to achieve the highest standards for those who are within the system. Of course, there is still work to do, and it is deeply irresponsible of politicians to make a crisis  out of a problem. Using that language debases the work of all those thousands of professionals.

No, not at the moment. The evidence shows that this has been a year of successful achievement for pupils and their teachers. Together, they have delivered record exam results. Entries for highers and advanced highers rose by 3.2 per cent and 4.2 per cent respectively, despite falling school rolls. Pass rates at higher and advanced higher level are at a record high. Standard grade pass rates are at their highest since 2000. That is not a crisis.

Things might not be hunky-dory, but we are not in a crisis.

Well, as everyone keeps saying this morning, I like to use language accurately. We do not have a crisis in Scottish education; we have problems to solve. If Mike Rumbles would like to be part of the solution I welcome him, but if he is not part of the solution he is part of the problem. I will give some more examples. Latest comparisons from the 2006-07 school year show that in Scotland, 69.8 per cent of pupils achieved the equivalent of a GCSE pass in English compared with 60.2 per cent in England, 57 per cent of Scottish pupils achieved a similar standard in a science subject compared with only 51.3 per cent in England, and 48.6 per cent of Scottish pupils achieved that standard in a modern language compared with only 30.9 per cent in England. We can and must keep improving, but we need to use the right language to describe where we are.

I want to address that and, of course, we will have debates and discussions. I was a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee for four years during the first session of Parliament, and I always take such issues seriously. However, I want to ensure that we solve  problems and do not just magnify them for political purposes. That is my aim. It is quite clear that every sector has a crucial role to play in improving the learning of our children and young people. Preparing a young person for learning begins before they are born, which is why we must not forget the important roles that are played by health professionals, social workers and those who support parents to give our children the best start in life. I look forward to meeting those professionals. I will work closely with the Minister for Children and Early Years, who has done a fantastic job on implementing the early years framework, which we developed jointly with COSLA. We also have to embed the getting it right for every child approach—which we will have a chance to talk about this afternoon—in the work of every professional and practitioner who works with children and young people. The provision of timely, proportionate and appropriate early intervention is the key principle of additional support for learning. The ASL legislation provides the framework for schools to deliver such support for children and young people.

Of course I will address the point, and I will do so in collaboration with local authorities. I have started that process. I make this point to Mr Brown, because he is a sophisticated thinker on these matters: we should ensure that we do not always lean on inputs; we must also look at outputs. I am happy to debate the issue with local authorities, in the chamber and elsewhere, and I will do so on the basis that we are delivering better and better education. I will now address curriculum for excellence. We have heard a great deal of scaremongering this morning, and no doubt we are going to hear more, but I will listen to teachers in the classroom. Yesterday, I was in Inverkeithing, where I had a discussion with a range of teachers in their classrooms. Three of them said that curriculum for excellence is doing just what they want. It is making their job a job that they want to do.

No. I go back to what Larry Flanagan, the education convener of the EIS, said in September 2009: "Curriculum for Excellence offers an opportunity to regain professional control of teaching and learning—a change, certainly, in contrast to the over-prescriptive practice of the  last decade, and a challenge too, but not one that should overwhelm teachers." It is right to ensure that professional people have the tools that they need for their job. It is right to encourage and help them to develop. Every good teacher I know—and I know many good teachers—wants the challenges of curriculum for excellence and they want to get it right.

No. The member has made her point and I want to make mine. That is why there is a management board of 17 members from the profession, four of whom are from the teacher unions. I will meet them shortly. No major decision on the progress of curriculum for excellence has been made without the recommendation of the management board members, and I will seek their views. In particular, I welcome the involvement of several representatives from the teaching unions, including School Leaders Scotland, in the management board's qualifications governing group, which will oversee development of the new qualifications, including the literacy and numeracy awards. For the first time since devolution, all teachers will be responsible for improving the literacy and numeracy of all children, and will support their success in gaining those awards. Of course, I recognise that there are concerns. There must be time to prepare children for the new awards, and we must ensure that the new qualifications are robust and challenging and demonstrate our commitment to raising standards. I will discuss those concerns with the professionals, parents and pupils. Let us just inject a fact into the scaremongering. I note that the first children who will be presented for the new qualifications are currently in primary 7. There is ample time, commitment and enthusiasm to develop the detail, engage extensively and get the proposals right before the first qualifications are received in 2013. I will not sign off on any proposals until I am satisfied that they will improve national standards and are workable. I will discuss with the profession at every stage. Significant resources are already being provided for curriculum for excellence. It is the future. We should be getting behind it and ensuring that it works rather than trying to undermine it in the way that I have heard it undermined this morning.

Then we are all on the same page, so let us ensure that we all work together to get it right. I look forward to that. I will finish on the issue of class sizes. I am passionately committed to the question of class sizes, not because it is abstract but because it will make a difference. I am certain that we are making progress, and I will continue to drive it forward in partnership with others. That is what we need to do. We need to have ambition, we need to focus and we need to ensure that we make achievements, but let us use the right language. Across the Parliament, across the sector and across Scotland, there is huge commitment and enthusiasm. We are delivering and we will go on delivering. Let us deliver education for Scotland in the way that the current Government has done and our predecessors did not. I move amendment S3M-5334.2, to leave out from "regrets" to end and insert: "recognises the progress of Scottish education under successive devolved administrations; further recognises the need to ensure effective delivery in every education sector in order to continue such progress; believes that the full and active participation of all stakeholders, particularly teachers, parents and pupils, and, of course, local authorities, is essential to achieving the best outcome including smaller class sizes, and agrees to continue to take such issues forward in pursuit of national educational excellence."

The proposed business structure for creative Scotland was announced in October. Working with the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, Creative Scotland 2009 Ltd is continuing discussions with staff and the trade unions about the transfer of staff, the post-filling process and how best to support those people who do not have a post in the new structure. A redeployment unit has been established in the Scottish Government to help surplus staff in the public sector, including those in creative Scotland, to find alternative employment elsewhere in Scotland's public sector. The Scottish Government is providing on-going support to Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council. As a Government, we remain committed to our policy of no compulsory redundancies. The commitment applies to all permanent staff in the Scottish Government core, the agencies, the non-ministerial departments and the non-departmental public bodies. I expect the organisations involved, when they redeploy staff, to follow best human resources practice in finding suitable alternatives to compulsory redundancy.

I acknowledge that point, which is a good one. It is a difficult time for many of the staff, but the organisation is committed to retaining expertise, and I am extremely enthusiastic about the new structure that has been devised by Creative Scotland 2009. It manages to blend a deep level of expertise with the flexibility that the organisation will need to respond to modern challenges in the broadcasting sphere and across the rest of the creative industries and the arts. We are mindful of those issues, and I am grateful to Margaret Smith for raising them.

It will clearly be in the interests of the new organisation, and of all of us who are concerned for culture in Scotland, to ensure that the people in the new posts are well trained, have experience, can operate in a flexible manner and are focused on the task in hand. I am certain that we will achieve all those things, and I am grateful for the support of members across the Parliament for the process of developing and building the new creative Scotland.

The Scottish Government will publish a white paper on 30 November and introduce a referendum bill in 2010.

I agree with Aileen Campbell. [ Laughter. ] I know that that comes as a surprise to  Mr McLetchie and his colleagues—Mr McLetchie always laughs loudest when he is surprised. As Aileen Campbell pointed out, it is perfectly possible to implement the parts of the Calman proposals on which there is agreement. Until this morning, we thought that there was agreement on most parts of the proposals; unfortunately, the Conservative party keeps reneging on whatever its commitment was. That is not new for the Conservative party—it did the same on its commitment to Scottish change in the 50s, the 60s, the 70s, the 80s and the 90s. It is now reneging on Calman. The proposals on which there is agreement can be implemented swiftly and the timetable that we published yesterday is entirely clear. Given the really important issues that we are dealing with, such as speed limits and air-guns, I ask members to consider seriously whether it would be better if we just did it, and did it now, instead of playing about as the Secretary of State for Scotland does and, alas, as the entire Tory party also wishes to do.

I have been at many of the national conversation events and I have not found there to be any languishing at all. Quite the reverse is true. I will follow Mr Fraser's logic to its extreme. Given that support for independence hovers between 30 per cent and 40 per cent, and support for the Conservative party in Scotland languishes at somewhere around 15 per cent, is not it about time the Scottish Conservative party dissolved itself and put us all out of our misery?

Scottish ministers discuss all matters that may influence the future prosperity of the Scottish economy, including issues such as the impact of the UK joining the euro.

A number of economic tests would require to be applied, and the willing assent of the Scottish people would be required. Those two things should not be seen separately. There are strong arguments that the euro in Scotland would be useful to Scottish business. Ultimately the Scottish people will take the decision. It would be best taken when Scotland is independent, so I look forward to being able to take the decision reasonably soon.

We are in a monetary union within the United Kingdom, and neither I nor any of my colleagues intend to relieve ourselves of the money that we possess within that monetary union, so Jeremy Purvis can take it that we have to support a monetary union within the UK.

This is a proper subject for debate, and people hold strong positions on either side of the argument. It has been argued that adopting the euro would reduce the cost to Scottish companies of trading across the euro area, an economy that is five times the size of that of the UK. Almost all the European Union states are committed to membership of the euro, including the fast-growing accession states such as Poland and the Baltic neighbours. The advantage of trading in euros would therefore grow in time. The euro would also bring exchange rate stability. There is a range of arguments in favour but, as I say, the proper way to reach the decision is to judge the matter economically and democratically.

The detailed costs of the referendum will be set out in the financial memorandum accompanying the referendum bill, which we will introduce early next year.

My real job is to serve the people of Scotland, and to help them to understand the reality of their situation. In those circumstances, I can think of nothing better to do than to tell the truth about the difficulties that the union presents to Scotland, and the opportunities that independence will present to Scotland. I am pleased to undertake that task. I speak affectionately of Mr McLetchie, whom I have known for a very long time, including at university. He was, at that time, a man who knew the cost of everything but the value of nothing. Unfortunately, he remains a man who knows the cost of everything but the value of nothing. I suggest—this is not a question, Deputy Presiding Officer; it is merely a suggestion—that he look for areas in which unnecessary expenditure could be curbed. I would start with the cost of 59 MPs. If we were to cut them out, we would save a substantial amount of money. That is something that people could do by voting yes in a referendum.

The Lisbon treaty will have a significant effect on Scotland. There will be new areas of European Union competence and practice relevant to Scotland's devolved responsibilities, affecting how the EU operates in the areas of energy, agriculture, fisheries and justice, among others. The treaty also includes a protocol on subsidiarity that will give the Scottish Parliament the opportunity to influence Commission legislative proposals.

Once the Lisbon treaty is in force, everything will need to be negotiated by co-decision between the council and the European Parliament, except fishing opportunities. I appreciate that Mary Scanlon is asking where matters that are in progress will fall. I believe that, if they are completed, the regulations will be completed under the present powers. However, I am happy to write to her to clarify that important point. Fishing opportunities, which will not be decided by co-decision, include the setting of total allowable catches, quotas and effort. Those matters will be agreed at a much-diluted December fisheries council, when there will be no scope to introduce complex technical provisions. In the longer term, that may well prove to be beneficial, although in the short term there is considerable anger at what is presently taking place.

The Scottish Government currently has no plans to send a delegation to Cuba, but I am open to discussions with both Elaine Smith and the Cuban Government about how relations between our countries might be developed. I have agreed to meet the Cuban ambassador on his visit to Scotland next month.

In my discussions with the Cuban ambassador, I shall focus on matters that relate to the bilateral interests that exist between the two nations. Any decision that the Westminster Government makes is for the Westminster Government. It is my view that, in the light of positive developments around human rights and political freedom issues in Cuba, we should talk about the ways in which we can build and develop a relationship of confidence between Scotland and Cuba.

As I said just a moment ago to Mr McLetchie, the detailed costs of the referendum will be set out in the financial memorandum accompanying the proposed referendum bill, which we will introduce early in the new year. It is appropriate for the Scottish Government to make provision for the referendum in the budget once the Parliament has approved the bill.

I am not a believer in conspiracy theories, unlike the questioner. The reality is that there are proper processes for making freedom of information requests and for answering parliamentary questions, which are all being answered with transparency and honesty. The white paper that will be published on Monday will indicate the way in which the work has been undertaken. The member would have learned—

If the member would pause for a moment, she might learn something from this answer. She would have learned a great deal about the process had she attended a single one of the national conversation meetings or taken part in any of the processes of the national conversation. It is somewhat perverse to attempt to criticise that process without having taken part in it. It strikes me as being a sign of a closed mind. The national conversation has been for open minds—it could even have opened her mind.

From festivals to ceilidhs, traditional arts activities the length and breadth of the country play not only a vital economic role, but a valuable cultural one. I am sure that that will be evident this weekend as we all celebrate St Andrew's day.

I am certainly happy to do so. As I have said several times in the chamber, and as I will repeat when I give the Sabhal Mòr Ostaig lecture on 7 December, there is a real need to create a new generation of Gaelic speakers in Scotland, which needs to be done in every part of Scotland. If enthusiasm and commitment exist in Kilmarnock, I will certainly encourage them. In bringing to an end the year of homecoming, which  was highly successful, as we now know from the published figures—

In bringing the year to an end, we will also look forward, in order to ensure that the tourism and cultural activities continue unabated. I hope that even those well-known killjoys, such as the member who is commenting from a sedentary position, will trip the light fantastic, sing and dance this weekend to celebrate the great success of the Scottish year of homecoming.

A number of initiatives are in place to make progress with the provision of Gaelic-medium education at secondary level, including increased funding and resources, continuous professional development for teachers, public body Gaelic language plans, teacher recruitment and the Bòrd na Gàidhlig education working groups that are considering various aspects of GME provision at secondary level.

Gaelic-medium education has been remarkably successful and it is one part of a range of provision. To return to the creation of a new generation of Gaelic speakers, there is no doubt that, although Gaelic-medium education has continued to sustain the language, the total number of speakers has not risen in the way that the previous Government and the present one hoped when the plans were set. We must therefore focus as strongly as we can on increasing that number. That will be the focus of Government policy as we proceed.

The constitutional future of Wales is a matter for the people of Wales. Officials have had limited contact with the All Wales Convention. However, the First Minister and I met the Independent Commission on Funding and Finance for Wales—the Holtham commission—which, given its remit to study the Assembly's funding arrangements, as well as tax-varying and borrowing powers, was of more relevance to Scotland's interests. It is right for the people of Wales to have a say in their future, just as the people of Scotland should have their say on the constitutional future of Scotland in a referendum.

I can say without difficulty that I regard that position as untenable. The member will be aware that not just David Cameron's position but the Liberal Democrats' position is untenable. The one consistency to be found is within the Labour Party, which, despite its agreement with Plaid Cymru in the programme for government that it would back a referendum, is now saying that it is not sure whether it should do so. In Wales and in Scotland, the Labour Party is against reasonable change and letting people have their say.

It is, of course, for the people of Catalonia to decide on their constitutional future. There are currently no plans to send representatives to observe the Catalan referenda, but I am following developments there with interest and I have enthusiasm for that democratic process.

I suspect that the significant difference between the situation in Catalonia and Wales, where these issues are current, and the situation in Scotland is that, in Catalonia and Wales, there is a range of political parties that are enlightened and democratic while, in Scotland, there appear to be only two—the Scottish National Party and the Green party.

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate and thank her for raising the issue. As human beings, we have a tendency, which is quite understandable, to seek to make real and tangible ideas and concepts with which we sometimes struggle. We struggle more than most with the concept of kindness and how individual acts of kindness can change the world. Warren MacLeod has come upon a perhaps obvious but inspirational thing, which is to make tangible and real the concept of kindness. He is building on an old tradition in Scotland—a tradition of taking small things and using them to remind us of other much larger things. A good example might be the powers with which a particular type of bean—the Mary's kidney—is empowered in the Western Isles. The bean, which comes on the gulf stream from the Caribbean islands, is much prized. Those who find it on the shores of South Uist or Barra take it, keep it in their pocket and treasure it for the rest of their lives. Werner Kissling, the photographer and film maker who worked on Eriskay in the 1930s, found one on the shore on Eriskay and had it in his pocket for the rest of his life. Indeed, it was among his effects when he died. Warren MacLeod has taken that old idea of converting concepts into something manageable and has used it to inspire the world with the idea of kindness. Robin Harper is quite right to say that the only problem with the idea is its modesty. Perhaps we need many more Sconestones around us. It would be intriguing to see a Sconestone doing the rounds in the Parliament on a weekly basis. At least once every two or three years, each member would have to observe the rules by doing an act of kindness to a person, animal or thing for the good of the planet as a whole; by keeping the stone for no more than seven days; by encouraging friends and strangers to touch the stone and pledge to do an act of kindness; by passing the stone on to a person whom they trust, who will honour the  purpose of the stone; and by telling the story on the Sconestone website. If we had our own Sconestone here, perhaps this would be a different place. The idea that a single act of kindness will inspire others to kindness is inspirational and will, in time, change the world. Linda Fabiani has drawn attention to some of the keepers of the stone. For Scotland, Neil Galbraith could not have been a better first keeper, given that his whole life has been devoted to inspiring and caring for others. One or two other keepers whom Linda Fabiani mentioned are inspirational figures, too. The present keeper, who has the stone this week, is Zsuzsanna Laszlo, a 17-year-old girl in the Czech Republic. When she was 11, she gave away all her money to help other children whom she regarded as less fortunate than her. Unfortunately, Zsuzsanna is now very ill and is at home under doctor's orders. As we think of her and wish her well, I am sure that we also think of the acts of kindness that she has inspired in other people. Next, the stone will go to Zsófia Boros in Vienna, who is a talented musician and who is thinking of the acts of kindness that she wants to do. The debate has been unusual. I do not think that we have talked in such terms about kindness and the inspiration of kindness in the chamber before. We have not celebrated the work of individuals and the children at Hunter primary school for their involvement in such a project before. We have not had the time to step back and reflect on what kindness is and how it spreads around the world. One might suggest that it is especially fitting this year, which is the 250 th anniversary of Robert Burns's birth, to think of people who have strong affinity for their fellow men and women—individuals who recognise weaknesses and strengths but who want the world to be a better place. It is not an exaggeration to say that Warren MacLeod is of that nature. By his thought, his actions and his creativity, he is—bit by bit—changing the world. I am sure that the Parliament wishes to salute him and to wish the concept well.  Meeting closed at 17:21.

It has been a rich and varied debate, which has ranged widely throughout Scotland and across issues. I shall corral the general issues first, before considering the particular issues in each constituency. It is a sign of the variety of the debate that, during it, I was asked by one contributor to occupy and repatriate Berwick; by another to raze the Commonwealth pool to the ground; by a third to put up a whole new system of signage; by a fourth to take down the whole new system of signage; by a fifth to give £200,000 to move a ship; and—incredibly—by Jamie McGrigor to revise all the knowledge that any of us has ever had of the clearances and to see them as a Lib Dem social engineering experiment. That is fairly remarkable. However, the most incredible thing that I have been asked to believe—

Not at this stage. I am sorry. The most incredible thing that I have been asked to believe is that the holy grail is currently in Kilwinning. The journalist Tom Shields—whom Irene Oldfather mentioned—used to refer to Kilwinning as the Ayrshire burgh of culture, but even he would be astonished by that piece of information. My favourite story about Kilwinning is of the train going through Kilwinning to Ayr when it stops and the guard's van door opens. A greyhound jumps out and rushes along the platform. The porter leans out, points to it and shouts, "Stop that dug, it's a parcel!" However, this is not an opportunity for me to tell stories about Kilwinning—I could spend until 1 minute past 5 doing that. A number of members have referred to the historic environment (amendment) (Scotland) bill that we hope to produce. I welcome the Tories' indication that they will support that bill virtually sight unseen.

I look forward to that opportunity. I assure Ted Brocklebank that nothing in it will frighten the horses—or even the greyhounds. It will be a constructive bill. Christine Grahame raised the barring of the listing of a building when there is a live planning application related to it. This response might give an indication of the type of bill that I hope that it will be. The issue arises all over Scotland, and the draft historic environment (amendment) (Scotland) bill, on which we consulted over the summer, included proposals for an alternative way of dealing with the issue—by issuing certificates of immunity in certain circumstances. That is the type of constructive discussion that I hope we will have as we consider the bill next year. The bill is being prepared and worked on by Historic Scotland. I pay tribute to Historic Scotland, which has come in for a great deal of criticism during the debate. I participated in such criticism in previous years, but nevertheless I believe that Historic Scotland is determined to be outward focused and to ensure that it represents itself and those with whom it works differently. It is determined to speak of its successes, as well, and there are many of them. For example—Mr Brocklebank referred to this—admission income is up 21 per cent from last year and visitor numbers are up 8 per cent. That is a considerable achievement, which Historic Scotland has followed up with vigorous activity to ensure that it is providing a quality product. Historic Scotland is also being proactive in terms of buildings in Scotland. It has recently introduced a system for private clients specifically to encourage maintenance management plans so that buildings do not fall into disrepair, resulting in extra restoration costs. That issue was raised by several members. Almost every member raised the issue of windows. I reassure members that, although there are difficulties with replacement windows, it is no part of Historic Scotland's duty to snoop on people to ensure that their windows are absolutely pristine. In circumstances in which replacement windows are an issue, Historic Scotland will work hard with people to find alternatives and ensure that those alternatives are viable. Indeed, I met some of the residents of a tower block in Anderston that is a listed building. I have committed myself to discussing with them a better system of working between the council and Historic Scotland so that no difficulties arise. Their problem is doors—it takes a long time to replace the front door of a flat when it should not. There have been successes. Just outside Pauline McNeill's constituency, the former Royal Automobile Club building has been redeveloped and there has been agreement on the type of  windows. They will be energy efficient and provide better windows for the building, and although they will be modern windows they will look good in that setting. The measure of our successes is in the figures. In 2008-09, Historic Scotland considered 2,137 applications for listed building consent. It responded to all but 29 cases in 28 days—only 1.4 per cent of cases went beyond 28 days. In that year, it did not ask ministers to call in any of those applications, so the idea that there was an endless dispute going on is simply not true—not a single application was called in in that year. The pilot study with local authorities, to which I referred in my opening speech, was intended to ensure that advice is targeted only at the most difficult cases, which is how it should be. Climate change issues are important, and a lot of work is being done to ensure that buildings are fit for purpose. It is interesting to note, however, that old buildings can be recycled, which can make them more efficient in energy use than modern buildings. The investment that Historic Scotland can make with support from private individuals and others can make buildings better able to meet the challenges of climate change. There has been a lot of discussion about the listing of post-war buildings. Members should remember—although they might not have been around then—that, in the 1880s, when the listing system started, people would not have considered for listing or conservation any building of the Victorian era. In contrast, just think of how we now consider those buildings. The way in which buildings are listed and conserved has changed, but there are significant post-war buildings in Scotland. There will be a conference on them shortly, there is a new publication on them, and they are important. It is important that we recognise that and add them to our listing schedule. Not every building is important, but there are undoubtedly good modern buildings.

I saw some of that art on Friday night, when I had the privilege of being in the Rothes halls in Glenrothes. It is fine art. There is no system of listing art, but contents of buildings can be considered as part of the listing process. However, perhaps we need to think about how we list town and civic art. I would be  interested in hearing a proposal about how we can ensure that we know where it all is. I will close by addressing some of the specific points that members made about their constituencies. I was sorry that Christine Grahame did not mention Abbotsford, because a lot of work is being done on it by a lot of bodies, including the Heritage Lottery Fund. Colin McLean, from the Heritage Lottery Fund, was in the—

I apologise. I heard the reference to Sir Walter Scott, but perhaps I was not paying enough attention to catch the reference to Abbotsford—I was overwhelmed by Christine Grahame's request that I occupy Berwick, and I spent some time working on the logistics of the exercise. Abbotsford is a good example of a building and a collection that have gone through difficult times. Now, however, we have an opportunity to do something about it. The Heritage Lottery Fund offered early support, and Scottish Borders Council has put together a package. A fund is being put together that, I am sure, will result in significant work being done to upgrade Abbotsford over the next few years. That is a considerable achievement. It is not possible for me to deal with every building that members have mentioned, but I want to say something to Cathy Peattie about railways. The work of the Scottish Railway Preservation Society is important, as is the work in her constituency to develop the collection. Another part of the rail heritage of Scotland is the Forth rail bridge, which is on the tentative list for becoming a world heritage site. A review of world heritage sites is taking place at the moment, and I hope that the bridge will eventually be listed. I thank every member who has taken part in this debate. It has been useful and productive. I know that members have raised specific issues that I have not addressed. I will write to them if there are issues that they would like to raise with me again in writing. I am keen that we keep this consensus on the historic environment. The event that we had in the Bute hall was significant, and I will make sure that a report of the event is made available to all members. We invited members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to attend the event. When similar events are held in future, we  will also invite the parties' culture spokespeople, so that Iain Smith does not feel left out of it.

I make a clear commitment that the bill's purpose will not be to introduce new burdens. Indeed, I would not wish it to introduce new burdens. It will be a bill to tidy and make more efficient the activities that we undertake.

I will add another detail from the summit to keep Mr Smith absorbed. The issue of how the three bodies that Ian McKee mentioned—the Historic Houses Association, the National Trust and Historic Scotland—can work together constructively on marketing and ticketing was discussed at the summit. All three bodies will take action on it over the winter.

I warmly agree with that sentiment. I have several things to say to the member. First, the railway museum is working towards national recognition. Secondly, the museums summit that was held in June set up a museums task force—as I asked it to do—to consider national policy on museums, and that will look at industrial museums. Finally, I add that my visit to the museum allowed me to drive a steam engine, so I am eternally grateful to the member's constituency, because I achieved one of my ambitions.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I should have noted that the member was on the footplate of the steam engine with me.

I am conscious that that theme has recurred during the debate, and I will address it in my summing-up speech. However, I counsel the member to be cautious. There are good examples of window replacement that has taken place, and very good recent examples of the installation of solar panels in listed buildings. Work is being done on those things. I will address the matter further, but it is not all doom and gloom.

The member makes a valuable point about the linkage of sites and places, which is extremely important. Work is going on in the south-west of Scotland to provide a route that takes people from Dumfries via Dumfries house, in Cumnock, to the Ayrshire coast and Culzean. We should make use of that concept, and I am happy to explore with the member its application to Clydesdale.

I agree strongly with Pauline McNeill's comments and would go further. One of the strongest reactions at the summit—I know that Iain Smith is desperate for a blow-by-blow account of it—came during the discussion that took place about the holistic nature of the environment. In that, we heard how we live in a country in which the landscape and the built environment go together such that the benefits to people—health benefits and other benefits—come from engaging holistically rather than in separate parts.

Tavish Scott. [ Laughter. ]

Crail is an interesting case. It illustrates two points, one of which is that blanket conservation and scheduling do not work. Fortunately, several parts of the site have been descheduled and work is going on with the local authority, Historic Scotland and other bodies to ensure that development proposals are made for it. Only key buildings at the site are now scheduled, which is the right way ahead.

I have a feeling that a number of members will mention Castle Tioram. I heard Mr Rumbles rebuke me for not intervening earlier, but rather than intervene during individual speeches I will address the issue when I sum up.

Today's debate, as we have just been so powerfully reminded, takes place exactly 90 years after the first time that we stopped together to remember those who sacrificed their lives for us in war. However, there was not just a desire to remember; there was a desire to connect that remembrance to physical places. Every city, town and village throughout Scotland has a memorial dedicated to the war dead, so I open the debate by talking about the work of the War Memorials Trust, which perhaps signifies better than anything else how we attach significance to place and thing, as well as to ideas. The trust supports the protection and conservation of war memorials, the relevance of which does not diminish with time. The Scottish Government works in partnership with the trust to ensure that those memorials remind future generations of the sacrifice that has gone before. Scottish Government funding to the trust of £30,000 a year, which is provided through Historic Scotland, has in the past year meant that vital restorative work has been carried out at locations throughout Scotland as far apart as Orkney, Fort William, Penicuik, Glasgow, Ayr and Campbeltown. However, the relationship is also about sharing expertise. It is now about partnership—that is the modern relationship within the heritage sector. In the past year, the War Memorials Trust has made full use of Historic Scotland's conservation expertise in conserving those monuments. That is the tone that I want to set today. There are collaborations aplenty to be had. People are working together in the historic environment sector and working across sectors, in Historic Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland and the third sector, and with private owners and resources. That is why, without further ado, I am happy to accept both the amendments, so that we can concentrate our debate on what unites us, rather than on what might divide us. The motion refers to the summit that I had the great privilege of hosting last Tuesday in the  splendid setting of the University of Glasgow's Bute hall. That was where the potential of what we could achieve, given energy and ambition, became absolutely clear and began to be realised. The summit brought together experts and enthusiasts from a wide range of backgrounds—archaeology, building preservation and conservation, skills and materials, planning, tourism, architecture and design, property management, museums and of course the Heritage Lottery Fund, which has played such a significant role in Scotland for more than a decade. The public, private and third sectors were all represented. There is enormous potential to make creative coalitions in Scotland across every boundary to realise the full value of our historic environment to our people and our economy. I will start with the economy. The Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland published a fascinating report earlier this year in response to a request from the previous Administration. The report stated that the historic environment sector contributes in excess of £2.3 billion to Scotland's national gross value added, mainly through tourism, construction and regeneration. It directly supports 41,000 full-time equivalent jobs, which rises to 60,000 once indirect and induced effects are included. Its contribution is equivalent to 2.6 per cent of total Scottish GVA, and compares strongly to a number of other distinctive Scottish sectors. For example, the whisky, gin and vodka sectors produce 43,300 jobs and sport produces 45,500 jobs. The historic environment is a big economic contributor and a big contributor to employment. To break that down further, in a study by Biggar Economics Ltd, Edinburgh castle's quantifiable economic impact just on the city is estimated at £86 million GVA—just under 3,000 full-time equivalent jobs. On a Scottish level, Edinburgh castle—just one part of our historic environment—contributed £130 million GVA and more than 6,000 full-time jobs. The historic environment contributes strongly to Scotland economically and socially. However, there are difficulties and problems. Part of the process in which we are engaged is about trying to solve those problems. The difficulties that the National Trust has experienced have been clearly and publicly indicated—I am sure that members will raise those issues in the debate. However, George Reid's review of the National Trust, which was announced last week, will move the trust towards solutions. Historic Scotland has not been without its critics in Scotland, perhaps even in the chamber, perhaps even in the person of Mr Brocklebank—[ Interruption ]—and perhaps even in the person of Ms Gillon, who indicates that she wishes to be  included in that number. However, Historic Scotland involves people with tremendous ability and tremendous enthusiasm. We need to make that organisation and those in it more flexible and more open; we need to make the organisation more easily accessed; and we need to make its culture more outward looking. That is happening. I will give examples of that. Through Historic Scotland, I want the Government to work with the National Trust and the private sector—not in competition, but in collaboration—as they are vital to protecting and celebrating the historic environment. I want them to capitalise on the homecoming effect. The homecoming has been a spur to the creative collaboration that we need—it prompted the largest-ever joint ticketing arrangement between Historic Scotland, the National Trust and the Historic Houses Association, which has provided access to 135 admission-charging historic properties. Early indications are that the homecoming pass has been popular among visitors—thousands of redemptions have been made at Edinburgh castle alone. I record the contribution to homecoming that Historic Scotland and all the other bodies made. Historic Scotland was spun out from parts of the then Scottish Office as a next-steps agency in 1991. It employs more than 1,000 staff. Most are based in the field—some are literally in the field—and take care of the 345 sites that are in state ownership or guardianship. Such work is done in collaboration and partnership. For example, at Dundonald castle, which Robert II built in the 1370s to mark his succession to the throne, the local community runs the site on Historic Scotland's behalf. The agency has formidable and world-recognised expertise in technical and conservation matters. Its expertise is applied not just to the jewels of the historic environment—the listed buildings and scheduled monuments—but to the much wider historic environment. In that regard, I mention again the War Memorials Trust. The agency also produces practical advice that is relevant to anyone who lives in one of Scotland's 450,000-plus traditionally constructed buildings—those that were built before 1919. I commend to members the interactive "INFORM House", which will be launched in a few weeks, and the newly issued "INFORM Church", which was created in partnership with the major ecclesiastical bodies in Scotland. They are examples of how information can be provided to those who are responsible for such buildings. On the Scottish ministers' behalf, Historic Scotland undertakes vital work with local authorities and property owners to help them manage the impact of change. Historically, it has  done that through its role in the consent process, but now it must change—its regulation must become problem-solving regulation. Historic Scotland must have earlier and more positive involvement and must ensure that its task is releasing the full value from historic assets, rather than getting involved in the business of allowing such assets to be seen as an obstacle to progress.

I am glad that Mr Brocklebank agrees with me. I draw attention to the groundbreaking and important castles initiative, which represents a whole new way of working for Historic Scotland. Scotland has a long tradition of successful castle and tower-house restoration, which is not as expensive as one might think. Restoration must be undertaken with the involvement of and not in opposition to Historic Scotland. That is precisely what is happening through the castles initiative, which provides information about available properties and about how Historic Scotland can help the restoration process.

It is important to recognise that when decisions are made, they are decisions for that time and within the policy. The opportunity to make new applications always exists. I am certainly happy to say that if Castle Tioram's owner wishes to make a new application, Historic Scotland will work with that owner to consider what is possible. Not everything is possible and not every individual owner's requirements can be met, but I am determined that, while I am responsible for my post, Historic Scotland will be much more positive and helpful. Indeed, it is already being so. The challenge that Historic Scotland and we as a nation face is a large one. In 1882, when the first list of places that deserved the special protection of the state was drawn up, a mere six places in Scotland featured on it out of a United Kingdom total of 21. We now have about 8,000 scheduled monuments and some 47,000 listed buildings, of which about 3,500 are A-listed. We also have designated wreck sites, historic gardens and landscapes and more than 600 conservation areas, and I announced earlier this year that we would proceed to establish a new register of battlefields. Much has changed in the past century and a quarter. Above all, in contrast to 1882, the vast  majority of those places are not in the care of the state or even the public sector. The old contract—that the state would provide the funds and sometimes have the ownership, and that it would look after everything that was identified as having historic value—no longer applies. We need a new contract that shows the value of the buildings and sites and enthuses the public about their protection and the responsibility for looking after them. We are taking steps in that regard. I commend Historic Scotland for its work with other statutory bodies, including local authorities. A recent scheme involving Glasgow City Council, the City of Edinburgh Council and Perth and Kinross Council has explored how unnecessary duplication can be removed. A three-month pilot with those authorities, which focused on minor works to B-listed buildings, removed a massive eight years of delay from the system. We can do much more like that by working in partnership and with strong principles, but we cannot save everything. I note that Irene Oldfather is in the chamber. Sometimes, we cannot save things that we would like to protect, such as—

Mr Smith is making an ungallant remark from the front bench, from which I would like to disassociate myself if it was picked up. The Carrick/City of Adelaide is a valuable ship, but not everything can be preserved. Imaginative thinking early on would help.

I will be happy to listen to genuine solutions. If it is possible to make progress, we will do so. Given the number of years that have passed, I think that that will be difficult, but I am always open to suasion, even from Mrs Oldfather. [ Laughter. ] I say that in a very constructive way, as this will be a constructive debate. Presiding Officer, I am conscious of the time and I do not want to overrun my limit by too much, but allow me to make one or two further points. We have to preserve not only things that are well known as being historic but some things that are in the process of becoming historic—I make no reference to anybody in the chamber. For example, I look forward to opening a conference later this month on Scotland's post-war  architecture, following the recent publication by Historic Scotland of "Scotland: Building for the Future", which is a series of essays on post-war architecture in Scotland. During the summer, I was delighted, as members can imagine, to launch a publication called "Raising the Bar", which is a celebration of Scotland's historic and listed public houses. I would have been happy to have other members with me at that event. We are also making strong connections between the historic environment and the natural environment, such as the work that we are doing with the Forestry Commission. There are also some important world nature projects. I am delighted that Historic Scotland has today signed an agreement with Glasgow School of Art to launch a joint venture that formally brings together the expertise of both public bodies in the digital documentation of the historic environment. The project uses laser technology that was adapted from the US star wars programme and world-leading digital visualisation skills. We are investing in the Scottish 10 project to record the five Scottish world heritage sites, and we are looking for five international projects to match them. The first of those, as members will know, is a project at Mount Rushmore. I signed the agreement for that in July and it will commence in the spring next year. We are also working with the National Trust for Scotland on the Bannockburn project, to ensure that we adequately celebrate the anniversary in 2014. We are looking for ways in which we can do that in partnership, recognising the ownership of the site but also Historic Scotland's particular skills. [ Interruption. ] I will make one final point—despite the member to my right, who is muttering about Bannockburn for some remarkable reason. I cannot imagine that there is a member in the chamber who would be ashamed of the opportunity to celebrate Bannockburn. If there is, I look forward with incredulity to their contribution to the debate. The care of the historic environment is a matter with which all of us should be concerned. Those who discover that they have the custody of a listed building sometimes treat that as an imposition and are afraid of the bureaucracy of the process. If we can persuade the people of Scotland to celebrate and be proud of what is special and unique in Scotland's heritage, and those who have responsibility for listed buildings or areas that are designated as sites of special scientific interest—I notice that my friend the Minister for Environment is now in the chamber—to celebrate that fact, we will go a long way towards engaging the whole population in the task not just of looking after their special past and what makes Scotland unique, but of conserving and investing in their future.  I move, That the Parliament welcomes the enthusiasm, passion and co-operation shown by all of the participants at the first Summit for the Built and Historic Environment held at the Bute Hall in Glasgow on Tuesday 3 November 2009 and recognises the valuable resource for the Scottish people and economy represented by Scotland's rich and varied heritage.

The Scottish Government will make it clear to the BBC Trust that we regard BBC Alba as a vital addition to Scottish broadcasting. From the very date of its launch, the Scottish Government has supported the availability of BBC Alba on Freeview—a matter that I have raised repeatedly with the BBC at every appropriate level.

Absolutely. Developing and maintaining a critical mass of viewers for BBC Alba requires it to be available on Freeview. There is some concern about some of the BBC Trust's arguments on the issue, which appear to have emerged out of nowhere. We will vigorously support the channel's availability on Freeview. Indeed, I have said on occasions, particularly to the Scottish member of the BBC Trust, that I cannot understand why the decision is taking a year. It should have been made much more quickly.

To be scrupulously fair to the BBC, which is something that I try to be, it has  listed a number of options as possibilities, of which the removal of a number of radio services is only one. Many of us were surprised to discover that that was one of the options. There are better options. We will argue for the options that ensure that services continue to be provided but that an additional service is provided—BBC Alba.

A tremendous importance.

I was indeed a vigorous objector to the demolition of the Carrick/City of Adelaide. That was almost 10 years ago. During the time since then, another Government that was present in Scotland did nothing to assist the matter. The city of Adelaide itself now seems unable to raise the finance to take the ship, and a proposal to send it to Salford to form part of a new development has been deemed impossible. I regret to say that there does not seem to be a range of other solutions that might fall within the funding available from the public purse or the Scottish Maritime Museum. The fact is that, occasionally, things of value cannot continue to exist, simply because we cannot bring together all the required resources. The amount of resources needed has risen substantially over the past decade; if something had happened earlier it might have been possible to do something. We will continue to consider every possible opportunity and do whatever is possible but I have to say that, given how long the matter has hung on for and given how the previous Administration did nothing to act on it, I am not hopeful.

Good progress has been made on matters relating to the Scots language since the completion of the audit. Following the audit, the Scottish Government has organised a conference for Scots language interests; taken over the funding of two key Scots language bodies—Scottish Language Dictionaries and the Scots language centre; commissioned further research; and invited nominations for a Scots language advisory group. I am pleased to say today that the group will be established and Derrick McClure will be its chair. I hope to attend the first and last meetings of the group. The other members announced today are Matthew Fitt, Michael Hance, Billy Kay, Alasdair Allan, John Corbett, Laureen Johnson, Janet Paisley, James Robertson, Christine Robinson and Rab Wilson. There is a further member still to respond, but I hope that we will add one more member. I look forward to the recommendations that come from the first ever group to look at policy and the Scots language.

The group will be fully familiar with all the work that is being done, including through the curriculum for excellence. There is a broad commitment throughout Government to ensure that Scots has its rightful place, and I am grateful for the work and co-operation of my colleagues in education, who are present as a sort of visual aid this afternoon. We are all working in the same direction and we will complete the task.

As a result of the budget cuts imposed by Westminster for 2010-11—[ Interruption. ] The member appears to be shouting about that, but I tell her that facts are chiels that winna ding, if I may use Scots this afternoon. I have reluctantly had to make cuts to parts of the culture budget for 2010-11. However, I have been determined not to impose a cash cut from 2009-10 levels. The budget for the cultural collections will still increase from £98.9 million to £99.7 million in cash terms between 2009-10 and 2010-11. I will discuss the specific plans for the cultural collections as part of the corporate planning process for 2010-11.

I respond simply by saying that it is hysterical nonsense. The reality of the situation is that all the things that the member mentioned are simply not happening. The national collections are in good form, there is constructive discussion between me and the national collections, and we are absolutely determined that they should grow and develop. If the member wishes to continue in her role as Ms Angry for Midlothian, I cannot stop her. I simply point out that it is not doing her much good.

Cha bhi lùghdachadh sam bith ann am maoin na Gàidhlig airson 2010-11. Tha Gàidhlig na prìomhachas aig Riaghaltas na h-Alba, agus bidh sinn a' coimhead ri adhartas a dhèanamh ann an leasachadh na Gàidhlig anns a' bhliadhna a tha romhainn. There will be no reduction of Gaelic funding in 2010-11. Gaelic is a priority for the Scottish Government. We look forward to making progress with Gaelic development in the next year and to building a new generation of Gaelic speakers.

As Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution, I have many opportunities to highlight the Scottish Government's work on climate change while carrying out the work of my portfolio—for example, my attendance at the meetings of the joint ministerial committee on Europe and visits to Brussels and further afield, including my recent visit to India, where climate change featured in many of the discussions that I had. The member will also be aware that several of my colleagues have portfolio interests in this area. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth met the European Commissioner for Environment, Stavros Dimas, on 13 October and outlined Scotland's position ahead of the climate change summit in Copenhagen, and the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change attended the environment council on 21 October, when climate change was the main agenda item.

There is a widespread view that the attitude of the United Kingdom Government is surprising to say the least. There is a precedent for the presence of Scottish Government ministers in such circumstances. Indeed, I seem to recall a picture of a previous First Minister sitting at a conference in South Africa that dealt with these issues.  Given the hard work that was done throughout the Parliament on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, it would be appropriate for that work to be represented in Copenhagen, and we continue to make representations on the matter. However, as I said on a previous occasion, a Scottish minister will be in Copenhagen—the issue is in whose delegation he will sit and in what way, but I repeat that a minister will be there.

Lead responsibility for sustaining and developing Scotland's film industry lies with Scottish Screen. Scottish Screen's work includes investing to improve skills in the industry; attracting production businesses into Scotland; building the capacity of screen businesses; and supporting the development of original screen content. Of course, during 2010, Scottish Screen's responsibilities will be taken over by creative Scotland, which will provide clear leadership for the film industry and other associated creative industries.

If there were a rot, I would stop it, but there is not. The reality is that the creative industries partnership, which has required hard negotiation—which has taken place—will for the first time bring the resources and focus of bodies such as Scottish Enterprise directly into the creative industries. Creative Scotland is breaking new ground and, in doing so, is bringing in new resources right across the creative industries, including in film and television. There are other areas of concern in the film and television industries, not least the decline in broadcasting commissions. Yesterday, I met representatives of Channel 4 to discuss that very  issue and I remain active on it. One of the biggest pieces of progress would be made if the Parliament and the Government had the power to offer the tax breaks and incentives for production that are the norm elsewhere. For example, local authorities, provincial governments and the federal Government in Canada all offer their own such packages. Having tax powers for the Parliament would make an enormous difference to film production and many other matters.

Scottish companies, organisations and individuals received a total of £247,000 of funding from the Media programme in 2008. That included a grant of just over £100,000 for Napier University from Media's training fund for film schools and universities.

I certainly confirm that. Like many people, I was surprised by the information that the BBC trust released this week about the possible consequences of MG Alba's entry on to Freeview, which have never been mentioned to me in all my discussions of the issue in the past eight months. I am at least sceptical about some of what we have heard, but the member can be assured that we will make the most vigorous response. We will argue and continue to argue for MG Alba on Freeview, so that the channel can build its audience.

I will refer to my colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, not as a visual aid again but as a full and willing partner in all such matters. She and I discuss the subject regularly. We have jointly decided that the youth music initiative will continue in its current format for the rest of the  spending review period, until March 2011, with £10 million that is allocated in annual funding through the Scottish Arts Council and creative Scotland. It will thus continue to make a major contribution to our children's music education, which includes its contribution through instrumental music services in schools.

I said that the YMI would continue until March 2011. The work under the initiative has strong support. It is important to recognise the role of local authorities. Extra-curricular music provision, as well as in-school music provision, is offered. It is important to note that East Renfrewshire Council—which must of course make its own decisions—has received £808,000 under the youth music initiative. I was struck that the council's quality improvement officer noted that the YMI had had an enormous impact on music provision and ensured that every child throughout primary school received a quality experience. She said that the initiative encouraged the authority to evaluate the opportunities that were provided for young people, provided a platform to engage with stakeholders, presented opportunities to share good practice, and helped to encourage the authority to spend more. I ask every local authority to consider its experience with YMI and the beneficial effects of music and music tuition.

The protocols that govern the relationships between ministers of the Scottish Government, the UK Government and the other devolved Administrations are set out in the memorandum of understanding and its associated overarching concordats. The four Administrations are discussing revisions to the MOU, which will be published on the conclusion of those discussions.

There are regular discussions on a whole range of issues and at a whole range of levels. For example, only this morning, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning held one of her regular discussions on employment issues with UK minister Jim Knight. I am very happy to say that, far from Robert Brown's presentation of the matter, there is an atmosphere of positive engagement among the Administrations. That continues to be the case. The issue of publication is a germane one. It was raised by the First Minister at the recent plenary of the joint ministerial committee. Certainly, the proposal that there should be more active publication of the outcome of the JMC has the support of the Scottish Government. We are pursuing that. Of course, we cannot decide that unilaterally; it has to be decided among the Administrations. I ask Mr Brown to remember that the other Administrations are also involved in these matters. There has to be agreement among all the Administrations for progress to be made. Certainly, this Administration, in its usual positive and constructive manner, is keen to be as transparent as possible.

I am happy to say that the matter has been raised at official and ministerial level. Indeed, a statement was published at the end of the recent JMC plenary—there was discussion of the matter. I think that we all were slightly surprised to have jumped upon us by the Secretary of State for Scotland his decision to publish the response to Calman without any previous notification to anybody else. Of course, I am much more constructive than he is. We will be very happy to continue to make representations on changes to the JMC structure. We cannot unilaterally impose that—any decision will involve the other Administrations, too—but we have put the Calman recommendations into the mix. Indeed, there are Calman recommendations that the chamber could decide on today, if it chose to do so. If the member would like to bring forward support for the draft orders that I have published, some of Calman could be in effect tomorrow.

I last visited Brussels on 7 and 8 September.

I am quite sure that many people would like to encourage me to gallivant even more than I do. I have two important points to make. First, my visits to Brussels are always multifaceted. On my last visit, in addition to working on the national conversation, I met members of the European Parliament, discussed a number of matters with senior officials, and met the director general of education. I will continue to have those meetings. Secondly, I am astonished by the contrast between the open and international vision of the Government and what we have just heard, especially on international development. The Government is determined to increase its contributions to the poorest in the world. I am astonished that the Labour Party does not appear to support that.

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on bringing the debate to Parliament. I congratulate, too, the previous speakers, who have brought their keenness for piping to the fore. It is regrettable that no Lib Dem representative is present—I find it surprising that a group of people who are fond of blowing their own trumpet have not chosen to talk about piping—but it has been a good and useful debate. I had the great pleasure to attend the world pipe band championships in August. I had a thoroughly enjoyable day. As Elaine Smith has indicated, Glasgow green is a wonderful location. To her suggestion that more seating should be provided, I would add a request for drier underfoot conditions—although the conditions were not the fault of Glasgow City Council. Bob Winter, the lord provost, played a pivotal role in making the championships successful, and I pay tribute to him for that. He and I have had some unusual musical experiences together. We enjoyed the pipe band event together and last night we were at the MOBO awards, which I will simply say was very  different indeed from the pipe band championships. The world pipe band championships are truly international. I echo the points that Anne McLaughlin made about the pipe band from Pakistan. It was immensely regrettable that the UK Border Agency acted in the way that it did. Along with Councillor Malik, I was active in trying to have its decision reversed. Even though the diversity of the event was diminished as a result, diversity was nonetheless in evidence, and not just because the Simon Fraser University pipe band won. The president of the organisation is from Northern Ireland, and the chair is a Scot who lives in England and has been active there. At every level—we are not talking simply about the top level of pipe bands, although that is clearly what the world championships are about—the pipe bands come from a wide range of places. The championships are truly an international event; they are also truly a community event. Elaine Smith's point about the community nature of piping and the need to invest in local organisations is well taken. Jamie McGrigor quite rightly drew attention to the successes in Inverary, which has reinvented a strong pipe band tradition and made it work; it is now all pervading, particularly in the schools. It is impossible to take away from Simon Fraser University its wonderful success. For its pipe band to win the grade 1 competition again is truly remarkable. I have had the pleasure of visiting the university. It is a fine educational institution that is passionately pro-Scottish. The fact that its pipe band has taken the trophy back to Canada simply proves the point. However, I agree that if we are to find a Scottish band that is capable of taking the grade 1 championship, we must look to Strathclyde Police pipe band, which I will discuss in a moment. To repatriate the issue from internationalism to Scotland, piping is an important part of our national identity. It is central to who we are and is embedded in our culture. On the weekend of the world championships, there were around 40,000 spectators in Glasgow, which is a massive number. The worldwide audience was made up not just of those who were able to travel because, for the first time, the championships were streamed on the web, where they attracted an enormous audience in Scotland and elsewhere. The Government believes that Scotland's traditional arts require and deserve investment. The traditional arts working group, which has been examining ways to support all areas of traditional arts and culture, will soon bring its recommendations to me. The outcome of its deliberations will contribute to the work that is being undertaken to take forward the creative  Scotland idea. Piping and many other traditional arts will be among the concerns of creative Scotland. I move from the generality to the particular issue that Stuart McMillan has raised. Strathclyde Police pipe band is one of the most lauded pipe bands in our national history. As he said, it finished fourth in the world championships and it has consistently produced world-beating performances. It won the world championships every year from 1981 to 1986. As Anne McLaughlin pointed out, I was fortunate to meet members of Strathclyde Police pipe band and to be treated to a performance by them during a visit to the College of Piping in Glasgow earlier this year. I was struck not only by the quality of the playing, which was first class, but by the great camaraderie among the band's members.

I plead guilty to not mentioning drumming or snare drumming, which are a vital part of pipe bands. I am sure that when Mr McGrigor hits his drum, everybody listens. I want to make a point about the family of piping. The camaraderie in Strathclyde Police pipe band reflects the feeling in the whole piping community that everybody is in it together. I make a personal plea. Tomorrow night, a concert is being held at the College of Piping. The concert has been organised by a distant relative of my wife, Alina Simpson, who has started a campaign to bring back the remains of John Archie MacAskill, who was a significant piper during the first world war. He emigrated to Perth, Australia, and fell on hard times. The campaign is well worth supporting for two reasons. It commemorates a great piper in a family of great pipers. Dr John MacAskill, who was a world-beating piper, played at my wedding. His photograph is in the College of Piping—a room is named after him. The campaign celebrates a great family of pipers, but it also proves the point about the family of pipers. Pipers feel strongly that such a great piper should be honoured and that his remains should return to Scotland. I commend the concert to members. If any member wishes to attend it, pay for a ticket and make a contribution, they will have my personal thanks as well as the thanks of those who are organising it. I know that members of Strathclyde Police pipe band will be there. Members of that band have proved themselves to be important members of the family of pipers and important exemplars for piping.  As Stuart McMillan said, I am in no position to interfere operationally with the work of Strathclyde Police, and I will not do so. However, I have been in touch with Strathclyde Police, as Mr McMillan raised the matter with me some time ago, and I have its assurance that the pipe band will not be disbanded. It will continue to be supported by the chief constable and the wider police service. I accept that operational matters always come first, and it is clear that members of Strathclyde Police pipe band are police officers. As serving police officers, their job is to contribute to and proactively develop policing services. However, that has always been the case. I believe that diminishing the band and its ability would diminish the whole of Scottish culture and the whole of piping. I know that I have run out of time because the Presiding Officer is leaning forward. You are right to bring my speech to an end. I commend Mr McMillan, members who have spoken in the debate and Strathclyde Police pipe band. I look for that band to continue, to grow, and to win the world championships again. We will then have another debate in which we will celebrate that win.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

When the First Minister spoke to the Scottish Parliament on 8 October last year, he identified three areas that he saw as being of particular importance: increasing network production by existing broadcasters; establishing a Scottish digital network; and improving accountability arrangements by giving Scottish institutions more power over Scottish broadcasting. All those issues arose from the report of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, which published its final report on 8 September last year after sitting for 13 months, hearing 83 hours of oral evidence and considering more than 200 written submissions. Unsurprisingly, the commission's final report was widely acclaimed as being rigorous, detailed and compelling. It is important that the report continues to command such an impressive consensus, because its implementation still requires support from across the broadcasting industry and the public sector in Scotland and the United Kingdom as well as from this Parliament. My statement today is what might be called the first annual report on the progress of implementing the commission's findings—a commitment that the First Minister made when he spoke last year. I will report today under the three areas that the First Minister identified. On increased network production, the figures that were produced by the Office of Communications in August this year provide a stark reminder of why the commission and this Parliament have previously emphasised the issue. Ofcom's figures show that, between 2007 and 2008, Scotland's overall share of the value of network production decreased from 2.6 per cent to 2.5 per cent, its share of Channel 4 programming fell from 1.7 per cent to 1.4 per cent and its share of ITV network programming declined from 1.9 per cent to 1.4 per cent. There was a slight increase in Scotland's share of BBC programming—from 3.3 per cent to 3.7 per cent—but that was counterbalanced by a decline in overall BBC production across the UK.  The BBC and Channel 4 have made strong public commitments to do more to increase network production in Scotland. Since the commission's report, the BBC has appointed commissioning executives in Scotland for factual, entertainment and daytime programming, and it has built its expertise here in comedy, drama, factual programming, entertainment and children's programming. The BBC says that it is confident that Scotland's share of network production will increase significantly in 2009. Many remain doubtful, and the jury is out. Channel 4 needs to play its part. I welcome Channel 4's commitment that a set number of programmes from key programme strands will be made in Scotland in future. I also welcome Channel 4's decision to establish a nations pilot fund to invest in new programming from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. However, the fact is that only 1.4 per cent of Channel 4's network programming is made in Scotland. That is completely unacceptable. Channel 4 needs to do much more. My job—and, I believe, the job of this Parliament—is publicly to hold the BBC and Channel 4 to account on those matters. Their rhetoric must be matched by progress. We must ensure that network production share in Scotland is increased rapidly, sustainably and in a way that brings genuine benefits to the Scottish production industry. A start has been made, but we need to keep an eye on what is happening so that improvement is made on that start. Getting network broadcasters to increase their share of broadcasting production will bring major benefits to Scottish producers, but any such increase in demand requires the broadcasting industry to have a concomitant ability to meet it. That is why the Scottish Broadcasting Commission included in its report recommendations for Scottish public bodies to help the development of the industry. Their response has been positive. Scottish Enterprise is now working far more closely with the television production sector than was the case before the commission's report was published. Postgraduate students in broadcasting now benefit from the investment that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council announced in March last year. Creative Scotland has agreed a clear way forward with local authorities and the enterprise agencies for supporting the creative industries. I firmly believe that creative Scotland will have an extremely positive impact on the television production industry, just as it will across all the other creative industries. Some progress has been made on increasing network production, but more is needed. The First Minister's second point last October was about the  establishment of a Scottish digital network, on which we have seen far less progress. The Parliament unanimously endorsed the need for progress on the issue. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission argued that a Scottish digital network would secure a sustainable source of competition to the BBC for public service broadcasting. Nothing that we have seen during the last year suggests that the need for such competition—and, therefore, for the network—has reduced. In fact, if anything, it has increased. In January, Ofcom reduced the amount of Scottish programming, other than news, that STV is obliged to provide to just 90 minutes a week. STV, of course, has promised to provide more Scottish programming than that, and to provide more high-quality, home-grown programming, but we await the outcomes. The need for us to move forward with the network has been accepted by a number of people outwith Scotland, most notably Stephen Carter, who, in February, when he was the minister in charge of broadcasting, said in a House of Lords debate on public service broadcasting: "I ... recognise the importance, having been reared on it, of having news and content that reflects the nation's sense of itself ... one of the things that we are seeing as a catch-up after the devolution agreements is how critical that is".—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 25 February; Vol 708, c 283.] As I said, the Parliament endorsed the idea of a Scottish digital network. I agree with what my colleague Ted Brocklebank said in March, when he described the creation of a new network as "the settled will of the Scottish Parliament".— [ Official Report , 18 March 2009; c 15864.]  His words were not original but are resonant. In that context, it is astonishing that the United Kingdom Government's final "Digital Britain" report simply ignored the need for a choice of non-news public service broadcasting content in Scotland. Although its recognition of the importance of ensuring sustainable news provision in Scotland was welcome—provided that it extends to the south of Scotland as well as to the current STV regions—"Digital Britain" missed a golden opportunity to rectify a difficulty that its author had correctly identified. As Blair Jenkins, the chair of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, pointed out after "Digital Britain" was published, it is simply not sustainable to say to Scottish audiences "that they can have 500 channels, but none of them will be Scottish. That's not digital Britain, that's a digital deficit—and also a democratic, economic and cultural deficit." I do not think that we as a Parliament can or should give up on the case for a digital network simply because the "Digital Britain" report ignored it.  The Scottish Government's power to establish a network is incredibly constrained, but we will continue to press the UK Government on the issue. I recently urged Ben Bradshaw to explain how the lack of competition in Scottish public service broadcasting can be addressed, and I hope that all MSPs will apply pressure on their Westminster counterparts to deliver the outcomes that Scotland needs. Of course, I acknowledge that funding difficulties are an issue, but the Scottish Government has pledged to be as constructive as it can be in making suggestions to the UK Government and others on the issue. The argument is not just about money, although money is an element of it. We need to ensure that the unanimity on the issue in Parliament and in Scotland as a whole is maintained and increased, because that is how we will win the argument. The final area that the First Minister highlighted last year was accountability. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission made some straightforward suggestions on how accountability could be improved. I welcome the fact that the Calman commission agreed with the SBC's recommendation that Scottish ministers should in future appoint members of the BBC Trust. That recommendation does not require legislation and is not dependent on any other recommendations in the Calman report. It can and should be implemented immediately. I hope that recommendations in the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report that relate to MG Alba and Ofcom can also be implemented. Those recommendations would require legislation, but the digital economy bill that will soon be introduced at Westminster represents an ideal opportunity to improve accountability. It has been heartening to see the Scottish Parliament playing an increased role in scrutinising broadcasting. In particular, the director general of the BBC, Mark Thompson, gave evidence to the enterprise and lifelong learning committee for the first time in June this year. I hope that such evidence sessions with heads of the major broadcasting organisations will take place regularly in the future. My belief, of course, is that the devolution of broadcasting powers should go much further than what the Scottish Broadcasting Commission has proposed. That will be no surprise to anybody in the chamber. Nothing that I have witnessed in the past year, during which a report that commanded cross-party consensus at Holyrood was ignored at Westminster, has dissuaded me from that view. However, I recognise and respect the fact that many members hold a different view.  That is one reason why the Scottish Government is today publishing a national conversation paper on broadcasting, which sets out further options for how broadcasting in Scotland could evolve under four different constitutional arrangements. I hope that the document will inform genuinely open debate about broadcasting in Scotland. It goes without saying that Scotland should have additional powers over broadcasting. It should have different structures, and it should enhance those structures. How it should do that is a matter for debate. The fact that the Parliament has been able to express unanimity on a key issue is a strength. The past year has been one of limited progress. The Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report has spurred some welcome moves, but they are far from complete. Scottish Enterprise and skills bodies have risen to the challenge, but the broadcasting companies have not yet fully done so. Much more needs to be done to meet the economic, democratic and cultural needs of the Scottish people. I am happy to announce that, later this year, I will host a major national conference on broadcasting in conjunction with the Saltire Society to discuss the way forward for Scottish broadcasting. The conference will be informed by new research that has been commissioned on attitudes to broadcasting and broadcasting requirements in Scotland. The current system is still short-changing viewers in Scotland one year on from the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report. We can make the system better. I hope that members will unanimously agree the means by which to do so.

Pauline McNeill asked a number of questions; I will try to run through them all. At a time when the Labour Government at Westminster is cutting the Scottish budget by £500 million, asking us to find additional money for Scottish broadcasting is part of the fantasy wish-list approach that Labour spokespeople tend to enjoy. The reality is that, if the Westminster Government is prepared to enter into an agreement with the Scottish Government to devolve broadcasting power and the resources for broadcasting—with power must come resources—Pauline McNeill will not find us wanting in implementing a radical and important new policy for broadcasting in Scotland. Pauline McNeill gave no indication in her questions or her commentary—and there was more commentary than there were questions—whether she continues to support the establishment of a digital network. Her analysis of the situation regarding ITV was extraordinary. To  accuse the Scottish Government of being in conflict mode with ITV when it is ITV that has taken out a writ against STV seems to show that she does not even read the newspapers. I strongly support the work that STV does. STV itself has welcomed the idea of a digital network; it did so again in a meeting with me on Thursday. Our job is to ensure that there is healthy plurality and diversity. I met STV on Thursday and I continue to meet all those who are interested in broadcasting. I want to ensure that they all succeed. Pauline McNeill should join all the other people in the chamber who want to see progress made on Scottish broadcasting as we continue to press her friends in London to deliver the Scottish broadcasting network. I do not judge her on the fact that she has so far failed to do so; I just ask her to do better in the future.

There are some interesting points in what Mr Brocklebank says. However, I do not regard the "Scottish Six" project as dated; it is long overdue, but that is not the same thing. We need news that is reported in Scotland and which reports on Scotland, on these islands, on Europe and on the world from a Scottish viewpoint. That  will be an important step forward, whoever delivers it. We are trying to achieve increased plurality in broadcasting, which Mr Brocklebank supports. In that context, I am not looking for a successor to the ITV network; I am looking for more variety within Scotland. I foresee circumstances in which a federated UK digital channel—I know that the F-word comes as a shock to Liberal Democrats, who have more or less given it up—might be a possibility. There are all sorts of models. As Mr Brocklebank knows, I have deliberately not got locked into how the channel should be finally structured; I am interested in getting agreement in principle from Westminster that such a channel should be established. There is potential for discussion on those matters.

The situation concerning ITV and STV is a legal dispute, which I cannot, therefore, get involved in. However, it illustrates, in general terms, the basic instability of the ITV settlement in the modern age and the fact that  broadcasting has changed so enormously that the old-fashioned structures and licences are, by and large, irrelevant. There are real issues in there for the ITV companies and for STV in particular. I will keep a close eye on what takes place, but I repeat that the matter is a legal dispute within ITV that STV and ITV will have to settle themselves. On the question of skills, it is always important to keep in one's mind the fact that there is potential for skills shortages, on which a great deal of work is being done. However, the real issue for most people who work in the sector is not the shortage of skills but the fact that skills are not being utilised. Many people who have such skills simply find that the telephone no longer rings. The other day, I happened to meet a cameraman with whom I used to work—I know that others in the chamber have worked with him, too—and he told me that he had not had a phone call about a job in six months. Freelance and independent contractors in the industry face a real problem, but the issue is not lack of skills but lack of work. That is why one of my real concerns around the issue of production in Scotland is that there needs to be a real increase in production in Scotland, not a cosmetic increase. Margaret Smith's reminder about radio was timely, as radio faces a number of issues. The independent radio structure in Scotland is interesting and has successes. We need to examine two aspects of it in particular: community radio and the changes that are needed in the regulatory framework so that community radio can grow; and the issues around Radio Scotland. The Broadcasting Commission's strictures on Radio Scotland were clear, but they have not been responded to. There is general disappointment at the performance of Radio Scotland, which will need to improve.

Yes, but I ask the member to be cautious. The STV plan is interesting, but it is not fully worked through—all that I have seen is a clip of what it might look like. There are three hurdles to be overcome. The first is that, at the moment, there is a consultation, not a policy, on the independent news consortiums and the top-slicing of money for them. The second is that, even if the proposal becomes UK Government policy, there is no firmness yet about which areas  will be covered. I am firmly of the view that the whole of Scotland, not just the Grampian and STV areas, should be covered. However, that is still to be decided. The third is the fact that there will be competition in terms of who would like to take part in the new system, as we know from an announcement last week. Therefore, the proposal is not a done deal. I would like all broadcasters in Scotland to recognise the reality of news coverage, which is that news starts from where one is. In Scottish terms, that means looking at the world from Scotland. Scottish news coverage would be considerably better if that principle lay behind a "Scottish Six" on ITV and a "Scottish Six" on the BBC.

I am happy to meet ITV, but the present issue concerns STV's decisions about its programming. It is, as Mr Whitton knows, a long-running dispute, and the issues are many and varied. I cannot solve or negotiate the dispute—I can only indicate my policy for broadcasting in Scotland; show generally, as I have done, strong support for the ITV network and what exists within it; and ensure that the staff understand that we wish to have a flourishing production industry in Scotland. I am pleased to do all those things. If there would be any benefit in myself or others meeting ITV, we will do so. It is important to recognise that STV has a right to set its own agenda, its programming and its means of operating. However, it also has a responsibility not only to its staff—although that is important—but to its viewers, many of whom are somewhat puzzled by the way in which the company has proceeded.

It is important that there is more diversity and plurality, and everyone—including those who work in broadcasting in the former Grampian Television area—will be better served by having a Scottish digital channel in addition to the existing service. It is not a good idea to reduce the service to any viewer in Scotland, but any new programme that might emerge is some distance away. As I said, it is at least three hurdles away from happening, and all that currently exists is a five minute mock-up of what the programme might look like. I do not think that anyone's interests in any part of Scotland would be served by reducing the good local news service that exists. That is particularly true in the north-east, where there is a fondness for the type of local service that was provided by the former Grampian Television.

STV is in no doubt that I share members' concerns about programme production and news production in the former Grampian Television region and throughout Scotland. I want to see more, not less. There is no question that I would in any way support the reduction of programming. I return to my point that any such situation is rather a long way away, if it ever happens. There will be competition for the independent news consortiums if the network is established, but no one currently knows whether that will happen. The consultation ended yesterday, so there is considerable time for views to change at Westminster. Because it involves BBC top-slicing, there will be a vigorous argument about it. Of course, we need more production, news and local and regional coverage rather than less. The concept of a "Scottish Six" is attractive: if it is done properly it will look at the world from where we are. With respect to Lewis Macdonald, that can be done from Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Galashiels or anywhere. Perhaps it should be done from Aberdeen.

Yes. I could go on at great length about that, but the Presiding Officer would not want me to. I have argued strongly with regard to the areas that Christine Grahame mentions—particularly Dumfriesshire and the south of Scotland, slightly further west than the area that the member is talking about—that the present dispensation that Ofcom has imposed is completely and utterly daft, and does not serve viewers in the area in any way. I have said publicly—I am happy to say it again here—that the independent news consortium should, if it comes about, apply to the whole of Scotland, including the Scottish part of the border region. It would be unreasonable for it to cover every area but that one.

Mr Macintosh questioned me closely—I suppose that is what he was trying to do—on those matters at this morning's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. The reality of the situation is that creative Scotland has the opportunity to draw in more resources from the enterprise network. If Mr Macintosh will persuade his friend Gordon Brown—assuming that Gordon Brown is his friend—to rescind the £500 million cut and increase the resources to the Scottish Parliament, and if he will persuade his party to vote for independence for Scotland and the use of Scottish resources, I will fund the channel.

I have said publicly that I and the Government favour the Freeview option for MG Alba. The option could be taken tomorrow. It is because of the incredibly bureaucratic structure of the BBC that the review is taking almost a year. Let us just do it. MG Alba needs a wider distribution mechanism and it is clear that there will be take-up on Freeview. There is no barrier to use of that option. The Government supports it. If was put to a vote in the chamber, Parliament would support it—I think that every party has supported it. If the BBC would stop counting the number of angels on the head of a pin and just do it, everybody would be pleased.

I disagree with Margo MacDonald. We are debating the policy and we need to be able to do so. As for news bunnies and topless darts, that is not my plan for Scottish broadcasting, although it might be hers.

It is broadly recognised by the National Trust for Scotland and by others that the visitor facilities at Bannockburn are in need of significant improvement. In 2008-09, the Government provided a grant of £150,000 to improve the educational facilities. That was spent mainly on a new educational video, which was launched recently. In 2009-10, a further £180,000 was made available to provide grants to school parties to visit Culloden, Bannockburn and, in due course, the Burns museum. The year 2014 will be the 700 th anniversary of the battle. I have asked my officials at Historic Scotland to work in partnership with the National Trust to develop appropriate proposals for improving visitor facilities in time for the anniversary and to explore how more synergy between Bannockburn and Stirling castle, which is in the care of Historic Scotland on behalf of Scottish ministers, can be achieved. Discussions between the two organisations about the nature and scope of such a project have commenced but are at a very early stage.

I was willing to welcome Murdo Fraser's words until he got to that last sentence. I was going to welcome his change of heart. At the weekend, he took extraordinary offence at the sight of children with wooden swords, presumably because he thought that they were threatening my friend Mr Brown, who was in the photograph as well, and denounced the whole concept of people visiting Bannockburn. Indeed, I thought that his idea of celebrating the 700 th anniversary might be to build on the site or to put a wall around it. The reality is that, like many sites in Scotland, Bannockburn is an enormously important site. Essentially, it is the cradle of the modern Scottish nation. In those circumstances, it is entirely appropriate for us to find ways to celebrate it. Improving the facilities is the first part of that. Now that Mr Fraser stands behind the project, nothing will be able to get in its way.

The member asks an extremely pertinent question. The timescale for the Culloden project was longer than would be possible for Bannockburn, but we are talking about a more modest project, which I anticipate will involve redevelopment rather than a complete rebuild. We are at an early stage. We have more modest expectations, although we expect a development of the highest quality. We have time, but in the scheme of building attractions, five years is not a long time, so we will have to concentrate hard.

As the member knows, because he asked a similar question last week and is a former member of the board of the Lighthouse, the future of the Lighthouse Trust as a company is now unfortunately in the hands of the administrators. My officials have commenced discussions with the administrators and Glasgow City Council to explore options for the Lighthouse, including its use as a national architecture centre, to build on the good work that has been done there. Wider discussions with the architecture and design professions will follow if we can find acceptable and financially viable proposals; I think that we can.

Those are positive and sensible suggestions. I cannot commit myself to saying precisely what will take place. However, there is no doubt that this Government has been supportive of the type of work that was undertaken by the Lighthouse, and the potential exists to develop that work. For example, some of the things that were planned for the Lighthouse, such as the Gaudi exhibition in October, will go ahead within the existing space, which is very positive. We can and should look at new potential for the building and project work that is based in the building. I am grateful to Mr McNulty for the way in which he asked his question and the positive approach that he is taking. That is the way in  which we in this chamber should approach this matter. I regret that, in August, the former chair of the Lighthouse, Janice Kirkpatrick, wrote a letter in which she said that the problem was not the Lighthouse but the Government, and that the political regime does not value architecture, design and the creative industries. That led to a rather strange spat in the newspapers, which included me and the former minister with responsibility for culture, Allan Wilson, swapping quotations from Ruskin. That was not a helpful way to solve the problem. The helpful way is to accept that expenditure has increased substantially over the past few years. The issue is what happens next, which will depend on good ideas, such as those that have been raised by Mr McNulty, and a willingness to provide resource—which is there at present—to ensure that good things can happen within that space. We are committed to that. How we do that is now business that we have to work through with Glasgow City Council and the administrators.

Yes.

I am always in favour of supporting Scottish authors, being one myself. The more resource that is used by Scottish libraries to purchase work from Scottish publishers and work that is written by people who write and work in Scotland—which is a slight difference in emphasis, but I am sure that the member will take it—the happier I will be. One of the jobs that is being undertaken by the literature task force, which is ably chaired by Rosemary Goring, is to consider support for Scottish writing and publishing. The purchasing power of libraries is an important part of that resource. I am fully in favour of the member's suggestion.

I am tempted to say simply no, just to be consistent with my earlier answer. However, given that I have a moment or two in which to answer the question, I will do so more fully. I do not think that what Mr Brocklebank says is true at all. I think that he is looking extremely narrowly at what this Government says and does. In actuality, we have a broad view of how Scotland should be presented and interpreted by children in schools and by a wider audience in Scotland. We need to ensure that, in our publishing industry and the promotion of our national culture, we are also conscious of the international dimension. Mr Brocklebank will be aware that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, which is before the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, includes a definition of the purposes of creative Scotland, on which I worked hard with my officials and which sets the organisation firmly in the context of national and international culture. I use the analogy that we are all rooted in the cultures of our country—I use the word "cultures" deliberately, because there are many of them—and that is the place in which we stand. However, if we raise our eyes, we see the whole world, and that also influences us. I do not think that, in raising my eyes, I simply see south of the border, as pleasant as that prospect may be. I see the whole world, and I think that everyone else does too.

I was very much struck during this year's Edinburgh festivals by the number of conversations that I had with others—festival directors, members of festival staff  and those on the boards of festivals—on the specific issue of how the festivals would focus and adapt in a time of climate change. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 places duties on public bodies—including those that are responsible for organising major cultural events—that relate to climate change. The City of Edinburgh Council's sustainable development unit, for example, is working with the Edinburgh festivals to minimise their impact on the environment. There is an enormous opportunity, as I am sure the member accepts, for the festivals to be exemplars of good practice and to ensure that they are moving forward their response to climate change. I am very impressed with the management of festivals in Edinburgh in particular, as well as more widely throughout Scotland, and I know that all festivals will focus on the issue.

Fortunately, that is already happening in Edinburgh, and the experience in the city can apply elsewhere. There is a Festivals Edinburgh environmental working group on which all the festivals are represented, and there is an Edinburgh festivals environmental policy. As the member will know, the policy commits the festivals to complying with the requirements of environmental legislation and codes of practice; assessing the environmental impact of current and likely future operations; seeking continuously to improve environmental performance; reducing impacts from pollution, emissions and waste; encouraging more sustainable forms of transport; ensuring that they  sustainably manage procurement and the use of all resources, energy and water; and ensuring that they raise awareness, encourage participation and train employees. The policy also gives the festivals a responsibility to expect similar environmental standards from all their suppliers and contractors; and—crucially—it places a duty on them to assist performers and festival-goers to participate in the festivals in an environmentally sensitive way. All those things are in place in Edinburgh. The challenge now is to take that good practice and spread it more widely throughout Scotland. I am very keen to find ways to do so. I take the member's point, on which I will ask my officials to bring forward proposals.

I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate, which has been fascinating and full of extraordinary information. Before I sum up, I welcome back to Parliament Karen Gillon, who is restored to what one would have to call her rude good health. It is good to see her back. Her many friends—I count myself in that number—have been worried about her. It has been a debate of great interest. Alasdair Morgan struck me immediately with the most novel way I have yet heard of funding the new Forth crossing: by selling indulgences. I shall draw this to the attention of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. It may well prove a winner in terms of what we are trying to achieve. I was similarly struck by the miraculous interventions that John Scott listed, particularly on David II's arrow wound. Professor Harvie's introduction of hagiographies such as Adamnan's was an interesting element. Hagiographies are meant to talk about the miracles and achievements of saints. The achievement with David II was remarkable, but I was not aware that a modern hagiography of Ninian included the selection of Tavish Scott as Liberal Democrat leader. That certainly may have been miraculous and, in time, people will probably worship at the throne of Ninian because of that achievement. Those of us who were brought up in the Scottish Episcopal Church were often brought up in churches that were dedicated to St Ninian. I am  one of those—St Ninian's in Troon was the place in which I originally worshipped. There was a living link with candida casa and Whithorn because there was a knowledge throughout those churches of the special place that Ninian held as, essentially, the founder of Christianity in that part of Scotland. There was also a belief that the foundations that are devoted to Ninian throughout Scotland were in some sense historically connected with the tours of Ninian. Professor Harvie alluded to that and commented on the role that Ninian and other similar figures might have had as sort of religious inspectors. There is some dubiety about the connections that those foundations have; in the case of 19 th century foundations such as St Ninian's in Troon, I think there is no connection whatever, but we should certainly remember the role of early Christian figures in perambulating around Scotland and spreading Christianity, or reinforcing Christianity at a time when it was not strong within Scotland. Whithorn stands in a very special place within that. Whithorn is unique because it is the only place in Scotland where actual evidence can be found of every phase of the development of Christianity from the earliest times—from the fifth century AD—to the reformation and beyond. Whithorn is a sort of visual aid to our understanding of Christianity in Scotland and has a special place in every faith and denomination in Scotland. It certainly has a special place in Scottish church history, which I had the honour to study at university. The remains of the crosses at Whithorn, the ruined priory and the other things that have accumulated there—both the physical relics and those places that are named, one or two of which John Scott mentioned—contribute to that distinctive nature. Every year, the small but significant community welcomes a small but significant number of visitors who are in search of contact with that history—with the age of saints and the history of Scottish Christianity. The Government, through Historic Scotland, has been working closely with the Whithorn Trust to achieve sustainable growth in what we might call the market for religious visitation in Scotland, because it is part of the general economic development of the community. However, it is much more. It would be quite wrong to reduce this to a matter of mere economics, because it is about something within the soul and history of Scotland, which we want many people to celebrate, and not just Scots. Of course, we have been doing that for a considerable time. The first ancient monuments act was passed in 1882 and the ruined remains of  the priory were taken into care shortly thereafter. The medieval stone crosses came in first—they were taken in as part of the first group of monuments. The priory came into care in 1908, so it has been in care for more than 100 years. Even at that time, the schoolhouse was leased and converted to display crosses and other carved stones, so Whithorn was in the heritage market early and has continued to be so In the 1950s, the excavations at Whithorn built upon that experience, particularly with the discovery of the famous Whithorn crosier, which was buried with a 13 th century bishop. That is one of the treasures at the Museum of Scotland, although I am pleased that it is displayed in Whithorn each year. How do we take this forward? A lot of work has been undertaken in modern times. Historic Scotland's education unit supports education visits. There is a downloadable PDF site guide for teachers on investigating Whithorn priory and museum, so there is access to information. Historic Scotland pioneered the use of microsites to provide access to Scottish information and the Whithorn microsite was one of the first. I have to say that it is also one of the best used. The Government also recognises the importance of developing cultural roots. Again, Professor Harvie mentioned that. We are looking at the possibility of pilgrim ways in Scotland; my colleague Roseanna Cunningham has been prominent in promoting those. We will, in 2010, advertise the route that links Whithorn and Paisley abbey, which will give people at both ends of that route and those who want to travel it an opportunity to learn something of the south-west of Scotland and ensure that they understand its history. Ninian's monastery was a place of pilgrimage and is therefore a place to which we should encourage modern individuals to go in pilgrimage. It was a light that shone brightly in the dark ages and it is a light that can shine brightly now. I am glad that Historic Scotland and the Whithorn Trust have worked together to establish a partnership that will enable that. Historic Scotland is also considering the opportunities for marketing and promoting other early Christian sites that are in state care. There is interest not only in pilgrimage, but in early Christian art. Along with Whithorn, that has to include St Andrews cathedral, Dunkeld cathedral, Iona abbey, Meigle in Perthshire, St Vigeans in Angus, the Dupplin cross at St Serf's church in Dunning, Jedburgh abbey, which Karen Gillon will know well, and a variety of other places. Some physical remains still exist, such as the impressive collections of carved stones at Kilmodan in Argyll. Sometimes where there is  physical evidence of buildings, and certainly where there is documentation and excavation that illustrates a site's importance, we will wish to promote those and to ensure that they are meaningful. In conclusion, there is no doubt that Whithorn is the jewel in that crown. Whithorn gives us a more complete understanding of Christianity in Scotland than any other site.

I ask Alasdair Morgan not to ruin my peroration. These things do not happen by accident. They are carefully planned. Whithorn is the jewel in the crown in our understanding of Christianity in Scotland. In that place, we have seen a good partnership between Historic Scotland and the Whithorn Trust, but much more can be done and there is potential. Therefore, Presiding Officer, I am more than happy to agree to a meeting with the trust. I suggest that we might meet at Whithorn, and I know that Historic Scotland is happy to facilitate such a meeting. I hope that Alasdair Morgan is happy with that—and with the way in which I have included it at the very end of my remarks.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

No—I am absorbing every word. Miraculously.

The future of the Lighthouse Trust as a company is now in the hands of the administrators, PricewaterhouseCoopers. The administrators' proposals will be developed through a process of discussion and agreement with various creditors and interests, including the Scottish Government. The Government is very keen to see a national centre of architecture continue in some form, and we are exploring ways to achieve that with the administrators.

I think that I have been entirely clear. While the process of administration continues, it is not only right but proper that those who are creditors and those who have an interest in the organisation undertake discussions with the administrators. At the end of that, all parties will be much clearer about what is possible. The member should recall that the failure of the Lighthouse was, regrettably, to do with not one but two substantial deficits that had been run up. It would have been completely wrong—Glasgow City Council accepted this, along with the Scottish Government—to have intervened at that stage. However, the Scottish Government has contributed almost £1 million to work that has been undertaken at the Lighthouse, and that work should continue. I am hopeful that we will be able to move forward the work that the Lighthouse has done and ensure that there is a national centre for architecture. However, it will not be made any easier if those who are involved in the process snipe at the administrators in their discussions instead of joining them in positive discussion.

I have given as much indication as I can, given the nature of the process. There is a strong commitment to a centre for architecture, to the work that the Lighthouse has done and to the issues with which the Lighthouse deals. I hope that we will be able to salvage something significant out of the wreckage. However, the decision to go into administration was taken by the board. The Lighthouse had recurrent problems, which had developed for reasons that have been well publicised. To get the best out of the situation, we should have a constructive dialogue with the administrators and allow that to take its course.

I welcome that contribution. There are positive steps that we can take. For example, the annual funding of almost £1 million is project focused, and we have no intention of withdrawing from projects if we can get them delivered, essentially for the same resources, by people who are capable of delivering them. An opportunity clearly exists for the Lighthouse to be involved in that. I should stress that, while the administrators are working, the priority must be for them to conclude that task, in discussion with creditors and with those who wish to support their work. That is what we are trying to achieve. There is no intention of withdrawing from the principles of the work that is being undertaken. We recognise the importance of having a national centre for architecture.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I simply wanted to repeat my invitation to every Labour member who raises the issue, as none has attended a national conversation event. They are prescient about what takes place. If they attend an event, I think everybody will listen to them. Unfortunately, they have not been to any, so they do not know.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I provided notice that I wanted to raise this issue. I thought it necessary to inform the Parliament that, after this morning's debate on the Calman commission and the pressure from members with regard to progress—particularly Tavish Scott's remark on it—the Scottish Government has lodged in the Scottish Parliament information centre at lunch time draft orders on the transfer of powers. A section 30 order and a section 63 order are now available for members, and will be available for the Parliament to implement when it chooses to do so. We hope to continue to make progress and I hope that members will now accept that the civil servants, too, are involved in the process, as the whole Parliament should be.

Will the member give way? I am about to offer.

I want to scotch this nonsense once and for all. Scottish Government officials have been working with Calman during the process. We have been giving support and information, and we will continue to do so. I ask the member for an assurance that she will back the positive proposals for implementation that are on the table today. We should not delay any  further; let us just make them happen. Why will she not give us that assurance?

Does the member not accept that there is more joy in heaven over a sinner that repenteth? With the amendment, we have the opportunity to deliver what he believes in. Why will he not vote for it?

I am sure that the member honestly believes that—indeed, it may be true, although I am not sure that it is—but how can he reconcile what he is saying with what David McLetchie said in his strong and passionate pro-union speech? If the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives are members of the same steering group, how can they possibly take forward those proposals?

Will the member give way?

I am baffled by that argument because its final logical extension is that Scotland should join up with any country that is socially progressive, depending on how socially progressive that country is. That is nonsensical. The guarantee of citizens' rights and responsibilities comes from the state, and an independent Scotland with a written constitution and a bill of rights would be far better able to provide that guarantee and far more radical than the United Kingdom is at present.

Does David Whitton accept that economists disagree on the proposals? That is a fair point. Neither Mr Whitton nor I are economists, and it is important to listen to each side of the debate rather than to dismiss views out of hand, as Wendy Alexander regrettably did, or—as I hope Mr Whitton is not trying to do in some curious way—smearing economists by party affiliation. Many economists have party affiliations, and not only to the SNP.

Can the member relate that thesis to, for example, how the results of the European elections turned out in Scotland? It does not seem to be an exact match, by any manner of means.

Will the member give way?

I say to Annabel Goldie—very quietly and gently—that she is very welcome to attend a national conversation event. I am sure that she would draw more people than I do.

I will contextualise our debate not by going back a mere 10 years, as Iain Gray did, but by going back more than a century. In the past century, many twists and turns have occurred in the process—it is a process—of Scottish self-rule. In 1885, the office of the Secretary of State for Scotland was re-established. In 1888, at the Mid Lanark by-election, what was to become the Labour Party and its candidate, Keir Hardie, fought on a platform of home rule for Scotland. In the declaration of Perth in 1968, the Tories finally converted to some form of home rule. I pay tribute to the Liberals, too, who have a long and consistent record on the matter. Each party has contributed, but I am in no doubt—the Parliament should be in no doubt—that  the petrol in the engine of change is the SNP. The pressure of the SNP has continued to drive forward the process—as then, and now, too. [ Interruption. ]

When self-government finally started to take place in 1997, it was not the result just of activity by the mainstream political parties. Iain Gray repeated the idea that Labour delivered devolution, but it was the choice of the Scottish people in a referendum.

Allow me to make progress. As we started with the Scottish people underlining what they wanted to do then, let us have the confidence to move forward and to ask the Scottish people what they want to do now. We are marking 10 years of devolution. The Parliament has passed numerous pieces of landmark legislation, but neither it nor democracy is static; they must respond to changing times, attitudes and outlooks.

Every piece of legislation that this Parliament—[ Laughter. ] I am sorry that the Labour members criticise themselves out of their own mouths. They have not wasted their time on the legislation for which they voted; we have all been working to improve Scotland. I will refer to the role of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. It is interesting to note that no less a person than the Terminator himself—not Iain Gray, as was obvious from his speech, but Arnold Schwarzenegger—said last night: "Scotland's ambitious and comprehensive targets" in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill "encourage other nations to step up to the plate". In everything that the Scottish Parliament does, it is an exemplar of change. The turmoil at Westminster shows how sensible we have been in making the Parliament an example to others, but we can continue to move forward. I pay tribute to the members of the Calman commission. It may have had as many peers on it as are in Gordon Brown's Government, but it genuinely tried to examine the issues in Scotland and there are issues in its report on which we can agree. Indeed, I am happy to say that there is no  difficulty with ensuring that we make progress on three out of the four main areas of recommendation not in six months, in a year, or at an unspecified time when the consultative group gets round to it, but now. We can do things now: we can devolve responsibility for electoral administration, solve the problem of air-guns in Scotland and get drink-driving limits and speed limits right for Scotland. The Parliament also has it within its power to consider the issues with the way in which it conducts its business, and it is moving towards doing that. Those changes, too, can take place now. Clearly, other partners are involved in intergovernmental relations—the Welsh and Northern Irish have to be part of it—but I announce that I have asked my officials to start to draft amendments to the memorandum of understanding, which is not concluded yet, so that we can propose the Calman changes this summer. We are moving forward on each issue.

The civil servants who work with me on such matters are never done working with officials in London on a range of issues, including the Calman proposals. When questions are asked about the cost of the national conversation, we have to factor in the considerable cost of working with, supporting and being kind to the Calman commission and ensuring that it was well guided on the realities of Scotland. We do that. Only on one area is there substantive disagreement, which needs to be listened to. Calman's recommendations may appear to give Scotland more control over its finances, but the reality is very different from the appearance. On a superficial level and a deep level, Calman offers nothing to Scotland in fiscal terms. Indeed, it could actually make things worse in our fiscal activity.

I hear Rhona Brankin shouting as ever. I shall not miss that noise during the recess. Far from it. I hope that I do not start hallucinating about it. I will examine criticism of Calman not from us—it is easy to criticise—but from Professor Drew Scott, Professor Ronald MacDonald, Professor Paul Hallwood, Professor Neil Kay, Professor Andrew Hughes Hallett, David Simpson, Professor Rod Cross and Professor Farhad Noorbakhsh, who signed a letter to The Scotsman last week. They said: "The Calman Commission proposals will do little to enhance the ability of a Scottish government to introduce measures necessary to improve Scotland's underlying  economic growth rate, or to balance the Scottish economy through good times and bad. The degree of accountability is illusory, especially since so much of the spending will be underpinned by the Barnett block grant." There is an answer to the question of fiscal responsibility in this Parliament.

I am a great supporter of my colleague Kenny Gibson, but I do not consult him on Crown dependencies, alas. I am sure that Kenny Gibson, when pressed, will talk about that issue. Let me tell the Parliament what the Scottish Government is thinking. The Scottish Government's paper on fiscal autonomy, which was published in February, made a strong, coherent case for Scotland's having full control of its own finances. That case has been supported previously by members of the Liberal party, the Conservative party and the Labour Party. It is the only coherent way forward for responsibility for the Parliament, and the fact that Calman refused to recommend it says much more about Calman's inability to think outside the box than it does about what Scotland actually needs. We are fully prepared to move forward on the things that we can do, and we will do. However, on the things on which there is substantial disagreement, we must debate what Scotland needs, rather than what the Labour Party wants, because those two things rarely, if ever, go together. Let me say a final word about the real process of discussion that Scotland needs. I welcome what Calman has contributed, but it is not enough. We can move forward with some, but not all, of what it has contributed. However, the real energy in the debate comes not from Calman but from the people of Scotland, who over the past year have contributed to the national conversation and attended repeated meetings throughout Scotland.

No. I am sorry.

No. I am sorry. I have invited Rhona Brankin to attend a national conversation meeting, and I will not take an intervention from her on this matter until she comes to one. There is a challenge for her. I look forward to that debate; I am sure that we will be able to sell tickets for it.  The amendment in my name provides the opportunity for the Parliament really to move forward, not to juggle ideas and semantics. If the Parliament is keen on the Calman recommendations—those that can be implemented—we can implement them now. My amendment allows the Parliament to do so. I hope that it is not narrow party advantage but, genuinely, the national interest that drives Iain Gray. If he and his colleagues want to vote in the national interest, they should vote for the amendment in my name. At the end of the day, we will know whether Iain Gray, the Tories and the Liberals really want change, or whether they want to pretend about change. The real history in Scotland is that change is driven by people and by the SNP. It will be the same again on this occasion. I move amendment S3M-4990.1, to leave out from the first "Parliament" to end and insert: "welcomes the constitutional debate in Scotland; notes the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution's report, Serving Scotland Better: Scotland and the United Kingdom in the 21st Century , and puts forward a plan for implementation that (a) urges the UK Government to work with the Scottish Government to implement now those recommendations for additional powers that have attracted consensus by devolving electoral administration (5.1), airguns (5.13), licensing of controlled substances for treating addictions (5.14), drink-driving limits (5.15) and national speed limits (5.16), (b) calls on the Parliamentary Bureau to consider the recommendations that apply to the procedures of the Parliament, (c) further calls on the Scottish Government to work with other devolved administrations and the UK Government to take forward recommendations on the relationships between the respective governments, and (d) calls for continued debate towards a decision by the Scottish people on the merits of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution's financial proposals in contrast to those that would offer real financial independence for Scotland."

It has been a good-natured and informative debate, although it has included some odd moments, to which I will refer, in passing, as I sum up. Before I do so, I want to respond to some of the positive and serious suggestions that have been made. Karen Gillon suggested a festivals event in the Parliament, through which we could spread knowledge of the work that the festivals do and allow members to provide information about the festivals in their areas. That is an excellent idea, which we will try to take forward collaboratively. Another strong suggestion that I thought was a good idea was that festivals could share knowledge of what was taking place and art forms could speak to each other. There is an element of such collaboration already, and I think that some of the programmes that we are developing under the innovation fund that will be announced next week might give us an opportunity to resource such an intervention at a future festival. I thank Mr Whitton for that idea; we will take it away and see what we can do with it. By and large, the points that have been made in the debate apply to us all. We have heard some interesting personal reflections. Karen Gillon said that we should ensure that events are drawn in  from other places, including the rest of the UK. When the Music of Black Origin awards are held in Glasgow in September, it will be the first time that the event has been held outside London. The fact that that extremely important event was secured for Scotland was the result of a Scottish group of organisations ensuring that they could bid for an event that would make a difference in Glasgow. I thought that Mr Brocklebank was a little churlish in his introduction to an entertaining speech. To suggest that the debate was a filler was probably the wrong thing to do; it has been an opportunity for the Parliament to exchange information and to celebrate good things in Scotland, and I know that Mr Brocklebank eventually came round to that point of view. Iain Smith made some interesting points about the need to take a longer-term view of the resourcing of festivals. By and large, a long-term view is taken, but when that does not happen, which is often the case with smaller festivals—I have been working with Mr Smith on a festival in his area of which that is true—we need to help as much as possible. However, it is a two-way street. Organisations need to know what they will spend and to plan ahead. Before other organisations can join in, they need to be sure of what their commitment is. It is necessary for a longer-term view to be taken of certain events if we are to ensure that they are not single events. Elaine Murray made an important point about licensing. I am happy to commit myself to speaking to my friend the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, who is now in the chamber, to see whether we can make progress on the issue. Repetitive form filling should not be necessary for local festivals, into which members of local organisations put a great deal of time and effort. They need to be helped as much as possible by the organisations that are there to support them, which should not hinder them. I will take the issue up and will ensure that I communicate directly with the member and with the organisations that have raised it with me. I am not sure that I will do the same for the festival of guga hunting, to which Alasdair Allan drew attention. I am familiar with what takes place on Sula Sgeir and although I have supported it, and been condemned for so doing, it is perhaps stretching the idea of a festival just that little bit too far to define it as such. A number of festivals with interesting origins have been mentioned. Elaine Murray made an important point about the fact that some festivals arise out of the natural rhythm of the year and the age-old rhythm of communities, whereas other festivals—such as the G66+Live festival, to which Mr Whitton referred—arise out of a particular need. They are the result of people deciding that  they need to do something about their community. I was extremely sorry that I was not able to attend the G66+Live festival—it was not my fault but Sir Kenneth Calman's. I hope that I will be there next year to take part. Mr Whitton was right to say that one good year should, but does not always, lead to another, so festivals need to be constantly ambitious and constantly aware of the pitfalls that they might face. As several members have said, we do not know what effect the recession will have on the arts or the festivals in Scotland. It is possible—we hope that this is true—that there will be more people in Scotland this year. The idea of the year of homecoming is that not only will people come from other places, but that people from Scotland will travel around the country taking holidays and going to events. If that turns out to be the case—and the signs are good—that will be tremendous. However, we must always be aware that there are difficulties and pitfalls, and that nothing is guaranteed. Inventiveness and ideas are needed. Mr McGrigor was right to draw attention to food festivals. Festivals should celebrate the best of Scotland, and we should certainly invest in the celebration of Scottish food. I did not learn from Mr McGrigor's speech whether Shed Seven was a place or a performance; no doubt he will tell me at some stage. I claim absolutely no cred. Karen Gillon asked me to get some cred, but I do not think that it would be legitimate for me to do so—I admit my ignorance on such matters. However, I recognise that T in the Park is a huge economic force, as well as a huge cultural and entertainment force.

I would be happy to do so. I note the concerns that various social enterprise organisations have expressed on the matter—procurement is an issue. Last night I had a brief conversation with Pete Irvine, whom I have known for some time and who has been an important force in the area. He made the point, as he has often done, that festivals come and go and that sometimes opportunities exist and sometimes they do not. However, it would be excellent if we could smooth out the process for businesses in Scotland. I will conclude by addressing the issue of economic impact. As I said earlier, in 2005 Edinburgh festivals were worth £184 million to the Scottish economy; I am sure that the figure is now much greater. Margaret Smith will be aware that statistics for festivals tend to be slightly outmoded.  We should not spend all our time studying them—we should snapshot them.

I am sorry that Lord Foulkes was not in the chamber for the rest of the debate, because he would have enjoyed it and would have found a range of issues to entertain him. I doubt that there is a living being in Scotland who has not been contacted by Mr McFarlane—he sends regular e-mails to Lord Foulkes and to me. I admire Mr McFarlane as a creator and writer of materials, but I disagree with him profoundly on this year's Edinburgh International Festival programme. At issue is whether Mr McFarlane's work on Robert Burns should have featured in the programme. That is a decision for the director of the Edinburgh International Festival and no one else. The accusation that having Handel's "Judas Maccabaeus" open the festival is an act of cultural genocide, in which I am complicit, is not one with which I tend to agree. When Lord Foulkes distracted me, I was about to give figures for the period between August 2004 and July 2005.

There were 3.1 million attendances at festival events and an estimated 1.4 million trips to Edinburgh, which generated output of about £170 million in Edinburgh, £40 million of new income, support for 3,200 jobs and new visitor expenditure—an increase in income of £31 million from accommodation and £22 million for bars and restaurants. Those are significant figures. Let us contrast them with the figures for public support, because the festivals provide very good value for money. Forty-eight per cent of the Edinburgh International Festival's income comes from private funding. Public funding is the smallest part of the funding for the great infrastructure of the 12 festivals. In 2009-10, the festivals received £3.1 million from the Scottish Arts Council and £3.3 million from the City of Edinburgh Council, plus money from the expo fund, which started last year. There are announcements still to come for this year—I am glad to have made one of them this afternoon—but so far the children's festival has received £350,000, the film festival £110,000, the jazz and blues festival £100,000, the art festival £100,000, the Edinburgh International Festival £180,000, the book festival £55,000 and the fringe £460,000, which includes an element for bringing more companies into the fringe. Today I  was pleased to confirm that the mela will receive £30,000. There is still work to be done for the storytelling festival, the winter festival, the science festival and the tattoo. A great deal of resource is being provided to festivals in Edinburgh through the expo fund and from public money, through the Scottish Arts Council and the City of Edinburgh Council, but a huge amount is coming from elsewhere. However, that is a small input compared with the output to which I referred. This debate has shown the affection and support that exists for the Edinburgh festivals across the chamber. It has also shown that there is support for festivals of a variety of types throughout Scotland. It has been a productive and good-humoured debate. I hope that the chamber will support the motion in my name and, what is more important, that people will buy tickets and attend every event that they can at all the festivals in Edinburgh this year.

I draw the member's attention to the fact that although this year's fringe tickets went on general sale only on Monday, the fringe has sold £500,000 worth of tickets, which is £150,000 more than it has ever sold at this point in the year.

I apologise for arriving in the chamber just seconds too late to be able to follow on—in cricketing parlance. I am pleased to speak about the success of the Edinburgh festivals and Scotland's other festivals, their contribution to the Scottish economy, their role in the cultural and wider life of the nation and the positive message that they promote about Scotland's cultural confidence and ambition. We should remind ourselves of what that success looks like. Edinburgh is the pre-eminent festival capital of the world. Our festivals radiate creative excellence and artistic quality, which attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors to Scotland every year and in so doing generates at least £185 million for the Scottish economy. Although the focus of the debate will be Edinburgh, I take the opportunity to acknowledge the wonderful work that is under way throughout the nation on a diverse array of festivals and events, which do so much for our economy, our sense of who we are and our national creative spirit and reputation. They are also thoroughly enjoyable—that is an important part of what I will talk about. It would be invidious to pluck any out of the air, but I will mention a couple of very different festivals. The St Magnus Festival in Orkney is a wonderful celebration of a composer and his work; and T in the Park is a celebration of artistic excellence and many composers, if we can call them that, which attracts many thousands of people. In every part of Scotland, we could touch on one festival or event or another that celebrates the things that we need to celebrate. However, it is Edinburgh, of course, that is our festival city—but not just ours, because its position is of global significance. Scotland is a festivals nation and we have the world capital of festivals as our capital. There is so much to talk about that I will not be able to capture the full festivals picture. I have already mentioned the St Magnus Festival, Orkney's midsummer arts celebration, at which the  National Theatre of Scotland and the Royal Scottish National Orchestra will perform this year. We also have festivals that are not music based, such as the Wigtown book festival, which is held annually in what is Scotland's national book town. This autumn, as part of Scotland's homecoming 2009 celebrations, Wigtown will host a unique festival within a festival, celebrating the connections between whisky and writing. Let us remember, too, festivals that are in our other languages—for example, the Blas festival in the Highlands offers in the autumn a unique celebration of traditional music and Gaelic. For other festivals, we can go to the east for the St Andrews StAnza poetry festival, the Coast visual arts festival in Banff, or Pittenweem for a painting festival. In the west, there is Celtic Connections, which celebrates music from across the world alongside home-grown Scottish talent. I was pleased to make my own festivals performing debut at Celtic Connections earlier this year.

Of course, I am a modest person and do not wish to talk too much about my own performances—[ Interruption. ] There is a strange sound of laughter to my right, from Margaret Smith.

Well, it is a definition that I recognise, even if no one else does. I appeared in a work called "The Flight of the Arctic Tern", by a composer called Mark Sheridan, which is a work for narrators and music. I myself did not fly, but such was the success of the performance that, I am glad to say, a second performance took place in March on the Tall Ship, which was recorded. The CD will be available shortly and I am willing to take orders this afternoon. The next in a series of performances will take place during the homecoming festival in Inverness later this year. I will be very glad to offer cut-price tickets to any MSPs who would like to attend, and a bus tour. I will not just talk about my own small performances. There are many festivals and performances to applaud and acknowledge across Scotland. There really is something for everyone, which is true of Edinburgh, too. I want to focus our attention on Edinburgh for the rest of my speech. From the mela to hogmanay, from storytelling to jazz, the breadth of the cultural offering in this city is truly world quality. Last year was a vintage year for the Edinburgh festivals, despite the summer's wet weather and distractions elsewhere. The Edinburgh  International Film Festival moved to a June slot, with enormous success, and it fills that slot again this year. Last night, I was privileged to be at the event's opening. The mela moved from a weekend to a week-long event and found a new location in Leith, ensuring its status as the country's biggest inter-faith festival. Despite well-documented challenges, which do not need to be rehearsed here today, the Edinburgh Festival Fringe still sold more than 1.5 million tickets for the third year in a row. In a rain-sodden Charlotte Square, the Edinburgh International Book Festival celebrated its 25 th anniversary in style, closing with the launch of a book called "Being a Scot". On his 78 th birthday, Sir Sean Connery made his only public appearance to talk about the book. I am sure that Opposition members will not be surprised to know that the Connery event was the fastest-selling event in the book festival's history, with all 570 tickets gone in under an hour.

Well, that is a great pity. I will simply say that the book was, as befits a Scot of international celebration and reputation, a wonderful seller. The fact that 25,000 people turned out to watch the fireworks finale across the skyline was a fitting tribute to the most successful year to date for the Edinburgh International Festival. Matthew Bourne's "Dorian Gray" became the festival's biggest-selling dance event, and overall box office takings were up by 7 per cent. Ticket sales are, of course, a good thing, but they are just part of the story. If we go beyond the headline figures, we can see how the Edinburgh festivals contribute to the cultural and wider life of the nation. It is clear from the representation of 45 countries at the book festival, the presence of fringe performers from all corners of the world and the international acclaim for the hogmanay celebrations that Edinburgh's festivals speak an international language. It is a language that an increasing number of people want to learn. There was an enormous sense of inquiry across the range of festival programmes last year. Audiences for talks and conversations increased, as people sought to engage not just with the artistry, but with the ideas and the artists. Such engagement is typical of the impact that the festivals have on the cultural life of the city and the nation.  The Edinburgh Art Festival, which, with just five years' experience under its belt, is a relative newcomer to the Edinburgh festivals group, is already helping to consolidate and build on the city's reputation as a vibrant destination for the visual arts. Established venues, such as Inverleith house, the national galleries and the Talbot Rice gallery, are embracing the new possibilities that are afforded by an annual focus on the visual arts sector, which during 2008 alone brought to Edinburgh a Tracey Emin retrospective, Turner prize winner Mark Wallinger and celebrated artist Richard Hamilton. It was not just international visitors who pounded the streets—local support was out in force and local ticket sales rose, too. Outside Edinburgh, the sharing the festival initiative, which is now in its second year, took the festival to those who otherwise might not experience the occasion. The production of "Class Enemy" went on tour to Rutherglen, Stirling and Cumbernauld. This Administration not only recognises but supports such activities. The festivals make such an enormous contribution to communities and the economy that they must be sustained and underpinned. I will give some examples of how we do that. At the science education summit on 5 May, my colleague Ms Hyslop announced a new science festivals fund, which will be worth £225,000 this year. That funding, which has been offered outside a formal grant scheme for the first time this year, will help to nurture new festivals in areas that are remote from science centres, thereby ensuring that local events achieve stability and have the chance to grow. The fund also makes provision of £60,000 for the Edinburgh International Science Festival, to increase the programme's scope to work with further and higher education, local science businesses and research institutes. We provide other means of support. The Edinburgh festivals expo fund is an enormously important part of Scotland's festivals infrastructure. Earlier this month, I was delighted to announce the provision of £1 million over the next two years to showcase Scotland-based dance and theatre artists through the fringe's made in Scotland programme. Funding from the expo fund will bring a fantastic suite of performances to this year's fringe. There will be radical interventions at, for example, the Royal Botanical Gardens, and the drama in Grid Iron's "Barflies" will unfold in the company's local—the Barony bar. I am sure that that production will attract some members that pure arts might not. The expo fund supports Scotland's creative sector at the grass-roots level by expanding the opportunities for those involved and developing the capacity of the sector to produce and deliver  on an international stage. The fund is born out of a desire to ensure that the Edinburgh festivals continue to flourish, develop and innovate, which is extremely important. During question time, Margaret Smith asked about the "Thundering Hooves" report and what happened next. It is by investing in the future that we will keep the festivals, and the contributions of the artists who participate in them, great. The expo fund invests in the future. The provision last year of £1.3 million of funding enabled the creation of a wide array of high-quality artistic collaborations that premiered throughout the year and which promoted the best of Scottish talent at home and abroad. This year's allocation of just over £2 million, through which we will continue to support ambitious projects from each of the 12 festivals, demonstrates the importance that this Government places on creativity and artistic endeavours. I cannot overemphasise just how important the festivals are in terms of international profile, creativity and the economy. That will continue to be the case. Last year, the Edinburgh mela received money from the expo fund to produce a piece called "Yatra", or "The Journey", which was performed twice over the mela weekend. It was an unforgettable experience that saw Scotland-based artists from three diverse musical cultures—south Asian, Scottish traditional and Japanese taiko—working and performing together in Edinburgh. I am delighted to announce that we have approved a grant of £30,000 from the expo fund for the mela to research and develop the possibility of a bold, large-scale, outdoor performance, "Cargo", which will focus on stories of immigration and the myriad diverse cultures that have settled in Scotland throughout our history, and will examine Scotland's own identity as an evolving nation. The project will engage with minority ethnic communities in Scotland and build international links. That is particularly significant in this, the year of homecoming, as we seek to reach out to our diaspora community across the world. Homecoming 2009 is at the centre of many of the events that will take place this year. The international film-making diaspora is featured at the film festival. The Edinburgh International Festival programme will include the themes of homecoming and the enlightenment. It is a good, diverse programme that balances the best of the world with the best of Scotland. The science festival will showcase some of the great contributions that Scots have made to scientific and technological advances, both at home and abroad. The book festival is creating a series of special events, focusing on the importance of Burns and the Scottish enlightenment. The tattoo will go on tour to four additional venues around Scotland. As 2009 is the 250 th anniversary of the birth of Robert Burns, a feature of this year's show  will be a series of vignettes depicting episodes from the popular poet's works. The Edinburgh festivals are uniquely placed to speak to communities at home and abroad and to convey what Scotland has to offer. They attract a huge international audience—a wonderfully cosmopolitan, colourful, open-minded audience—and make Edinburgh a must-see destination and a place that comes even more alive. That leads to international success for Scottish artists and underpins what we want to continue to achieve. Everything that we do must underpin not just Edinburgh's position now but what it can and will achieve. We seek constant innovation, investment and celebration. The festivals are a living thing and need to be treated in a way that encourages them to grow and develop all the time. Their global marketing strategy—the first cross-festival collaborative project, with investment by the Scottish Government, through its Edinburgh festivals expo fund—is being put in place, will be essential and can be built on. Edinburgh's major festivals have continued to grow in strength since their foundation. This is a 60-year-old festival city. We should be proud of it, must support it and must understand that it is key to the economic and cultural life not just of the capital city and the region but of the entire country. It defines some of our place in the world. Scotland's burgeoning festival scene—this nation of festivals, right across the country—delights and entertains us all and underpins Edinburgh's success. It reaffirms what it is to live and be part of the social and cultural life of this country and supports the creative and social confidence of the people, who need to become all that they can be. Long may we continue to promote and make a noise about our collective talents, creativity and ambitions on the global stage. Long may these crucial annual happenings encapsulate the confident, proud, diverse, dynamic and inclusive nation that we know ourselves to be. The work that the Government is doing to set up creative Scotland will help that process, but the real treasure in all our festivals, artistry and events is the artists themselves. Long may they be supported by our festivals. I move, That the Parliament recognises the international success of the Edinburgh festivals, along with Scotland's other festivals, their contribution to the Scottish economy, their role in the cultural life of the nation and the positive messages that they promote about Scotland's cultural confidence and ambition in this Year of Homecoming.

First, I congratulate all six of Scotland's newly elected MEPs. The Scottish Government has already begun to engage proactively with them—as a team and individually—in order that they may deliver the best possible outcomes for Scotland in key EU areas such as fisheries and renewable energy.

The recovery programme that is under way has a number of priorities. On broadband, it is fair to say that while Scotland still needs some development, it is not in a category in which substantial investment is needed to complete the coverage, which is an issue in north Wales, for example. Energy is a key area. The recovery programme, which is focused on a variety of renewables, will help to support the Aberdeen offshore demonstrator and will be involved in the carbon capture plant. Those are good examples arising from strong lobbying by Scotland's MEPs and a strong team effort to put forward a case for Scotland. A strong follow-through of support for the actions of this Government, to ensure that we get our policy outcomes for the good of Scotland, will be very welcome. I see the six MEPs as a  team, and I have offered them my support and the support of Scotland House in Brussels to ensure that they can achieve the maximum possible.

The member used the word "incarnation". I always welcome incarnation and reincarnation. In the case of George Lyon, that is precisely what has happened: he is reborn as an MEP. I am sure that members will be delighted to hear that, typical of the constructive approach of both of us, we have already had a telephone conversation. I hope that I will meet George Lyon shortly—not something that I have said often—to discuss the role that he will play. He has indicated that he wishes to have a positive relationship with this Government, which is what I want with all of our MEPs. Together, I am sure that we will make a difference.

Dr McKee asks a good question. There are two aspects. One aspect is the role of the Parliament in issues of subsidiarity. The Lisbon treaty anticipates an enhanced role for sub-national Parliaments. In those circumstances, as the Presiding Officer and members will be aware, the Parliament itself is endeavouring to engage with Westminster on the issue, and the Government is engaging with the United Kingdom Government on the issue, to ensure that our parliamentary scrutiny activities are kept up to speed and improved. MEPs have a strong role to play in being an early warning system for material that is going through Europe. I am keen to develop a number of structures in Scotland, including the European elected members information liaison and exchange structure, which has been slightly unwieldy up until now. EMILE is a committee of all six MEPs, local authority representatives and the convener of the European and External Relations Committee. I hope that we can focus EMILE so that it is a body  with action at its heart. If we do so, I hope that the MEPs will play a full and active part.

I am aware of the member's keen interest in Latin American countries, particularly Cuba. I had the privilege of having dinner with a Cuban delegation and the member some time ago. As I said at my appearance before the European and External Relations Committee, I am keen to consider all new opportunities to promote Scotland overseas. The fact that the value of exports from Scotland to central and South America nearly doubled from 2004 to 2007 is of immediate interest, as are the opportunities in the energy sector that exist across the continent. There are, of course, cultural links with a number of countries in South America, as well as links of friendship. As I said to the committee, I intend to turn to engagement with Latin American countries in the coming months, in order to identify the right priorities. We will be led by the existence of opportunity and the need to prioritise to meet the Government's economic purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth.

I am happy to say that I will seriously consider our relationship with Cuba as part of our relationship with Latin America. I would welcome an opportunity to talk to the member about that. I invite her to come and see me about it. I stress that no decision has been made about how exactly we are to proceed, but it makes sense for us to engage as constructively as possible in each area of the globe, and also to address language issues where major languages are likely to be part of our efforts. That must be led not only by economic matters, but by cultural and political matters. I invite the member to talk to me about Cuba. Our conversations have been very constructive in  the past and I am sure that they will be in the future.

I am certain that anybody with whom we work will want to emulate the wonderful freedom of speech that we have in Scotland, where Mr Fraser and I can discuss these matters fully in the open and agree on them. Human rights are very important. In all our work, we should encourage people to offer the same opportunities that we enjoy. I encourage Mr Fraser to take his interest a step further and support an independence referendum in Scotland that will allow the people to choose.

I am tempted to comment on the Darian expedition, but I will resist. That expedition included the sending of a large number of woollen bonnets from Dundee, which is perhaps not the trade activity that I had in mind when I talked about trade links with South America. I refer the member to the answer that I have just given to Elaine Smith. We are defining what we want to do in terms of economic opportunity, cultural opportunity, friendship and our desire to normalise our relations in every part of the world. I am not sure that Darian is at the forefront of our ideas, but it must be in there somewhere.

Following his meeting with the First Minister during Scotland week in 2008, Luis  Alberto Moreno, the president of the Inter-American Development Bank, visited Scotland in October 2008. The IDB is working on a number of proposals to promote renewable energy partnerships between Scotland and Latin American. While President Moreno was here, he had meetings with a number of companies that are involved in renewables. Scottish Development International has been working with the IDB to promote the contribution that Scotland and Scottish companies can make in renewable energy. Like Scotland, Chile has significant wave and tidal resources. SDI has supported outward and inward missions from Chile for marine energy and other projects that are under way in Latin America. The member might also want to be aware that the University of Strathclyde will launch a regional centre on renewable energy and environmental protection in Mexico in August 2009. A great deal of work is under way, but we want to encourage even more, because that emphasises Scotland's world-leading position in some of these technologies.

Of course, the festivals—not just the Edinburgh festivals but all Scotland's festivals—will be the subject of a debate later this afternoon. It is fair to say—as I will say in the debate—that it is too early to be able to assess the impact of the economic downturn on the Edinburgh festivals, but the early signs are positive. For example, only last week, the Edinburgh fringe announced its largest ever programme. We are all determined to ensure that the Edinburgh festivals continue to flourish. The Government's commitment is demonstrated by the significant investment that we are making in the festivals through the Scottish Government's Edinburgh festivals expo fund.

I can certainly confirm for the member—who has a strong interest in the matter—that we intend to continue with the expo fund, which has another year to run. Our commitment to the Edinburgh festivals is strong and constant. We take seriously indeed the conclusions of the "Thundering Hooves" report, on which a great deal of progress has been made. The essential message of that report should always be kept in mind: the excellence of the Edinburgh festivals must be a perpetual excellence. Year on year, those festivals must be the greatest arts festivals in the world. Certainly, the fringe is the largest festival of its kind, but we must ensure that Edinburgh's unique collection of 12 festivals continues to grow and develop. Just last night, I had the opportunity to attend the launch event of the Edinburgh International Film Festival. In conversation with Sam Mendes—the director whose film was being shown—I made the point that his allowing that film to be shown here at the start of the festival was a vital contribution. To every artist, director, performer or other person with distinction in the arts throughout the world, I say that we want to ensure that they come here to maintain the quality of our festivals.

The member will not be surprised to know that we support some of the Calman recommendations, in particular those that we argued for—the member has usually been on the other side in those arguments, so I welcome his conversion—on matters such as airguns, drink driving and a range of other issues. We have made those arguments for some time, so I am glad that others are now catching up with us. However, the report as a whole—Professor Calman indicated that the report should not be taken as a whole, but we can take it as a whole, if the member wishes—is a missed opportunity. In contrast, the Government's national conversation provides a genuinely open debate with the people of Scotland about our future. [ Interruption. ] As ever, I hear the tinkling laughter of the member for Midlothian. That somewhat annoying noise, which I try not to be annoyed by, tinkles  away. However, the member for Midlothian has not attended a national conversation event. I invite her to turn up to such an event to debate with me. Then it will be the audience whose laughter tinkles. We are intensifying the national conversation. That will lead to a white paper in November that lays out our proposals and a choice for the people in a referendum next year. I am sure that the people of Midlothian will choose wisely and choose independence.

Were there such a ban, I would ask for it to be lifted now. As the minister responsible for this area of work, I know the amount of time and effort that the civil servants who work with me have put in to answering questions from the Calman commission and working constructively. I attended the launch of the commission's report on Monday, but I do not think that the member was there, so I have better first-hand knowledge of what Ken Calman said than the member does. I make it clear that we are very keen to see forward movement on these matters. I hope to come to the chamber shortly to talk about how we can take the issues forward without further delay and without the long-grass tactics of which Mr Jim Murphy seems fond. We will move forward. Just as I suggested to Mr Fraser that openness was required on the referendum, I say to the member, let the people of Scotland have the final say. Until he does that, he is no democrat.

As ever, I find myself in complete agreement with my friend Mr Morgan. I could not put it better myself.

Support for non-national museums, including the Scottish maritime museum, is routed through Museums Galleries Scotland, which makes decisions on funding, taking into account the business needs of the museums and competing demands for the grant fund. The planned funding for the Scottish maritime museum from Museums Galleries Scotland in 2009-10 is £305,000.

In the interest of accuracy, I point out that part of the Scottish maritime museum is in Jackie Baillie's constituency. I have already committed to visiting the Denny tank, which is in her constituency, and I am a long-time supporter of not just the Scottish maritime museum but the industrial museum sector. Three weeks ago, we held a Scottish museums summit and brought together the entire museums sector, because I, too, was concerned that some of the issues that Jackie Baillie and I identified in the work that we did together on that report while on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in the first session of Parliament have not been resolved. It is important that the entire sector is involved in helping to resolve them. We are setting up a policy group to work with me and my officials, the key issue for which will be the need for a consistent, long-term funding framework throughout the sector. It is obvious that we are seeking that at a time of constrained resources, but the sector's response to that day meeting was positive. I think that Jackie Baillie will know that from the Scottish maritime museum, because Jim Tildesley was there. We will take forward the work to try to get the sustainable  solution that Scotland's industrial and other museums deserve.

No, I will not make that commitment, and I regret that I have been asked to do so. If the member was trying to be helpful—which she should be, because it is co-operation that makes a difference on such issues—she would have told the Parliament, as I am about to, that Henry McLeish, the chair of the Scottish mining museum, spoke to the museums summit, was part of the debate and discussion, and will be part of the process of setting the national strategy. I visited the Scottish mining museum some time ago, first in order to announce the capital funding, but secondly to engage with all those who are involved in the museum and to say that it is an immensely valuable resource and that we need to find the right way forward. If all that we have is attempts to score press releases for the "Midlothian Courier" or some such, the member is not part of the solution but remains part of the problem.

The Scottish Government, through the Scottish Arts Council, is supporting a wide variety of cultural developments in the Borders. It is supporting, for example, the Eastgate theatre and the Wynd theatre, the Borders Book Festival—which I will attend this week; I will be there tomorrow—young people through the youth music initiative, and artists. We welcome the enthusiastic way in which the Borders has embraced the year of homecoming, which features the return to the ridings and the in the footsteps of the reivers events and the clan Scott gathering, which homecoming Scotland is supporting.

It is important not to be against projects, but to be in favour of them. I am happy to say that I am strongly in favour of the Abbotsford project. My visit to Abbotsford just before the HLF decision shows my support for it. I have had conversations with the member about Abbotsford and I hope to go back there again. A fundraising event is being held this evening by the Faculty of Advocates. Alas, I do not think that I will get to that event, but I express my support for it. We must ensure that Abbotsford is secured. These are difficult times financially—nobody is saying anything other than that—but I have given a commitment to the member that I will work as closely with him and the Abbotsford trustees as I can on something that Scotland needs to have: a place where we can remember the extraordinary genius of Walter Scott and reflect on his cultural influence on the nation and, more widely, on the importance of the writer not just as an entertainer or story teller, but as a conscience of the nation.

The debate has been good, valuable and important for the Parliament. It is appropriate that from time to time we review all the actions in which we are engaged and the structures that exist. It is equally important that we review the purposes of the structures that we have created, to ensure that they are fit for purpose and serve the people whom we serve. I took that point strongly from Mr Finnie's speech. The process of developing governance in Scotland is always unfinished and it is good to see the process move further forward. I make it clear to Johann Lamont, who expressed doubt about this, that the Government supports the report of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee and the proposals that it contains and will want to do everything that it can to assist the passage of those proposals. A number of important points have been made and I will respond to two such points before I make wider points. I was struck by Des McNulty's  speech, which was mirrored to some extent by the speeches of Tom McCabe and other members. It is important to say that the independence of the bodies that we are considering in no way negates their accountability to the Parliament. The difference between independence and accountability needs to be clearly understood. Parliament must be allowed scope to govern the overall size and scope of budgets. That is not about interference; it is about ensuring that we do the job that we are elected to do, which is to ensure that resources are properly used and services are properly provided. The Crerar recommendation to reduce the overall number of commissions and scrutiny bodies was informed by experience in New Zealand. The Government is committed to a similar model, whereby when a new body is established another one ceases to exist. That principle exists in New Zealand, where there is a focus on the function and purpose of bodies. As proposals for the creation of new rights commissioners come before the Parliament, we should remember the point that Jackson Carlaw made in that regard. It is not that the idea of new commissioners did not excite Mr Carlaw—I have never, ever, aimed to excite Mr Carlaw and I suspect that that is true of all members. However, the committee referred in paragraph 284 of its report to the recommendations that the Finance Committee made in 2006 and noted "the need to explore all possible opportunities for an existing body to carry out any proposed new function and make use of existing resources before creating a new body." As proposals come forward—they are already doing so—I ask all members to bear that key principle in mind. I am glad that the committee made the point again and I pay tribute to the committee and its convener for doing so and for the high quality of their work. When it gave evidence to the committee, the Government made clear our stance on the potential to create a more streamlined landscape. We wanted a better co-ordinated and more proportionate approach to conduct and standards in public life, which would be balanced with the need to save resources. We were very much in accord with the SPCB's proposals, but it was clear to everyone that it is for the Parliament to take a view on the distinctiveness of commissioners' roles and performance. The committee recommended that the Scottish Government include the necessary provisions for a new complaints handling process in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill. I am happy to confirm that I will lodge amendments to the bill at stage 2 that will fulfil that requirement, subject to the Parliament's agreement. It is clear to us all that  the creation of an easier, shorter, quicker and wholly user-focused approach to complaints about public services in Scotland should be our priority, because such an approach will not just place an empowered user at the heart of the process but lead to a more effective use of public resources. If more complaints are resolved at the first point of contact, there will be less need for more expensive and difficult upper-tier complaints handling work and organisations should work more effectively. An encompassing, design-authority role for the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman will take all complaints processes out of organisational silos and away from the complex landscapes that have bedevilled all previous efforts at reform. Johann Lamont drew attention to the fact that the approach represents neither rocket science nor new thinking. All Governments are attempting to take such an approach, but it is difficult to do. Let us remember what is at the heart of the issue. As members know, each complaint is individual and unique. Each complaint has a human face and represents, at the minimum, disquiet about a service or organisation. As every elected representative knows, sometimes all that is required is to say, "Sorry." We need that human focus in our work. The complaints system is also the interface between the state and the citizen, and it must be efficient, effective and properly tuned. The proposals will take us down those lines. I noted Joe FitzPatrick's point about Waterwatch Scotland. I think that the Government's proposals in that regard were the right ones. We wanted a co-ordinated and coherent approach across all public services—that aspiration was behind the proposal to transfer prison complaints. We will support the motion in its entirety, because we do not want our preference in relation to Waterwatch to disrupt the process. However, we will consider the matter and ensure that it gets the further attention that it needs. The report considered the governance of the Parliament—how we look after ourselves. We must show that our attitude to governance is rigorous and comprehensive. We must show that we are always concerned with improving and strengthening governance and with improving our relationship with the Scottish people. We must show that our proposals add value to the procedures that deal with all elected representatives and that our proposals demonstrate the integrity of the system and the people in it. The Government will back the report's recommendations in that regard. The work of the committee and its clerks was thorough. The report is well thought out and will allow us to make further changes. It is not the final word but it represents a significant step forward.  There are points of difference between the report's authors and the Government, but I stress that they relate to issues that are finely balanced, as many members said, and which we can discuss. Overall, the Government endorses and agrees with many of the recommendations and looks forward to working with the corporate body to make the changes and improvements that will help to simplify not only the complaints handling process but the complaints landscape, to address the ultimate goal of the work, which is to continue to improve our public services so that we reduce the need for people to complain in the first place. We look forward to the constructive work that will go ahead and hope that a committee bill will be introduced.

I admit to being confused by two things during the debate. The first is Helen Eadie's invention of a new political philosophy—Celtic neo-liberalism—which I must investigate further. The second is curious—it is a dog that has not bitten. It is Labour members' slavish loyalty to their London colleagues, which is bizarre, because we all know that they do not like one another much. That is an open secret, so why are they locked together in that way? I will tell members why. They are locked together in a dance of electoral death; they are  going down together. If anybody had any doubt about that, it was demonstrated by the results on Monday: 22 out of 32 local authority areas voted for the SNP, not Labour. In the three that preferred Labour, the difference between the two parties was—I will not use a phrase that my friend Kenny Gibson once used in the chamber—very narrow. The reality is not only that Labour is going down but that it deserves to go down. I will use two examples to prove that. The first, which was referred to by Dr Alasdair Allan and Nicol Stephen, is yesterday's extraordinary sight: Gordon Brown trying to pose as the great reformer. He is not so much the great reformer as the late reformer. On expenses, he failed to act and, indeed, damaged action by his bizarre YouTube performance. On a written constitution and bill of rights, which he claims to believe in, it is "Maybe aye, maybe no." On reform of the House of Lords, he is, after 12 years, still talking about an unelected element. On electoral reform, which he has rejected again and again, there is simply more talk. Westminster first considered electoral reform in a Speaker's conference between the wars, and has since considered the matter again and again. The Jenkins commission has been referred to, but no decision has been taken. There was, despite the corrosive arrogance of the Westminster system, nothing in Gordon Brown's speech about the sovereignty of Parliament, nor was there anything about innovation, except perhaps in respect of giving people the vote at 16, which the Scottish Parliament is already pursuing. There was but a mere mention of Calman. In short, there was nothing at all in the speech. Any Prime Minister who builds up their statement as a major step forward and then delivers nothing deserves the description that Disraeli gave of Gladstone's Government: "a range of exhausted volcanoes. Not a flame flickering on a single pallid crest." For that reason, the Labour Government has to go. There is another stronger reason why the Westminster Labour Government must go, which has been repeated again and again today. The argument that we have heard is that the Labour Government must remain in office because all the other options are worse. That is an affront to every member, to every citizen of this country and to every citizen who believes in democracy. What has been said is not a fact, but the opinion of a group of people: if those people said that the sky is blue, one would have to go out and check for oneself. Members have even claimed that elections are a waste of time and that they would make people suffer. That is an outrage. Democracy should triumph—people should decide. Any Government that says that people  cannot vote it out because they will make the wrong choice should automatically be voted out. Brecht talked satirically about the people failing the leaders and electing a new people. That is now Labour's mantra. What has been said is an outrage because it is wrapped in a lie. We have heard repeated again and again in the chamber the lie in which that outrage is wrapped. Iain Gray, David Whitton, Pauline McNeill, James Kelly, Johann Lamont and Michael McMahon have all said the same thing. They have pointed to a lie that I must disprove. I shall do so in three ways. First, the fall of the 1979 Government was caused by Labour rebels, not by the SNP. In evidence, I cite none other than James Callaghan, who wrote a book entitled "Time and Chance"—an appropriate title. Labour has had its time and now it must go; its chance is over.

James Callaghan said in the book that I mentioned: "Michael Cocks, the Chief Whip, had spoken with some of Labour's Devolution rebels. In his view the difficulty within the Party was much greater than any from the Scottish National Party and the Whips' judgement was that the Government could not rely on the votes of Labour Members from Merseyside or the North". That is first point. Labour brought itself down. The second point is very important. It is that the manifest failures of Labour brought down that party then, as they are doing now. Thirdly, let us get to the heart of the democratic point. I will tell members who it was that voted the Labour Party out of office. It was not 11 SNP MPs—not even my good friend Andrew Welsh—who voted the Labour Party out of office. It was voted out by 13,697,923 voters in an election. Those voters brought down the Labour Government—nobody else. Let us tackle the other myth about what happened during the Thatcher years. Those years were awful, and the Thatcher Government was culpable. I was among those who marched and protested. I was at Gartcosh, Ravenscraig and Caterpillar. I did not pay the poll tax—I could have, but I would not. Labour could have followed that campaign, but instead it undermined it. When the marchers got to London, it preferred to debate Westland to Gartcosh. I was in George Square;  indeed, I was on the board of Scotland United. Labour did not back us, but instead walked away.

No, I will not. I want to quote again from James Callaghan's memoirs; what he said is important. He said that, in 1979, he consulted Labour's general secretary, Ron Hayward, who "reported that the Party in Scotland was pretty shell-shocked." It wanted to take forward devolution, which should have remained "in the forefront of Labour's programme, but the well-being of the Government must be the priority". That was the case with UK Government then and it is now. Let us take the issue further.

No, I will not. I believe that politics is about the positive, not the negative. The more Labour argues a negative line, the more it will repeat the experience of the past weekend. There are now nine points between positive and negative. Shortly there will be 19, and the gap will continue to grow. I want an election now for the following reasons. They are positive reasons that will move Scotland forward. I want an election to give the people of Scotland the opportunity to choose a better way for Scotland. I want an election because I reject the self-interested desperation of the "late reformer" yesterday. I want an election because I reject the intellectually dishonest compromises that we have had. I want an election because I want to ensure that we do not have the empty glitz of David Cameron. I want an election because Scotland needs an independent future and because an election can usher one in. The time for change in Scotland is now. An election can change us—we should have one.

Will the member reflect on the fact that, since becoming Prime Minister in June 2007, Gordon Brown has voted in only 10.8 per cent of divisions in the House of Commons? That should be on the record, in the interest of fairness.

Edinburgh is the pre-eminent festival capital of the world and its festivals make a significant contribution to our economy because they attract visitors to Scotland from around the world. Our £6 million expo fund will ensure that the festivals continue to flourish by supporting ambitious projects, increasing funding to Scotland-based artists and practitioners, and promoting the best of Scottish talent at home and abroad.

I am sure that the homecoming celebrations will have a major impact on all the festivals because they will have a major impact on those who come here. Particularly at the end of July, when the gathering takes place, many people may choose to stay on in Edinburgh or return to Edinburgh for festival events. I know that all the organisers are planning for that factor. I am pleased that the fringe has attracted £1.2 million over three years from the expo fund for the made in Scotland curated showcase, which will also give guidance to companies on how they can enter the fringe and be a part of it. I was lucky to be able to launch the showcase a fortnight ago in the Scottish Parliament building and I know that it will have a substantial effect. The fringe is an important part of our festival infrastructure. We should not forget that there are 12 festivals in Edinburgh, but the fringe is one of the jewels in the crown.

I am glad that Malcolm Chisholm is standing up for the Leith festival, which is an excellent event. So many festivals around Edinburgh are excellent, in Portobello and elsewhere. It is important that we make a distinction with the 12 festivals that are supported from the expo fund, because they lie at the centre of things. However, Festivals Edinburgh, whose director, Faith Liddell, I met last week, is keen to ensure that, although there is a league table of festivals, so to speak, the effect of the central 12 festivals is felt throughout the city at all the other events, including those that are generated in each community in the city. Therefore, the existence of the expo fund and the 12 festivals already contributes to the success of festivals such as the Leith festival.

While the Scottish Government is not presently providing humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka, we are continuing to monitor the situation and, of course, we remain in close contact with the Department for International Development, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and, in particular, the Disasters Emergency Committee Scotland, whose attitude towards this matter will of course assist in determining our own, if an appeal is launched.

It is significant that all the European members on the council voted in favour of the inquiry. There is unanimity among the European nations—and countries further afield—that there should be such an inquiry. There is wider unanimity that there must be humanitarian action to protect and support those on both sides of the conflict who are suffering now that the conflict has come to an end. I put all the Government's weight behind the appeal that the member makes. I hope that that adds to the international voices that are making it absolutely clear that humanitarian assistance is at the centre of this matter.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Ofcom to discuss a number of issues, including the future use of spectrum. We have responded to the consultations that were carried out as part of Ofcom's digital dividend review. In our response to the United Kingdom Government's "Digital Britain" interim report, which I had the opportunity to talk to Lord Stephen Carter about, we recommended that further work should be undertaken to establish whether the seventh multiplex spectrum would be suitable for broadcasting purposes.

I very much sympathise with the point that the member makes. Indeed, I have made such representations to Ofcom, to the new chair of Ofcom and to the Scottish director of Ofcom very recently, and I will continue to make them. We all recognise that the situation following the demise of Border TV's news coverage is totally unacceptable. The present coverage by Tyne Tees Television is unacceptable; indeed, it is irrelevant to the local audience in the Borders and especially to the audience in Dumfries and Galloway. The best solution would be to have a single Scottish licence. I have made that point to Ofcom, and I do not think that there is much disagreement with it in the Parliament or in the broadcasting sector.  I sympathise with the member on the need for new possibilities in local coverage and, in so far as we are able to, we will support the development of such new possibilities. Of course, we could do even more if broadcasting powers were the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament, and I hope that transfer of that responsibility will not be deferred for too long.

The National Trust for Scotland is an independent charity that works to conserve our Scottish heritage, and the Scottish Government provides it with funding support for specific projects. Recently, I and my officials have had several meetings with the trust's chair and chief executive to discuss its current, extremely disturbing difficulties. I have also met representatives of Prospect, the trade union that represents many of the trust's staff, and of in trust for Scotland, the members organisation that wants the trust to be more accountable.

The full facilities that the Scottish Government offers with regard to redundancy will be made available to the trust's staff. I am sure that my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and her colleagues will support the trust's staff through the partnership action for continuing employment programme and other initiatives. I deeply regret the redundancies, which are a matter for the trust. In their representations, the trade unions made what seemed to me to be a fair point, which was that in an organisation that is as specialised as the National Trust for Scotland, the greatest care must be taken to ensure that crucial skills, particularly in conservation, are not removed from the organisation. The trust must confront the difficulties that it undoubtedly faces, many of which are long term, although some of them have arisen recently, but I hope that it will consider the balance of work that it can do and ensure that it does not  find itself abnormally weakened by the decisions that it makes. I will be very happy to work with the trust on those matters; indeed, conversations are continuing between my officials and trust officials.

I am tempted to say, in language with which Lord Foulkes is familiar, "I refer the member to the answer I gave some moments ago." As we do not use that terminology here, I simply say that my officials and I have had several meetings recently with the chair of the National Trust for Scotland. We discussed the trust's proposals for changes to its operating arrangements at several properties, staff reductions, and the specific projects that the Scottish Government is funding.

I remember the answer that I gave the member this morning—my attention span is still capable of remembering such things. As the member indicates, that answer mentions a considerable sum of money. That money is project-related funding for specific projects. It is a considerable contribution to the trust and to the wellbeing of Scotland's heritage. I am very familiar with the trust's work in a variety of places, including Culzean, where I had the pleasure to be a member of staff when I was a student. It is a special place, although even then there were strong questions about the way in which the trust approached the commercial aspects of its work.  I am sure that the member will be pleased to know that yesterday, at the final conference of the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland, I said not only publicly but repeatedly that I wanted Historic Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland, and the owners of the historic houses in Scotland, including the Historic Houses Association, to work together closely, to share experience, to find ways in which they can pool costs, and to sharpen the offering that we can make in Scotland. Others could be involved, too. I am sure that members will be as surprised as I was to learn yesterday that the largest owner of grade A scheduled monuments in Scotland is not the National Trust for Scotland, Historic Scotland or the owners of historic houses, but the Church of Scotland. Eighty per cent of the ecclesiastical buildings that are scheduled in Scotland belong to the Church of Scotland. There are issues throughout Scottish life. However, those who are trying to make a commercial prospect out of our heritage and to ensure that it continues need to work together.

I thank the member for letting me see the letter a short time ago. I find it disturbing to discover that the National Trust for Scotland has received a substantial legacy from a donor, applying to the David Livingstone centre. Presumably, if the trust had withdrawn from the centre, those resources would have had to be returned to the donor. That fact is germane, and it might have been better if it had been in the public domain when the discussions were going on, rather than now. I encourage the trust, and its chair and chief executive in particular, to be transparent and open in the discussions that are taking place about the future of the trust's work. The National Trust for Scotland is a membership organisation, and it is important that its members and the wider public know the facts on which people are making decisions. I look forward to discussing those and other matters when I go to the David Livingstone centre with the member on Tuesday.

I remind the member that the trust is a membership organisation: its officials are responsible to its members, and it is for the members to take the actions that they think necessary. I have visited Hugh Miller's cottage within the past year, and I found it a remarkably interesting place. Places such as Cromarty are not overburdened with attractions of that nature, so it is important that the attractions remain open, so that they can describe the distinctive nature of their part of Scotland. I hope that the trust will focus on ensuring that its range of offerings is made widely available. If memory serves, this is the second major round of cuts in recent years. Public confidence in the trust will be greatly eroded if cuts are seen to be part of a continuous process.

The Scottish Government recognises the important role that Scottish Screen currently plays in supporting the screen industries. That is why we provide the body with on-going grant-in-aid funding to allow it to undertake that work. Creative Scotland will inherit the functions, responsibilities and resources of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, and, by a transformation, will build on that work, taking the best from both organisations and creating a single unified body.

No, I cannot. I think that I indicated that, although I acknowledged the importance of the Scottish Screen brand, I also acknowledged the importance of a new creative Scotland brand. That will be essential. If the new organisation is to be the dynamic force that we all want it to be—the establishment of creative Scotland has been supported in this chamber—we should focus on ensuring that it is a dynamic brand. That is not to do down anything that has happened in the past, but to acknowledge that, in a time of limited resources, we should focus on getting—if I may use this phrase in the chamber, Presiding Officer—as many bangs for our buck as we possibly can. That means that we should be working to ensure that the creative Scotland brand is taken forward. The important work that Ken Hay and his colleagues do is of high value and will continue under the creative Scotland label. If a way can be found to use the Scottish Screen label as an adjunct to that, well and good. I hope that the good work will continue—but Scotland could gain much more in terms of film production if we had the taxation powers that other countries have to attract film production here.

I shall not be replacing Mr Smith on the joint board. I see no need to do so, because that joint board is a transitional board. I have been in touch with Iain Smith since his resignation. I regret his resignation, and I said so at the time. I hope to have a longer conversation with him, but I know that there were many reasons for his resignation. He was doubtful about the process that was being undertaken. That process has been accelerated in recent months. To continue Mr Smith's analogy of the operating table, the people who withheld the oxygen were those who voted against the bill when it was going through. I might therefore blame the entire chamber. However, let us not look back now, whoever the murderer is—and I see that Mr McAveety appears to want to claim the credit. Now that I am in the emergency room, I hope to be able to do something. I have been trying to take the process to completion; to assure all stakeholders that it will happen; to find the proper way of  informing the chamber of the costs, which I hope I have done; and to reassure members about the key issues. Those key issues include the one that the Tories have properly raised, namely the resources for the creative industries—we are taking that issue forward. I hope that in talking to Mr Smith and others—[ Interruption. ] I hear strange noises coming from the Labour benches. A former minister with responsibility for the matter appears to be overexcited. If she had delivered, we would not be in this situation. We will deliver, our approach will work, and we will move forward. That will show up the failures of others, particularly Ms Brankin.

The Scottish Government has had no discussions with Slovakian diplomatic officials about Slovakian nationals in Glasgow. However, I recognise that there is an issue in parts of Glasgow and I am sure that the member has information that will assist me in taking the matter forward.

The issue cuts across the responsibilities of a number of ministers, but I will be happy to visit the member's constituency to discuss areas that are of particular relevance to me in my capacity as minister with responsibility  for external affairs. There are also issues to be discussed with the ministers with responsibility for health, education and justice. The member and Councillor Anne Marie Millar have talked about policing with the help of Slovakian officials. There are issues in that regard that need to be discussed. There is also an on-going petition from Govanhill Housing Association on issues that are of some relevance. I assure the member that we will work hard with him. Perhaps more than one minister should engage with him on the issue.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of a strong local newspaper sector and the contribution that it makes to culture, democracy and the economy. We appreciate the pressure that the newspaper industry has been facing for many months, which is why my colleague Jim Mather facilitated a discussion at a Scottish Government seminar on 4 February on how the problems might be overcome. Since that session, the First Minister and Jim Mather have had a series of meetings with industry representatives, to encourage active industry engagement and exploration of new business opportunities arising from the exploitation of new technologies.

We live in a time of considerable change in how the media operate. It is not possible to beat back the tide simply by continuing as we are; it is necessary to have new ideas about how we support local media and how the sector should develop. I was interested to note that in recent months Mr Lamont called for the establishment of the Scottish digital network—I agree with him on that—and made a link between such a network and the health of the local media and newspaper sector. Problems are associated with the operation of a commercial digital network on a local television basis and the health of local newspapers—one could adversely affect the other. Although I do not agree with some of the member's ideas, I agree that we need to help the  local newspaper sector to adapt and change in the current times, and I will work with him and others to achieve that.

Many trade-offs have to be made. The substantial reduction in the 2010-11 Scottish Government budget that has been brought forward by members of Pauline McNeill's party means that we must take ever tougher decisions to achieve a more efficient public service. We would want to do that in any case, but the decisions are being driven on by financial pressure from south of the border. The member therefore cannot complain about one thing but not complain about that. As I have said, we are in a time of profound change for the media, so it is important that we are not—as the member appears to be—luddite.

That is an extremely good point, and it works the other way as well. When I was in Canada, I took the opportunity to speak to the mayor of Toronto, the mayor of Hamilton and the federal culture minister about the specific work that they were doing to attract film investment. If we had taxation powers, we could imitate their ability to attract production. That is a key issue.

I should correct the member on two points. First, far more than 10 cities are involved; I mentioned 10 cities only because those were the ones that the three ministers managed to visit. Secondly, by any definition, Scotland week is coast to coast. We mentioned events in New York and San Francisco and in Prince Edward Island and Vancouver. In both countries, it is coast to coast.

I seem to remember that I indicated during questioning at the committee meeting that I thought that there had perhaps been more documents in the past than there should have been. I think that Mr Gordon and the convener agreed with me on that, and I agreed to consider how we present the documents. I indicated in my earlier speech that we will refresh the North America plan—indeed, that process is under way. I welcome Mr Gordon's contribution and I am sure that he will take entirely seriously my assurance that we are not diminishing but intensifying our work and that we will have documentation that will be fit for purpose.

I think I said in my speech that we are in the process of refreshing the America plan. I have been keen to influence it myself, so it is slightly later than it might have been. Progress is going well and I hope that we will publish something in the weeks and months to come. I will not tie myself down, but there will be a new plan.

Will the member give way?

I have to say that I cannot recall hearing from a single radio chief—however that might be defined—either in uproar or otherwise. I would welcome any evidence that the member can provide in that respect.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I shall be reasonably flexible. I am pleased to speak to the motion in my name, which is on what I regard as a very important topic indeed—Scotland's past, present and future engagement with the United States and Canada. I notice that there is a paucity of amendment, which I hope is a good sign. I am happy to say that I will accept Labour's amendment, so I am sure that we can have a positive afternoon. It is worth reminding ourselves that Scotland's historical links with the USA and Canada date back to the very founding of those great nations. There will not be sufficient time this afternoon—even with flexibility—to do full justice to the extent of Scotland's influence on the political, cultural, social and economic development of the USA and Canada. However, a few examples will illustrate the point. According to the best sources, around half of the Presidents of the United States, including the current incumbent, have some sort of Scots or Scots-Irish ancestry. Scots accounted for a similar proportion of the signatories to the US declaration of independence, and nine of the 13 governors of the original United States were Scots. The signs of the connection are all around us. Just a few weeks ago, I was in Dumfriesshire visiting the cottage of John Paul Jones, the founder of the United States Navy. Scotland is dotted with places that have that sort of live connection with the United States. Many of America's foremost businesspeople have been proud to claim Scottish roots—people such as Andrew Carnegie, John Rockefeller, John Paul Getty and, more recently, Bill Gates. Estimates of the total number of Americans with Scots or Scot-Irish ancestry range widely, from 9 million to 29 million, which represents possibly as many as one in 10 Americans.  Scotland's mark on Canada has been even greater: some 15 per cent of the population can trace their roots back to Scotland. In Nova Scotia, the proportion is even higher, at around 30 per cent. Remarkably, some 40 per cent of the citizens of Prince Edward Island, which has a population of only 135,000, claim Scots ancestry. Indeed, I am very proud of the fact that my wife's ancestry includes the Cape Breton giant—the tallest non-pathological human being from Scotland and Canada. Sarah Boyack is shaking her head in wonderment. However, as well as being a privilege, it is an indication that in almost every family—and I suspect in the family of almost every member in the chamber—there will be some link with Canada or the United States. There are strong connections in bloodlines, but there are connections elsewhere. Many people from North America who are not Scottish come to Scotland to enjoy the connection. For those who are Scottish or have Scottish roots, the connection is all the greater. We will see that this year, at the gathering in July, which will be the largest ever bringing together of people with Scots and Scots-Irish roots who want to come to Scotland for a single event. The event builds on the enthusiasm that has been generated by the year of homecoming, which is focused in America and Canada on strengthening and nurturing our connections with the Scots diaspora. We have commissioned research that should inform us how we can best develop those existing links. We should not just look backwards; we should look forwards. Our aim will be to work with partners across the private and public sectors in Scotland and North America to develop a cohesive, effective and supportive framework for our future relationship. At the heart of that are the celebrations that take place across North America on 6 April to commemorate the signing of the declaration of Arbroath in 1320. It might seem slightly arcane that that event is celebrated, until one realises that there is a strong link between the declaration of Arbroath and the American declaration of independence. The celebrations started in Nova Scotia in 1986 and spread to other provinces of Canada. They were adopted by a resolution of the United States Senate in 1998, and in 2008 the then US President, George W Bush, issued a proclamation marking the 10 th anniversary of tartan day, as it was called. The Government on this side of the Atlantic has been capitalising on the good will that that has created, but we need to accelerate that activity. Individual activity by parts of Government has been significant, but it was not until 2001 that Henry McLeish signalled an intention to harness the potential opportunities. I pay tribute to him and  the work that he did. Since then, he and his successors, Jack McConnell and Alex Salmond, have built the relationship and ensured the engagement of Government. The Parliament's relationship has been an important part of that. The decision in 2001 to establish a Scottish affairs office in Washington DC was a useful foundation on which all of that could be built. The challenge remains to connect in a modern way the people of North America with the people of Scotland, and to build out of the traditional and historical relationship a new relationship. Of course, the prize to be had is great. Let us look just at the financial prize. With a value in 2007 of £2.8 billion, the US remains Scotland's biggest export market and our single largest overseas market for tourists. There were 417,000 visits to Scotland from the US in 2007, with an estimated spend of £257 million. In the same year, Scotland's exports to Canada were worth £275 million and there were 124,000 inward visits. Those are big connections that can be made bigger. When those figures are reinforced with a whole range of other trading and business links, one can see a sharp edge to the issue—an edge of earning money in Scotland and ensuring that Scotland prospers as a result of the relationship. Tartan day—indeed, the whole of Scotland week—is now the visible symbol of that relationship. It is an opportunity for us to renew the relationship and to profit by it. We have heard of business and cultural examples. On the cultural side, I refer to the phenomenal success of "Black Watch", the National Theatre of Scotland's touring production. At one time, we were informed that it would be too rich fare for America, but the Americans took to it with huge enthusiasm and gusto, and the National Theatre of Scotland is talked about very warmly in New York, in particular. There has been investment in building the relationship. The previous Administration made a considerable investment, which has continued to grow. When we were elected two years ago, we were respectful of what had taken place and keen to extend it. That we have done. We expanded the remit of the Scottish affairs office to include responsibility for the totality of Scottish ministers' objectives in the USA and Canada, which includes the contribution that is made by Scottish Development International and other Scottish public sector organisations, such as VisitScotland. In the leadership role, the Scottish Government counsellor in North America, Robin Naysmith, is charged with ensuring that the work of the Scottish Government and its partners is integrated, cohesive and co-ordinated, and supports the Government's primary purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth for Scotland.  The distinctive touch that we have brought to the process has been to harness all the resources and interests and to focus them on the Government's purpose and what we believe Scotland will profit by. In 2008, we published an international framework that set out the basis on which we would seek to engage with our partners overseas. Since then, we have refreshed the plan and we held a stakeholder event some weeks ago to focus on how the plan can be built up. We need to build on the strength of our historical and cultural links, sharpen the focus of our activities, simplify the way in which we promote Scotland in Canada and the United States of America, and share our vision with partners and friends in a way that ensures that we can all work to the same objectives. We have made a good start. I will reflect on my personal experience in that regard. Since this Government was elected in 2007, ministers have made 15 official visits to the United States and five official visits to Canada. All of those visits were focused on a string of political, cultural and educational objectives. Earlier this year, the First Minister made a short and highly successful visit to Washington DC, where he met the recently appointed US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, just four weeks into the new US Administration. During that visit, the First Minister was joined by members of the 50-strong friends of Scotland caucus in the House of Representatives, when Senators Jim Webb and Lamar Alexander launched a new friends of Scotland caucus, with bipartisan membership comprising a third of the US Senate. Those events represent a level of political engagement between Scotland and the US that has not been reached since the days of the founding fathers. Last month, the Deputy First Minister led a Scottish Government delegation to North America for Scotland week, building on the success of the first delegation of its type in 2008. Nicola Sturgeon, Jim Mather and I visited 10 cities in Canada and the US where, in the course of the week, we undertook a total of 60 official engagements and met individually 32 current or potential investors in Scotland. Through receptions, dinners and other events, we spoke to a further 1,000 business, cultural and diaspora figures to promote homecoming Scotland 2009. Our objectives were to build confidence in Scotland as a place in which to do business, live, learn and work, and to promote homecoming Scotland. As we predicted, the total budget for the trip did not exceed £400,000. Our collective efforts during Scotland week were greatly enhanced by the welcome involvement of the Presiding Officer and a cross-party delegation of four members of this Parliament who travelled extensively in Canada and the US. You and I had  the memorable experience of walking down 6 th Avenue, Presiding Officer, either side of the actor Alan Cumming, without traffic coming in the opposite direction. It was an important, enjoyable and significant set of events. Among the highlights of Scotland week 2009 were business meetings with some of America's biggest businesses, such as Johnson & Johnson, Microsoft, Sun Microsystems, Chevron, Boeing, J P Morgan, Morgan Stanley, the Trump Organization, Citi, IBM, Research in Motion and the Bank of New York Mellon, all of which are investors in Scotland. We also had meetings with potential investors and representatives of more than 100 other companies during business receptions and dinners in New York, Toronto, Seattle, North Carolina and Vancouver, which was taking part in Scotland week for the first time. The Scottish Government sponsored the sixth annual Scotland run in New York, which was branded the homecoming Scotland run and attracted a record 8,000 participants—alas, I was not one of them, and nor, I think, were you, Presiding Officer. A showcase for Scotland's textile industry and innovative fashion designers was hosted by the flagship department store Saks Fifth Avenue. The Deputy First Minister made a major speech at the prestigious Stanford University, in which she highlighted Scotland's scientific excellence. I went to the Economic Club of Canada, where I outlined the Scottish Government's response to the current economic situation, and to the Munk centre for international studies in the University of Toronto, where I lectured on Scotland's constitutional future. In North Carolina, Jim Mather met the state governor and co-hosted, with you, Presiding Officer, a successful reception for Senate and House of Representative members of the North Carolina state legislature. I understand that Mr Mather has since been back to America—no doubt he will talk about that when he sums up. Ministers have spent a lot of time engaging in and building up the relationship between Scotland and North America, but I believe that more can be done to encourage activities not only in the United States but in Canada. One focus that I will bring to my job will be to ensure that we increase the amount of work that we do in Canada and the profile of that work, because the relationship with Canada is strong and on-going. In Toronto, I had the pleasure of meeting the former Canadian foreign minister Flora MacDonald—a name that almost says it all—for the first time since I met her in New Delhi in 2000. At the age of 80, she is going all over the world to talk about peace and justice, and she leads and supports a charity that works in Afghanistan. She  traces her whole personality and success to the strong background that she inherited from the many generations of her Scottish family in Canada. She embodies Canada's strong relationship with Scotland. She is proud of her background. She is very Canadian, but very Scottish, too. When we look at what we can achieve in Canada, we should see a huge opportunity. We should celebrate the work that we have done throughout North America, we should be grateful to all those who have taken part from all parties, and we should intensify our work, based on clear objectives. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of Scotland's relationship with the United States of America and Canada; notes the contribution of the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and all those who were involved in the development of Scotland Week over the last eight years in North America; expresses its gratitude for the significant contribution of the Scottish diaspora in helping to promote Scotland's rich cultural heritage, and encourages the Scottish Government to continue to develop a more joined-up approach to the promotion of Scotland in Canada and the United States of America by working in partnership with all relevant organisations in the public and private sector in order to ensure that Scotland derives real social and economic benefits from such activities.

For reasons of open-mindedness. The Holtham commission is looking at a full range of options for funding the Welsh Assembly Government, including tax-varying and borrowing powers. By contrast, the Calman commission cannot examine all the options for the future of Scotland. Nevertheless, if it helps, I will meet Sir Kenneth Calman later this month to explain the work of the Government's national conversation in more detail.

I would have thought that a peer who apparently is one of the four wise men considering British intelligence matters might be  more careful with his language than he appears to be in this chamber. If anything, such comments reflect badly on him. I make it entirely clear—and the member should know this if he is a man of intelligence—that the Holtham commission is considering a whole range of options including tax-varying and borrowing powers.

I am afraid that Lord Foulkes is just not asking the right question. The reality is that tax-varying and borrowing powers are being considered by the Holtham commission, a body that the First Minister and I have met. We should remember that the Calman commission has, by diktat of the party of which Lord Foulkes is a member, excluded from consideration all the options that face the people of Scotland.

I certainly concur. However, I advise the member not to judge all members of the House of Lords by the one from whom we have just heard.

Creative Scotland will inherit the budgets of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, as well as having access to an additional £5 million for an innovation fund in 2009-10 and 2010-11. Detailed decisions on the use of those budgets will be for creative Scotland to take when it is vested. At present, the existing bodies remain in operation and are spending their resources.

The member is right to stress the importance of working constructively, professionally, properly and inclusively with the trade unions and the staff members on those issues. I met the trade unions on 2 April in connection with my statement, briefed them fully on the issues that we were discussing and made it clear—as I did in my statement and in responding to questions afterwards—that the identification of exact numbers and the debate on that should properly take place between the transition body, the trade unions and the staff members. I will keep a close eye on that to ensure that it is done in the best possible way.

There will be no compulsory redundancies as a result of the creation of creative Scotland—that has been said many times. It is the Government's policy that there will be no compulsory redundancies in relation to the work that we are doing, and I am happy to confirm that again.

The First  Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—who is sitting beside me and I am sure will confirm as much—visited China to pursue the objectives of the Scottish Government's China plan. The main themes of the visit were energy, financial services, tourism, business, the creative industries and education. I have provided further details on the visit in response to written parliamentary question S3W-23141 from Gil Paterson, which was answered earlier today.

The member's attitude towards China is curiously equivocal, but I shall be positive about both parts of his question. Ahead of his visit, the First Minister met Amnesty International and the Scottish Human Rights Commission and raised the issue of human rights in his meeting with the vice minister of foreign affairs. Indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning did the same when she met the vice minister of education in April 2008. We should remember that, last year, when calls for the visit to be cancelled were made in terms not dissimilar to those that we have just heard, John Watson of Amnesty International said, in support of the visit: "Amnesty believes that engagement can provide the opportunity to push for change". On the second part of the member's question, there were detailed discussions on a whole range of green—and green energy—issues, and the enthusiasm shown on both sides was much remarked on. Such contact will have positive benefits for Scottish companies and, indeed, for both countries.

Members would be surprised if I said no. My answer is "of course". Indeed, I have already been in touch with the Ayrshire Fiddle Orchestra through an intermediary and have offered to meet its members to give them good wishes for their visit. If meeting them helps in any way, I am happy to do so.

I am happy to assure the member that the concordat with the United Kingdom Government on European Union issues makes no distinction between the staff of the three devolved Administrations in relation to eligibility to hold posts in the UK permanent representation to the EU. Members of the Northern Ireland civil service, which is a fully devolved civil service, have held such posts on the same basis as members of the home civil service who have worked for the Welsh Assembly Government or the Scottish Government.

I suggest that the member should have more confidence in and be more open to these matters. Of course we expect members of the civil service in Scotland to play a full part in every aspect of the UK civil service in the wider world in order to learn and contribute. Indeed, that is what they do. However, we feel that  we have a strong opportunity to move towards a civil service that is focused on Scotland and works in the wider world. That remains the Government's ambition, and I hope that we will achieve it.

I concur. [ Laughter. ]

I was so taken aback that I have lost my place. The Government has set out in our statement of Scottish historic environment policy how local authorities, Historic Scotland and others should work together to preserve historical buildings. We are also investing significantly in the built heritage. Last year, for example, we provided £13 million of support through the building repair grant scheme, conservation area regeneration schemes and city heritage trusts across Scotland. The member might like to note that the conservation area regeneration schemes in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth will provide support of £700,000 to the local community over five years.

I was glad to meet Jamie Hepburn and Councillor Tom Johnston yesterday to discuss the issue. I could reflect slightly unkindly that if North Lanarkshire Council had not sold Cumbernauld house in 1996, we might not be in the position that we are in now. However, that being the case, Historic Scotland would be involved only if there was an application for help  because of the condition of the building. I understand that the problems with the condition of the building relate to the illicit removal of lead from the roof, which I think is a matter for insurers, rather than anything else, at present. I have been willing to encourage communities in every part of Scotland to take advantage of significant buildings, but no opportunity exists, particularly in these straitened times—let alone with £500 million of Labour cuts coming—for the Government to step in and get involved in taking the building on. However, I encourage the community and others to get involved. It is not impossible that Historic Scotland would give that encouragement, too.

I would be delighted to do so. I am always happy to see a William Adam house and I am always happy to visit Cumbernauld, so I look forward to such a visit.

It is always a pleasure to visit Kirkintilloch and I would be delighted to do so. However, my visit would—alas—be in the context of cuts in lottery funding, because of the requirement to pay for the Olympic games, which I think is regrettable. I support the Olympics, but I do not support their being paid for in that way. I am happy to go to Kirkintilloch, Cumbernauld and all other reachable points during that day.

As I said in my statement to Parliament on 2 April, my expectation is that the total cost of the  transformation will be just over £3.3 million. That figure represents our rigorous current best estimate of the full costs that will arise from transition.

I have no difficulty in agreeing whole-heartedly with the member. We must have a modern vision of the arts in Scotland. We must put the artist—the creator—at the centre and we must emphasise access and participation. We must eschew the supposed dichotomy between the economic imperative and the cultural imperative, which is, as I am sure the member agrees, an old-fashioned way of looking at culture. We must be rigorous in our inclusion, bring all the sectors together and value creativity. If people attempt to divide, we must resist that as strongly as possible.

The member was present this morning when we debated a motion from Mr Whitton on the Scottish media and particularly the print media. The Parliament recognised the importance of a strong media sector and its contribution to democracy and the economy. As the Government outlined in its response to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report, we are pursuing diversity and the establishment of a Scottish network and we seek increased network programme output from the BBC and Channel 4, neither of which has lived up to Scotland's expectations of it for output. We appreciate the pressures that the newspaper industry has faced for many months. That is why my colleague Jim Mather facilitated a discussion at a Scottish Government seminar on 4 February to encourage the industry to identify issues and discuss ways in which it might overcome the challenges that it faces. As Margo MacDonald knows, my strong opinion is that that can be achieved only through an inclusive and proper  approach to employment practices, which we have not seen in the print sector in recent weeks.

I am not surprised that Margo MacDonald's family is involved in all activities of fiddling and the arts. The member is entirely right about the Record and the Mail . I sympathise very much with her position. She is a former distinguished writer for a range of Scottish newspapers and she continues to contribute a punchy column to the Evening News . I am keen for my colleague Mr Mather and me to meet whoever we need to meet to discuss such matters. I said today to another member that I am happy to meet the trade unions, the chapel and others to discuss the situation, if that would help. We are open to participating in discussions but, in the end, the decision and the resolution can come only from active and constructive negotiation between employers and employees. That must and will happen and should not be delayed.

I continue to make it clear that only negotiation will produce a resolution, so negotiation must take place. Even if the management refuses to negotiate now, it will eventually have to accept that it should negotiate, so the answer is yes—of course.

The Scottish Government has consistently said that the commission might make a useful contribution to the national conversation. However, by refusing to consider independence, the commission limits  debate and denies the people of Scotland the opportunity to consider all the options.

It will not surprise the member to learn that I will not do that and that I endorse Aileen Campbell's remarks, because her point is entirely clear. Any commission that rejects any of the available options is anti-democratic. If all the options are genuinely included, a process is by definition democratic. I look forward to the opportunity to have that discussion with Sir Kenneth Calman. I have agreed that we should have that conversation, in which, I am quite sure, he will argue otherwise. That said, the weight of truth is on my side. In the end, only an examination of all the options will lead to a clear choice by the people of Scotland. I hope, Presiding Officer—I am sorry, Deputy Presiding Officer—I have just realised that there has been a change—

Alas, given that sedentary intervention from Mr McAveety, I cannot say that things have changed for the better beside me. I hope that Lord Foulkes will take part in the national conversation, lend his undoubted weight to the issue and ensure that we understand his considered position, after which he should vote for the people of Scotland to make the final choice. That is democratic.

I declare an interest, in that I am a former member of the NUJ, a contributor over many years to many papers and broadcasting outlets—I think that Ted Brocklebank has on one occasion commissioned work from me, although Mr Whitton has never done so—and a former director of a media company. Perhaps my most relevant interest is that, after having been a Herald columnist for more than six years, I was fired by second-class mail by an editor whom I had never met. That says something about the culture of newspapers today. That was bad practice, which is what we are talking about today. Good practice requires consultation and discussion with employees and involves respect for their skills and abilities. Bad practice dispenses with all of that in the interests of the profitability—and, perhaps, more—of a single company. The examples that David Whitton gave are important, and I am aware of similar cases, such as that of a photographer with 29 years' service to a newspaper who has just been made redundant in order to diminish his pension. That is a shameful thing for a company to do to an individual who has given long and distinguished service. We should condemn such practices unreservedly, which is why the Government will be  supporting the Labour motion and abstaining on the amendments. It is right to say that what is going on is bad practice. Of course, it is not our place to tell companies how to run themselves, but we can say that they should run themselves to the highest standards, and we should say when they are not doing so. I hope that that message will be reported by the newspapers. I take strongly Hugh Henry's point that the purpose of newspapers is to hold people to account. However, newspaper owners have to be held to account as well. The purpose of this debate is to perform what Kelvin MacKenzie used to call a reverse ferret, as we are holding to account the owners of those newspapers. I hope that they will report that and reflect on their actions.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. In the past, my party and I have been critical of the ownership structure of Scottish newspapers. The criticism that too much of the ownership is based outwith Scotland and focuses too much on areas other than Scottish economic and newspaper interests has turned out to be true. We must also reflect on the rapidly changing paradigm of the newspaper. That is an important context for this debate. I have to disagree strongly with Ted Brocklebank, as I think that the reality of the situation is that technology is part of the solution. It is not the enemy of change, but something that can produce change. The failures in the newspaper industry—particularly in Scotland, but also more widely in these islands—are due to the fact that the embracing of technology by newspapers has been haphazard and often plain wrong. Some of them have given away their most valuable product, while others have not known how to maximise income from their product using new technology. My colleague Jim Mather gave some good examples of that, as did Kenny Gibson. Three things need to be said in this debate. First, bad practice in management, wherever it exists—in newspapers or elsewhere—should be condemned. We need to send the message that short-sighted management that diminishes the quality of the product and constantly goes on cutting the costs will be completely self-defeating in the end. Secondly, although newspapers have traditionally been read more intently in Scotland than almost anywhere else in Europe, that is no longer the case. That is partly due to a drop in the quality of newspapers, as the experienced people who work on them have been thrown out of the door—a practice that needs to stop.  Thirdly, the workforce, by working together and collaborating with management, can invent the new paradigms that can take forward a distinctive Scottish media with an ownership structure that is based in Scotland. Although I understand Ted Brocklebank's fondness for a solution that involves local television, that could bleed out more advertising and run the risk of damaging Scotland's local newspaper sector in particular, so we must be careful about that. I believe that Scotland, as a centre of excellence for newspapers and the media, should celebrate what has taken place in the past—it has been a distinctive part of our national culture—but should regret what is taking place, which is largely driven by companies that have very little focus on Scotland. We should try to find a structure that will take us forward and ensure that a modernised, renewed and refreshed Scottish media that takes advantage of new technology can once again become among the best in the world. More important, we as a nation would be better served by our media than we are now.

Very good progress has been made in terms of our structural support for the Gaelic. The progress that I still want to see is that, while we strengthen our structural support further, we must ensure that it is effectively and urgently used to increase the use of Gaelic in the home, school, community and workplace.

I certainly agree with the member that the visibility of Gaelic in Scotland is important and a valuable means of raising the status and use of Gaelic and demonstrating the strong links between Scottish heritage and the Gaelic heritage. The Scottish Government wants a continuing increase in the visibility of Gaelic and to ensure that road signs, for example, reflect the importance of Gaelic. That is why, since becoming Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, my colleague Mr Stevenson has extended the use of Gaelic road signs on the A82 through Inverness, building on the existing programme being implemented on other trunk roads. Transport Scotland has a responsibility to evaluate its polices, including the bilingual one, but I know that Stewart Stevenson is clear that he wants any review to be fast tracked and completed as soon as possible. I have been assured that results will be available in 2010 before the current signage programme ends. I understand that Mr Stevenson has asked senior officials for advice on accelerating that even further. The research will be conducted by Transport Research Laboratory, which will carry out an evaluation study, including an examination of changes in accident patterns that will of course be scientifically and properly  based. We will continue to discuss how we can spread the important visibility of Gaelic even further.

I understand that the condolences and concerns of the Parliament about the tragedy yesterday will be expressed later this morning. As members know well, the level of debate about this Government's intention to establish Creative Scotland is significant, and has been intense. That is to be welcomed. Open dialogue about state support for the arts—not only on the what and the why, but on the how—is central to a modern democracy. However, there is a moment when the talking has to stop: a moment when the focus switches from structures to substance. After a decade of debate in Scotland, I believe that such a moment has come. Scotland's artists are key contributors to the Scotland of ideas that we all should seek. They help us to frame the wider questions about what we want to be and how we can achieve our aims. As two of our artists, Alexander Moffat and Alan Riach, observed recently: "All art ... represents and interprets the world. It resists the numbing of the senses, it helps us to live more fully, engaged with the world and critical of it." For me, that is just the type of creativity that I want to see in Scotland. There should be no doubt about this Government's continuing commitment to artists and creators of all kinds. The resources that are being made available have been increased. In our approach to structures, we have made it clear that we want to secure a body that is fit for purpose and is able to support, sustain, develop and underpin Scotland's creativity. That body will be the new Creative Scotland. I am very heartened by the high quality of the work that has been, and is being, done to establish Creative Scotland. I refer to my predecessor, Linda Fabiani; the transition board, which was led by Ewan Brown; the existing joint board, which was led by Richard Holloway; the two chief executives of the existing organisations, Jim Tough and Ken Hay; and the people who work in those organisations whom I have met over the past couple of weeks. The wider arts and creative community—for example, as expressed through  the cross-party group on culture and media, with which I met last night—is also deeply engaged. I am particularly pleased that the transition board now has a transition director working with it: I welcome Richard Smith to that role. Creative Scotland will come into being in the first half of next year—subject, of course, to the final decision of Parliament. However, in order for it to be much more than the sum of its parts, and for it to be the living, dynamic, forward looking, informed and supportive organisation that it must be, it will need more than just parliamentary approval. All the people I have mentioned are needed at this time and all must be part of the process of change. We must engage their enthusiasm, learn from their experience and keep them fully informed of the bigger picture. That is what I intend to do. Of course, paramount in the decision making process is the Scottish Parliament. It is therefore to Parliament that I want to outline the final details of the cost of establishing Creative Scotland. I am making this statement not only because I recognise the continuing high degree of interest in the issue, but because I want the debate on Creative Scotland to be based on fact, not on speculation. The context in which Creative Scotland will be established is that this Government wishes to expand access both to funding for the arts and culture and participation in the arts and culture. For that reason, we have increased by £33.6 million the money that is being made available for culture in the plans for this spending review period, which is a 14 per cent increase in cash terms. Although we want that type of support to continue, I should enter an early caveat. In common with all other areas of Government, we may need to review our plans for 2010-11 in the light of the heavy cuts that the United Kingdom Government is to impose on the Scottish block grant in that year. I have already intimated such concern to the national companies and the national institutions. I will continue to keep the matter under revue. Whatever the financial situation, the establishment of Creative Scotland requires to be paid for; such a task could never have been undertaken at zero cost. This is not just a transition; it is a transformation. It has involved taking the best from both the current organisations, in which there has been much to praise, and creating a unified organisation that has skilled and confident leadership from the sector's best. In so doing, we want to create a new force that will set a national—and, who knows?—an international standard as a vibrant and forward-thinking organisation.  After detailed work from the two current bodies and with the transition board and the Government, my expectation is that the total cost of the transformation will be just over £3.3 million. I am publishing today a summary of the figure and I talked this morning about the costs to the relevant trade unions, which marked the start of a detailed period of consultation of the unions before we present the figures to Parliament in the financial memorandum to the proposed public services reform bill. That £3.3 million represents our rigorous current best estimate of the full costs that will arise from transition. In essence, it is the establishment cost for a new body and we should see it in that positive light. For completeness, I say that the figures that we are publishing today include two footnotes on a couple of other costs that do not arise from transition, but which should be noted. The first is a one-off payment that may be required to be made to the pension provider of Scottish Screen as part of pension arrangements for Creative Scotland after vesting. The second may arise from the expectation that Creative Scotland will not have charitable status—indeed, it would never have had that, even under the previous Government's plans. However, I intend to discuss that directly with the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator before a final decision takes effect. I hope that this major investment will result in a major return. I expect the skilled leadership of Creative Scotland to set up a lean and intelligent system that will help its staff to help Scotland's creativity in the wider sense. In funding the arts, the Government intends that the money is for just that: for the arts, by means of supporting artists. Consequently, although artists and creators will benefit from the investment, I confirm that they will not pay for it from grants that are intended for their support and assistance. Let me say unequivocally, therefore, that the cost of setting up Creative Scotland will not come from front-line grants to artists, whether they are existing grants administered by the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, or new initiatives such as the extra £5 million over 2009-10 and 2010-11 for the innovation fund. The Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen have already made provision for costs that have been incurred to date during 2007-08 and 2008-09. Those figures are included in the costs summary that I am publishing today. The Government will meet the remaining transformation costs from within my portfolio budgets. That will be challenging, but it is the right thing to do. Since I took over this portfolio six weeks ago, I have met a wide range of arts and cultural bodies, and many individuals in the sector. I have said to  all of them that I do not regard it as being the job of the Government, still less as being that of a Government minister, to define what should or should not receive money. I respect and understand the arm's-length principle. However, I believe that we need to be honest about what that principle means. It is not just a principle that stops interference in detail, but one that insists on Government playing a key role in defining the structures, setting the broad parameters and then devolving the key day-to-day decision making. In short, Government must set the overall context within which our arts and culture can thrive. For me, a successful context means four things: encouraging and sustaining artists and creators of all kinds; ensuring that their work is accessible to all; ensuring that as many people as possible can participate in creative activities; and extending and increasing the wider benefits of arts and culture, including their contribution to the promotion and development of our unique national culture and its place in the wider international sphere. Those aims will be enshrined in the legislation that will set up Creative Scotland. The implementation will be the fruit of the national investment that I have outlined. This is not just about process, however. While work continues on establishing Creative Scotland—work that will also come to fruition when Parliament gets an opportunity to shape that organisation through modern legislation—much good work in the arts continues. I want to draw attention to some of that now. First, members will recall that some weeks ago I made a promise to expand the board of the transition company. The first new appointment has just been made and I am very happy to welcome broadcaster and cultural commentator and figure, Sheena McDonald, to the organisation. She attended her first meeting last week. One more appointment remains to be made. Secondly, members will know that I have a particularly strong interest in ensuring that Gaelic is at the forefront of how we present our national story. I am pleased, therefore, to be able to announce today that Gaelic will be integral to the work of Creative Scotland and that funding has been agreed for the appointment of a specialist arts officer to implement the Gaelic arts strategy within the context of Creative Scotland. Thirdly, I am very mindful that Scotland's creative industries' sector makes a huge cultural and economic impact: it contributes over £5 billion in turnover and supports 60,000 jobs. We have already announced the framework agreement, and I am pleased to be able to tell members that, last Tuesday, Councillor Harry McGuigan of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and I jointly chaired the first meeting of a short-life group  to put flesh on the bones of that framework. I look forward to a new partnership in support of the creative industries that will fully involve Creative Scotland and COSLA as lead players. Fourthly, I confirm that the emerging structure of Creative Scotland, which is very much a work in progress, will continue to have a sectoral and subject focus. This issue has concerned many people who are involved in all the arts and creative industries, and who have been worried that experience within the organisations might be lost and that inappropriate models might be used to replace successful support structures. I am determined that we will build on what is good and I regard this approach as having succeeded. Certainly, it needs to be modernised and developed, so I look forward to some new thinking about how it might evolve. In addition, I have asked Ewan Brown and the transition board to let me have proposals for projects—actual projects under Creative Scotland—which can be developed using the innovation fund that we announced last year. However, there are sectors in which progress has not been made and where there are shortfalls between ambition and policy. Two sectors in particular have given me cause for concern. In one—the traditional arts—we have already put in place a working group led by David Francis to recommend the best national arrangements to support and develop this vital area of interest. The conclusions of that group will feed into Creative Scotland and inform final decision making about the issue. I believe that literature is another area in which we are, in terms of national policy, underachieving. Accordingly, I can announce that I have established a similar working group, to be led by the literary editor of The Herald , Rosemary Goring, which will include writers, publishers and academics. I want that group to review what we are doing and to make radical recommendations about what we should do as a nation to support existing talent, promote new talent and encourage books that are made in Scotland, as well as those who publish and sell them. This group will inform emerging policy within Creative Scotland and will advise me and the chairman of Creative Scotland, Ewan Brown. I hope that I have put some more flesh on the bones of Creative Scotland. Much remains to do, and I welcome again the input of all those who are joining us, Ewan Brown and his colleagues in making the idea a reality. Creative Scotland will happen: it is time that it happened. We can thereafter devote our national energy and our national resource to the important task of encouraging artists, widening access to their art and securing participation in the arts, and by so  doing, making our national culture deeper, richer and more connected to the world.

I am grateful to Pauline McNeill for her questions, which are similar to questions that I have been answering from the staff of the organisations and the artists involved. I am happy to provide comprehensive answers to them now, although I will be brief because I am conscious of the time. First, there has been an increase in cultural funding of 14 per cent over the current spending review period—that is a reality. However, we must be accurate about what we are talking about. I was asked the question last night at the cross-party group on culture and media. The two previous organisations have existing responsibilities in dealing with the sectors and are coming together in a new and dynamic body. There is no expanded role sectorally in that regard—all those concerns already exist. However, the resources of the two organisations will be more focused and will be used more. It is simply not true that there is some vastly increased number of specialities; therefore, there is no funding gap. An enormous resource is not being made available to anybody at this stage. I have made it absolutely clear that the purpose of the exercise is to ensure that we get more bang for our buck—I have said that openly for the past six weeks. We want to ensure that more money is made available to the sector. That will be the case at the end of this process not just because there has been an increase in funding through the spending review, but because the new organisation will focus its resources on its job. I expect the new organisation to be able to do more, and I am sure that that will be the case. Secondly, the role of Scottish Enterprise in the creative industries is crucial. Pauline McNeill knows that we are building on the framework arrangement, which has been announced to Parliament and with which members are familiar. It will take the ability and resource of a range of bodies and apply them to the creative industries, with Creative Scotland undoubtedly playing a lead role. COSLA also has a role to play. I was pleased that Jack Perry, of Scottish Enterprise, appeared at the first meeting of the short-life working group and was deeply involved.  Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Skills Development Scotland and the creative industries themselves are also involved in ensuring that all the resources are focused on the task in hand. I will give an example: the resources of the business gateway are not allocated discretely to culture, but can assist many small and medium-sized enterprises in their cultural endeavour. There is therefore a virtuous circle in ensuring that we do things that way. I think that it is going to work. I have also said publicly that I will keep the closest eye on the performance of the enterprise companies—in particular, to ensure that they honour the commitments that they have made. Thirdly, of course, there is a fondness for Scottish Screen and its importance is recognised. I am sure that, in some way, the work that it does will continue to appear under that brand. However, the really important prize is the new brand of Creative Scotland. Creative Scotland should, will and must be a highly successful and recognised brand, and all our efforts should go into making it so while not looking backwards, but forwards. On the location of the body, my predecessor made it clear that there would be substantial problems in siting the new body at a single location, not least of which are the existing lease commitments of the Scottish Arts Council. I remain wedded to the policy that my predecessor announced, which is that the costs of changing its location at present could not be borne. Nevertheless, it is obvious that we need to develop a new culture within Creative Scotland to bring the bodies together. Mr Macintosh, who is sitting on the Labour front bench, was part of the inquiry into the exams debacle in 2000. One of the problems at that time was the fact that there were two bodies—one in the west and one in the east—that did not share a single culture, which created a problem for their performance. I am determined that the cultural bodies should learn from that experience and develop a new shared culture. Finally, on grants and loans, I am absolutely certain that the good support that exists will continue. Nevertheless, I want to ensure that the way in which we provide that support in Scotland is modernised. That will be the job of Creative Scotland 2009. There is no reason for anybody who is being supported at the moment to have any fears about the way in which they will be supported in the future. In fact, our proposals will improve the way in which people are supported.

I regret the tone that Mr Brocklebank has adopted. I would have thought that his interests in the matter would have led him to rejoice at this happy day on which we have clarity at last. I know that Mr Brocklebank is a man who is capable of rejoicing, so let me encourage him to do so. Perhaps he simply got out of the wrong side of his bed this morning. The reality is that there was considerable clarity in the statement, which I am happy to have provided. The statement was, indeed, circulated to the party spokespeople, including Mr Brocklebank, earlier, so he has had time to mull it over and see how clear it is. I know that Mr Brocklebank has taken a particular interest in Scottish Enterprise's funding of the creative industries. The role that Creative Scotland will have in the process is absolutely clear: Creative Scotland is the lead organisation. However, wonderfully—this is another reason to be jolly—it is also able to open the door to lots of additional money. I have illustrated how help from the business gateway network can come into play, and there are lots of other opportunities. The problem has never been the resource; it has been the perceived difficulty of accessing that resource. Creative Scotland will open the door to that resource. It will free up the process and will be a lead partner in the framework agreement, as Mr  Brocklebank knows. In all those circumstances, things will be better for the creative industries, rather than worse. Mr Brocklebank should welcome that. I regret—as everybody regrets—the fact that the lease on the Scottish Arts Council premises is as it is; however, it is important to accept the reality of the situation. I would have thought that the Conservatives would be rather relieved that I have taken a pragmatic view of the matter and that, instead of spending more taxpayers' money, I am ensuring that we get the maximum bangs for our buck. I would have thought that Mr Brocklebank would be happy about that.

If there were to be additional responsibilities, I would warm to Mr Smith's final point. However, what we will have is a new, leaner, fitter and more focused organisation, and the resources that we are talking about will be applied in that way. I am glad that Mr Smith has welcomed the short-life working group. It is important that we put flesh on the bones of the framework agreement, although the framework agreement is a big step forward. Skills Development Scotland is part of the group. Yesterday, I met Skillset and discussed its involvement. In addition, individual practitioners will be involved in the group. Out of that group will come great clarity about how the system will  operate, and I am impressed by the commitment of all parties to it. I am long enough in the tooth in politics to know that, even when there is no reason to complain, the Opposition has to complain. I have done it myself.

Lord Foulkes is shouting from a sedentary position. He is a past master at making something out of nothing, or, should I say, at making nothing out of something? It is important to welcome the clarity that has been provided and to acknowledge that considerable work is being done to talk to, listen to and learn from the experience of—as I said in my statement—the widest creative community. I hope that the Opposition spokespeople—indeed, the whole Parliament—will not only welcome that work, but will become part of it. I was happy to invite the Opposition spokespeople to the event at the Traverse Theatre in February, and I make a commitment that I am happy to continue to involve Opposition spokespeople in the process so that we can get out of it something that not only the Government, but Parliament is glad about.

By and large, that approach has worked in most, although not all, areas. I have talked about a couple of areas in which it has not. I do not want to tie the hands of Creative Scotland 2009 because it should have flexibility and it should consider a modern version of doing things, but the approach means bringing expertise to bear and ensuring that that expertise encourages best practice. In New York on Friday afternoon, I shall meet RSAMD graduates who will take part in the Scotland week events. I shall take Anne McLaughlin's good wishes to her former colleagues.

I wish to treat the Scots language in the same way. Although I have made an announcement about a Gaelic officer, I am keen to discuss with all the relevant parties how we can integrate Scots into Creative Scotland. I think that Cathy Peattie is aware that I told the cross-party group on culture and media last night that at the British-Irish Council summit on minority languages, I opened my contribution in Gaelic and closed it in Scots. I hope that we all recognise that we have a three-voice nation and that we should celebrate all three voices.

I do not agree with Elizabeth Smith. A natural process is taking place. The transition board is prioritising its work, and the chief executive will be appointed in line with the priorities that the transition board sets. I am happy to support it in that process. I am sure that the existing leadership in the organisations is effective. Ewan Brown is providing the leadership of the transition process, Richard Smith is now working as the transition director, and the new chief executive will be appointed at the right time. I am sure that applications from all over the place—including applications from furth of Scotland—will be considered.

Yes. The costs include £1.1 million: half is for 2009-10 and half is for 2010-11. I met the trade unions and the staff of the Scottish Arts Council this morning, and I met the staff of Scottish Screen last week. I intend to follow best practice, and Ewan Brown has echoed that. There  will be a voluntary early severance scheme and no compulsory redundancies. We hope that the voluntary early severance scheme will be the best that it can be. The process will be difficult for the staff. On Tuesday, I said to the staff of the Scottish Arts Council that my career pattern has not had a straight-line trajectory and that I therefore know about how people suffer in such circumstances. The process is genuinely difficult, and we will do everything to ensure that it is made as painless as possible, although it cannot be completely painless. We will keep close contact with the trade unions. We had a positive discussion this morning. Ewan Brown will now engage in detailed discussions with the trade unions to ensure that we progress matters in the best possible way.

It will be warm, inclusive and positive, and it will show that I am determined that every part of the arts community in Scotland feels involved in the process. Such issues are raised in every meeting. It is absolutely no part of my intention to do down one artistic group at the expense of another or to prefer one artistic group or discipline over another. Everybody must share in the process, and I am determined that everybody will do so. I hope that people will talk directly to me, Ewan Brown or others about their worries and concerns rather than build them up without having discussions with us. I am determined that visual artists remain an important part of our arts infrastructure in Scotland. I will be positive about that matter and am happy to meet the Scottish Artists Union to confirm that.

As Creative Scotland will be a key partner, we obviously want to ensure that we work in Glasgow as elsewhere. The legacy of the games will be important for Scotland as a whole. In December 2008, the Government published the interim legacy plan, which set out our thinking on turning ideas and aspirations into action. Since then, the Government has worked with a wide range of partners, including the Scottish Arts Council, to develop a legacy plan for Scotland. The evolving plan will be published in the summer, and the established mechanisms for partnership  working will mean that everyone will have a part. That means that, when the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen become Creative Scotland, Creative Scotland will have a part too.

I am keen that we spend as little as possible on branding, but I am equally keen that the brand is well known. We have to strike the right balance. The member is right to raise the issue. We should be circumspect, but we should also ensure that people understand the importance of Creative Scotland, which will happen if Creative Scotland is an effective organisation that does good things. I am sure that, with her long experience of trade union matters, the member recognises that it is entirely proper that the trade unions and Creative Scotland discuss details in a proper negotiating forum. I have set out the context for that and confirmed the key issues. The primary and overriding point is that there will be no compulsory redundancies. With the resources set and the discussions undertaken, I hope that the process will be completed in an orderly and proper fashion. It is expected that there will be two rounds—one in the coming financial year and one in the financial year thereafter—during which numbers will be focused on. We are talking about the minimum number of redundancies possible and ensuring that we get the best organisation that we possibly can.

As my Gaelic progresses, I will answer Alasdair Allan's questions directly in Gaelic. However, as he used to be my Gaelic tutor, I am a bit nervous that he—

Oh no. I assure members that Alasdair Allan is far better than I am—in every way, I am sure. It is necessary that we make links between education and Gaelic. The officer in question will focus on Gaelic arts, but, as the member knows, Gaelic arts are integral to education. Therefore, the post will have an impact on education. I want to ensure that Gaelic, Scots and other cultural traditions in Scotland are well represented. As part of that process, art will always be involved in education.

I must admit that I am slightly surprised by all these suggestions that there are revolting masses of people outside who are ready to stone me.

The question whether people in the chamber are revolting I leave to the judgment of members of the public. Over the past six weeks, I have had the most positive discussions with a large number of groups and individuals. Those discussions have been vigorous and direct, certainly, but they have also been positive. I am absolutely certain that we have to ensure that ownership of the process does not lie simply with me or with the chamber but with the artistic community, in its widest definition. In my statement, I made it clear that the key issue is the purpose of Creative Scotland. I outlined what I think that purpose should be, and that will be interpreted in the legislation. To be honest, I do not think that anybody in the artistic community is in any doubt about the fact that Creative Scotland is happening. We should make it happen, and do so collaboratively. I would welcome Mr Macintosh's participation—that is not something that I often say. I hope that front benchers and back benchers in every party in the chamber will be constructive in making Creative Scotland happen. It will happen best if it happens collaboratively, in a way that involves not just members in the chamber, but people throughout Scotland.

The Scottish Government has committed funding from its international development fund to the Scottish Fair Trade Forum until 31 March 2010. Any requests for future funding will be considered in discussion with the forum.

I am happy to agree with the member on that matter. Leadership on the issue has come from a range of individuals who have been committed to co-ordinated actions that have been brought together within their own communities. I pay tribute to my predecessor, Linda Fabiani, who had a very strong commitment to this area of activity and was keen to ensure that as many organisations as possible participated. The Scottish Government provides funding of £60,000 a year to the Scottish Fair Trade Forum. Additional funding, of £40,000 in 2007-08 and £20,000 in 2008-09, has been awarded. That money has gone, in great part, towards helping the grass-roots movement. All of us want that work to continue.

I congratulate Joe FitzPatrick on securing the debate and on the relevance of the motion. One or two speakers—though not Andy Kerr, whose thoughtful comments about tax were appreciated—might appear to be playing a computer game entitled Angels on the Head of a Pin, after Duns Scotus, given how they tried to avoid talking about taxation by saying that it should be discussed elsewhere or that we should not create a fight with Westminster, as I think Mr Smith said. The motion mentions the current tax regime, and the industry's view is that the current tax regime is a barrier to further development. The real issue, as Nigel Don and Andy Kerr said, is the relationship between the tax regime and creativity. Nigel Don was wise to talk about the established precedent in the UK in relation to the tax system's contribution to film production. The approach is used much more effectively elsewhere but is acknowledged in our tax structure. We must consider how we use fiscal levers to achieve policy objectives in the creative sectors—of course, there is a wider question about how we do that in all sectors. Let us be honest, the answer is that we cannot use levers that we do not have—it is impossible to do so. Perhaps I will go on to consider more consensual views, but at the outset I want to say this: give us the tools to achieve the objective.

I will not be dragged down that avenue, which is lined with red herrings. I repeat my point, in case Mr Brown did not hear it: give us the tools on taxation and then we can decide how to apply them to create opportunities in sectors. That is a political issue and I pay tribute to Joe FitzPatrick for the work that he is doing to advance the issue in Dundee—it was most memorably advanced there last week by Councillor Craig Melville's victory in the Maryfield by-election, which will change the state of Dundee.

I accept that taxation is not the be-all and end-all, but it is not possible for us even to decide whether it is relevant because we do not have the powers. Give us the powers, and we will then decide whether it is relevant. I will move on from the motion, which mentions tax, to talk about another way in which we consider creativity. Nigel Don is right to define creativity by activity and not medium. The point that Marlyn Glen made is germane to that. How we support the creative industries in the widest sense—activities undertaken by creative people—is a cultural issue. Within cultural policy, games are both artefact and idea. They are actual things that contribute to our culture, but they are also pervasive in other cultural expression. For example, I think of Scarlett Thomas's recent novel "PopCo", which is about playing games. It is also about alternate realities and how computer games create them, sometimes in potentially destructive ways. The issue is important. The industry is important to us and is an important part of the creative industries sector. It needs to have all the tools at its disposal to compete internationally and one of those is undoubtedly taxation. The serious challenges cover other areas. The NESTA report is significant. There is a potential lack of skills and there are barriers to finance, as well as the issue of subsidies in other territories. However, there are also interesting ways forward. For example, the Scottish Enterprise digital media industry advisory group is taking forward plans to develop the sector. That group includes some of Scotland's most important games companies, such as Realtime Worlds. It is considering how to secure more investment in games companies, greater internationalisation and more innovation and has highlighted the need to consider a range of possibilities. Talent is needed to sustain the industry, as in every industry. The recent investment of £5.8 million for two new Skillset media academies is an important part of that. The academy at the University of Abertay Dundee will specialise in computer game education, and I praise the university for its initiative in that area. We also need to ensure that those who are already involved in, or want to be involved in, the creative industries know where they can get the support that they need to get in or get on within those industries. The framework agreement that we have recently published—this, too, is germane to Marlyn Glen's point—sets out the roles and responsibilities of organisations that provide support to the creative industries. I am pleased  that enterprise agencies, local government and creative Scotland will work together to implement that agreement. As I mentioned in my statement on broadcasting, Councillor Harry McGuigan from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and I will jointly chair the short-life task force that will realise those plans. We want Scotland to be recognised as one of the world's most creative nations across the board. Creative entrepreneurs—and no area of activity is more important for creative entrepreneurship than computer games—can access specialised support; we want to ensure that they go on accessing it through creative Scotland.  In the debate, we should acknowledge the reality that we need tax powers, but we should also celebrate the success of the computer games cluster in Dundee. My colleague the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism met academics at the University of Abertay Dundee last month to discuss a range of issues. He learned first hand about the work that is being done in Dundee and he celebrated it. We will bring together key figures from the industry to identify what needs to be done whenever we need to. We will help to support the sector, but we will also be realistic. We will do what we can, but we could do more with the powers to do more.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

It is now just over six months since the Scottish Broadcasting Commission published its final report, which was widely acclaimed for the independence of its thought, the thoroughness of its analysis and the practicality of its recommendations. At the outset, I offer my thanks to Blair Jenkins and his team for their extraordinary and hard work. Since the report was published, much has happened in broadcasting and the wider world. The Office of Communications has published a United Kingdom-wide review of public service broadcasting; the UK Government has published "Digital Britain: The Interim Report", to which the Scottish Government responded last week; and, in a broader context, the economic environment in which broadcasting operates has, of course, been transformed since September. This is therefore an appropriate time to update the chamber on the Scottish Government's work in relation to broadcasting, particularly as, today, the Scottish Government is responding formally to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report. The First Minister said in September last year that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission represented "a blueprint for a revolution in Scottish broadcasting."— [ Official Report , 8 October 2008; c 11553.]  The report contains 22 recommendations on increasing and improving the size and quality of our broadcasting industry. Its key recommendation, of course, is on the establishment of a Scottish digital network. I make it clear that the Government welcomes that recommendation unreservedly; indeed, it whole-heartedly accepts the report's recommendations. The arguments for a digital network are compelling. We are entering a world where the public service broadcasting obligations of ITV and Scottish Television might no longer be commercially viable. Ofcom recognised that in January by limiting STV's requirement for public service broadcasting, other than news, to 1.5 hours a week. Furthermore, in some form or another, it looks likely that Channel 4 will provide the basis of public service broadcasting competition to the BBC at a UK level. Channel 4  currently produces virtually no content specifically for Scotland. I shall return to that point. Without radical action, there will be no significant competition to the BBC for public service broadcasting content for Scotland. That is unacceptable. Our chief aim in developing the recommendations in the Scottish Broadcasting Commission report is to secure choice in quality public service broadcasting for Scotland, not just in news, but in documentaries, arts, drama and comedy. Given that Scotland does not have any devolved powers in relation to broadcasting, we cannot achieve that goal by ourselves. The Scottish Government responded last week to the UK Government's "Digital Britain" interim report, and on 9 March I had a useful and positive meeting with Stephen Carter, the UK Government's Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Communications, Technology and Broadcasting. It is clear that the unanimity of opinion expressed by the Scottish Parliament in October when it endorsed the network has been noticed. It is also clear that both Ofcom and the UK Government recognise the strong desirability of choice in public service broadcasting for Scotland. For example, in the House of Lords debate on Scottish broadcasting last month, Stephen Carter said that recognising the importance of "having news and content that reflects the nation's sense of itself" is "one of the things that we are seeing as a catch-up after the devolution agreements". The Scottish Government agrees with that view. Furthermore, we believe that a digital network offers the best way of ensuring a choice of content that, as Stephen Carter put it, "reflects the nation's sense of itself."—[ Official Report , House of Lords, 25 February 2009; Vol 708, c 283.] We recognise that the ultimate prize we seek—a secure and sustainable alternative public service broadcasting voice for Scotland—is valued by all shades of political opinion in Scotland. I want to make it absolutely clear that the Scottish Government will engage constructively with the UK Government and others on proposals. To achieve that aim I am open to working with everyone in this chamber and with many others, including Westminster members of Parliament, in pressing the case. In addition to the cultural and democratic importance of broadcasting, its economic significance is even greater in the current climate than it was last September. Broadcasting can be a major driver of growth within the creative industries, which are one of the priority areas set  out in the Government's economic strategy and which are also a vital part of our plans for creative Scotland. It is useful to remember the original reason for establishing the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, which lies in the shocking fact that in 2006 major UK broadcasters made only 2.6 per cent of their network programmes in Scotland—half the figure of a few years previously. Simply by subjecting that decline to detailed public scrutiny, the Broadcasting Commission performed a great service, which might already be starting to bear fruit. In the past few months there have been some very welcome announcements from both Channel 4 and the BBC. The BBC had already made it clear in late 2007 that it intended to produce at least 8.6 per cent of network programmes in Scotland by 2016 at the latest. On 15 October last year, it announced implementation plans to start to make that happen. I discussed those plans earlier this week with the controller of BBC Scotland and told him that the Government intends to keep a very close eye on the BBC's progress on the matter—and I meant it. Channel 4 has not set a target for production in Scotland, but it has acknowledged that, so far, Scotland, along with Wales and Northern Ireland, has not benefited much from its quotas for production out of London. On 20 January this year, Channel 4 announced that it would establish a commissioning editor in Scotland and would ensure that a proportion of programmes in all its key programming strands would be made by companies that are based in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Channel 4 has also established a commissioning hub in Scotland for its digital media innovation fund. Those of us who are slightly long in the tooth—I include Mr Brocklebank in that, given his experience in broadcasting—might say that all this is a little late in the day, given Channel 4's 26 years in existence. Even now, Channel 4's current commitments in Scotland do not come close to the 8.6 per cent target set by the Broadcasting Commission, and we will therefore continue to press Channel 4 on the issue. Similarly, we want the BBC to meet its production targets by 2012, rather than by 2016—I made that clear to the controller on Monday. Both broadcasters can and should do more, more quickly, and a major role for all politicians is to keep attention focused on the issue. Production statistics for major broadcasters are released by Ofcom annually. If it becomes clear that broadcasters are still failing in their duty to commission programmes from across the UK, we should all expect them to explain why.  The promised increase in demand for programmes made in Scotland, together with the prospect of a digital network, presents a major opportunity for Scotland's economy and its independent production sector. As independent producers, they must show imagination and energy—as independent producers always do—to take advantage of the opportunity that exists, and I am sure that they are doing so. However, there is also a role for the public sector to improve skills, provide co-ordinated economic support and demonstrate leadership within the sector. Today, Scottish Enterprise is publishing its economic strategy for the broadcasting sector. The document makes clear the scale of the economic opportunity that the broadcasting industry in Scotland faces: there is the potential for it almost to double in size in the next three or four years, which would bring direct and indirect benefits to the Scottish economy of approximately £200 million each year. The strategy, which I see as a starting point for Scottish Enterprise's involvement in the sector, rather than an end result, sets out how Scottish Enterprise will engage with the production sector so that it can remove barriers to growth for the industry in Scotland. On skills development, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council announced last month that it was making £5.8 million of funding available over five years for skills development in the creative industries. Of course, that funding is not solely for broadcasting, but, among other things, it will help to fund an additional 40 postgraduate places in broadcasting each year. My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop, announced last month that there would be an additional 50 modern apprenticeships in the creative industries in 2009-10. That will help us to address skills needs across the sector, to ensure that our future workforce is geared up for the challenges and opportunities that it will face. The framework agreement for the creative industries, which was published last month, outlined how creative Scotland plans to work with enterprise companies, local authorities and the business gateway to develop the creative industries. Councillor Harry McGuigan of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and I will jointly chair an independent short-life group to drive the agreement forward. Between them, our skills bodies, enterprise companies and creative Scotland have made a good start in ensuring that the broadcasting industry will have access to the skills, support and leadership that it needs in order to prosper, but of  course more has to be done. The actions that I have outlined are a first step. The final point that I want to make is that a thriving broadcasting sector in Scotland would have a cultural and economic impact both in Scotland and beyond Scotland's borders. That impact could have economic benefits through the export of programmes and through making online content available commercially to users abroad. It would also be culturally significant. At present, Scots and other people who are interested in Scotland—of whom there are many—might not have ready access to news and programmes about Scotland. For example, people who live in England can find it hard to gain access to Scottish news. The availability of a digital network would allow people throughout the UK to watch Scottish programmes if they wanted to do so. The network's online presence could provide people throughout the world with a source of high-quality information and programming from Scotland. The network would help to explain the wider world to Scotland and Scotland to the wider world. The Scottish Parliament and all of us are central to taking those issues forward. As I said, there is little doubt that the views that were expressed here on 8 October have been heard beyond Scotland. The debate on STV in December, which Ted Brocklebank sponsored, was also a welcome sign of Parliament's concern about the subject. I hope that the Parliament will take an active interest in the topic, and I intend to report to Parliament later this year on the progress that has been made. I hope that Parliament will actively influence opinion in and furth of Scotland to make the case for a new network in a compelling, persuasive and inclusive fashion. It is right that the Parliament should have a regular opportunity to scrutinise and speak on the issue, since the goal towards which we are working is important. To demonstrate that, I will conclude on an undoubted success story—the establishment of BBC Alba. BBC Alba was set up to meet a clear need for a specialist Gaelic-language channel. It is now achieving impressive viewing figures each week, despite being available only on satellite. I was particularly delighted that it has been nominated for seven awards at next week's 30 th Celtic media festival, which I hope to attend as a minister and as the event's founder. BBC Alba shows clearly that there is an appetite in Scotland for high-quality programmes that—to borrow an elegant and useful phrase from the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's chair—are distinctively Scottish, but not relentlessly Scottish. Alas, that appetite is not being met by public service broadcasting in Scotland, but it needs to  be, if viewers in Scotland and beyond are to have the choice that they deserve. That is why the Scottish Government will continue to work openly, constructively and tirelessly with the Parliament, the UK Government and others to deliver the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's recommendations. We know that doing so will boost our economy, enrich our culture and strengthen our democracy.

Pauline McNeill's question is detailed, so I will try to roll it up from the bottom. I do not recognise the image of creative Scotland that the member presented. I noted the resignation of Iain Smith—

I was referring to the Iain Smith who has a Hollywood reputation, as opposed to the Iain Smith who is sitting next to me, who does not—although he has a reputation in Fife. I noted Iain Smith's resignation and would have been happy to speak to him before he resigned. I remain happy to speak to him and am actively seeking an opportunity to do so. Creative Scotland is not an idea that is collapsing around us but an idea whose time has come—it will be delivered. I am working hard with Creative Scotland 2009 Ltd and the existing organisations to deliver it and shall have more to say on the matter in the future. As I have said today, creative Scotland will have a role in skills development. Funding is a serious issue for the proposed new network. However, legislative responsibility for broadcasting lies south of the border, so I suspect that funding responsibility also lies there; that is the reality of money and political power. I would be happy to discuss with the relevant ministers south of the border ways—of which there are a number—in which they might be able to provide the resources that are required. At the moment, the issue is not money, but the willingness to accept the principle that there should be a Scottish digital network; my discussion with Stephen Carter about our response to "Digital Britain: The Interim Report" centred on that issue. We can look at the ways in which resources can be applied to a Scottish digital network after the principle has been accepted, especially because of the timescale. It needs to be acknowledged in the discussion that it is unlikely that money will be spent on the project before the next spending review period. It may also be possible to link the resources that are being applied to developing the production base in the BBC, and the proposed increase in production  by Channel 4, to spending to develop a funding base for the new network. There are synergies. My penultimate point is that I accept entirely Pauline McNeill's comments on the needs of viewers in the Borders. I oppose strongly the development that has taken place, with news moving to Tyne Tees. That is nonsensical and does not serve viewers in the south of Scotland, especially the Borders and Dumfriesshire. A better solution should be sought—the solution that the member suggested is certainly better than the one we have. ITV has got the matter utterly wrong, and the Office of Communications was wrong to allow the proposal to go ahead. Alas, however, it has. I will end on a positive note by reversing what we heard in the question. I welcome the Labour Party's support for the proposed new network, which will become a reality only if we all work together. I will work in any way I can with the Labour Party, the Liberals, the Conservatives, the Scottish Green Party, Margo MacDonald, the UK Government—through the Scotland Office and other departments—MPs at Westminster, the House of Lords, members of the European Parliament and everyone else who can help us to convince the UK Government that it is right to establish a Scottish digital network. I look to Pauline McNeill to offer such opportunities, so that I can prove that I mean what I say.

I am happy to accept many of the ideas that Mr Brocklebank has advanced, not as being writ in stone or as guidelines for what the new channel might achieve, but as part of the debate on how the channel should proceed. If Mr Brocklebank wishes the plan to be seen as the settled will of the unionist parties, it is probably better for it to be seen as that, rather than as a nationalist plot. If that is how he wishes to present it, I am happy to have it presented in that way. To return to the point that I made in response to Pauline McNeill, we need to show our ability to work together, in and outside the Parliament, so that we can persuade the UK Government of our case. Ted Brocklebank raised funding issues. I do not wish to be drawn into that again, but if there has in the past been an imbalance in respect of investment in television in Scotland—as I think Mr Brocklebank would accept—the establishment of the new channel might be seen as balancing the debate, through the investment that will be made over time. Broadcasters are very fond of balancing things over a period, as Mr Whitton knows. The investment will be large in Scottish terms, but in terms of the totality of the licence fee, it is a very small investment. If one were to tot up the licence fee that has been raised in Scotland during these past 15 to 20 years, the investment would represent a miniscule amount in comparison. There are all sorts of ways to approach that sum of money, but in doing so let us fight for acceptance of the principle that we should have the new channel as being the way forward. Then, let us have a detailed debate—which will take some time—about how we will structure the channel, how it will operate and even about the vexed question of where it will be based, which will take considerable effort. I am with Mr Brocklebank on many of the points that he made, but they are points that can be resolved later. Let us all fight for the principle.

Mr Smith raised a number of good points. One of them, however, was not: the demand for a road-map for achieving the channel. Believe me, Presiding Officer—if I had such a road-map, I would not be hiding it, but distributing it in the chamber. There is no road-map, but there is an opportunity for a united campaign. I make that point again to ensure that the Liberal Democrats will be part of that campaign, as Mr Smith is indicating they will. The issues around channel 3 are interesting. I do not believe that channel 3 is an alternative to the digital network. It is important to understand that we are talking about two different creatures. The digital network is a public service broadcaster to balance what is taking place and to create new opportunities. STV exists—the Scottish channel 3 exists. The difficulty in which the Scottish channel 3 finds itself is in moving from one model of broadcasting to another. We have to give opportunities to the many creative people—albeit that there are somewhat fewer of them than there used to be—who still work in STV and who need opportunities to access the pot of money that should be providing production opportunities throughout these islands, although the funding seems to be applied in a very restrictive way. I want people to access that money and I want the commitment to local programming—which still exists in the licences, although it is much reduced—to continue. When we talk about the digital network, we are talking about something different—something that is much fuller and more varied and that might, as  Mr Brocklebank said, grow into the type of city and local television about which there has been a great deal of debate and which is part of the new infrastructure of broadcasting. Channel 3 will have a place in that infrastructure—a regional channel 3 might well have a place, although that is not yet certain—but it is not the alternative. If we start to describe it as the alternative, we will lose the real prize, which is the digital network. Let us keep our eyes on the real prize, while not forgetting the opportunities and difficulties that exist in relation to channel 3.

It is clear that there is a skills issue for creative Scotland. That needs to be recognised. It is clear that there is an interface between what one might call the art of film production and the people who, quite rightly, treat film production as an art form, and people who work in the broadcasting sector, just as there is—historically, there always has been—an interface with people who work in the advertising sector. There are lots of interfaces. A key issue for creative Scotland will be the organisation's role in developing skills—there are other key issues. I have much sympathy with the view that we should provide opportunities for broad film training in Scotland, which would also train people in excellence in television.

Those opportunities represent a start, not a conclusion, as I said in my statement. Like Mr Whitton, I think that it is important to create opportunities for people to acquire skills. I  want those opportunities to continue to grow. There are always financial difficulties, and I am sure that Mr Whitton does not want to be one of those Labour members who constantly call for more money and uncosted commitments. I absolutely believe that we must show that there are opportunities for individuals to enter and continue in broadcasting in Scotland. As Mr Whitton and Mr Brocklebank know—and as I know from another perspective—it is unfortunate that the way in which the established and operating mainstream broadcasters in Scotland were able to bring people in and train them on real wages, rather than exploit them, is now sadly missed in Scotland. We would love such opportunities to exist again.

As ever, Mr Gibson makes a good and combative point. I have argued the same point in the past. In my meeting with the controller of BBC Scotland this week I touched on the imbalance in relation to the licence fee in Scotland. If £320 million is the figure, as I believe it is, only a proportion of that money would be used for the new channel. Indeed, over 10 years the proportion would be very small. I am keen that we keep our eye on the prize and are able to argue for the new network in a way that looks forward, not back. I hope that all members will contribute to that argument. Given Mr Gibson's skill as the most formidable campaigner in the Scottish National Party, I am sure that he can be a formidable campaigner for Scotland on the issue.

It is slightly amiss of Mr Macintosh to accuse Mr Gibson of threatening unity and then to do exactly the same, so let us try to draw ourselves together and re-establish unity. I will make the point about funding that I made some moments ago. If Mr Macintosh missed it, I ask him to allow me to make it again—

If I may, Presiding Officer, I will make the point in a spirit of unity. The legislative power lies south of the border; therefore, the funding responsibility lies south of the border. If Mr Macintosh would like to go further than the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and support the repatriation of broadcasting legislation to Scotland along with the funding that goes with it, I will be a happy man. However, as I am sure he will not do so, let us find a way of working together on the matter. I discussed funding with Stephen Carter and acknowledged that the issue will concern the United Kingdom Government. A number of solutions have been proposed already. One involves the licence fee and another is the allocation of revenue from spectrum sell, but both have some difficulties. It is extremely important that we campaign for the principle of a new digital channel. In so doing, we will need to have a constructive discussion about funding among all the bodies that are involved. I also said that a number of issues have not been taken into account on funding. For example, the channel would build the production base in Scotland, which would undoubtedly have an impact on the work that the BBC intends to do on building the production base in Glasgow. It would also have an impact on the commissioning that Channel 4 intends to do in Scotland. There may be synergy between those three that has not yet been fully recognised. If we have the opportunity, we might find that our resources go to one part of that triptych, which might usefully be the channel itself. I say that to Mr Macintosh in order to indicate that I am engaged with funding issues. There is a detailed discussion to be had, and I would like to have it as part of the combined campaign to establish the channel. However, if Mr Macintosh wants to settle the funding issue as a prerequisite before we have the campaign, that will be unfortunate.

As somebody who previously worked in the creative industries, I am glad to say that the Government is committed to supporting the creative industries, which contribute more than £5 billion in turnover and employ more than 60,000 people in Scotland. With our investment in modern apprenticeships, we are ensuring that young people can get into the industry; with our investment in training, we are ensuring that people have the right skills to be successful; and with our development of the creative industries framework agreement, we are ensuring that creative practitioners can access effective support.

I am happy to commit myself to working closely with employers and other organisations to ensure that our positive policy is followed through. At the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities conference two weeks ago, I met Councillor Harry McGuigan to discuss COSLA's involvement in the creative industries framework agreement, and he and I will jointly convene the first meeting of the short-life group to ensure that that agreement becomes real. That meeting will take place within the next month or so. I am committed to ensuring, wherever possible, that people get the right skills, that they are enabled to use them, and, most important, that they have the opportunities to use them. Creative Scotland will be an important part of that as well.

I am happy to make that commitment. Support for all those who work in the arts, at either amateur or professional level, is crucial. The member and I disagree on one or two cultural things. I remember that he is not fond of Gilbert and Sullivan, whereas I might admit to a slight fondness there. However, amateur musical theatre companies, amateur musical societies and NODA all make important contributions, and I hope that they continue to do so. Everything that the Government does within culture is designed to encourage creativity, access and participation.

Aberdeen and the north-east's thriving arts scene is supported in a number of ways. The Scottish Government provides funding for local cultural services through the local government finance settlement. It is for each local authority to determine how to allocate resources for particular services based on local needs and priorities. Funding for the performing arts is distributed by the Scottish Arts Council, which is the main funding body for the arts in Scotland. The five national performing companies receive direct funding from the Scottish Government, which enables them to reach audiences throughout Scotland, including in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire.

I regard the Lemon Tree as an important venue. The Government has shown  that in its support and encouragement for the solution that has now been found. Of course, it would be entirely inappropriate for me to allocate moneys myself to any particular venue, but I think that everybody agrees that the Lemon Tree fulfils an important role in the ecosystem of the arts in the north-east. It does just the things that the member said and, in those circumstances, it deserves to be supported.

Creative Scotland will become operational in the first half of next year. As I said on 18 February, in a contribution that I think was well reported, creative Scotland is needed and it will come to fruition.

I am always aware that organisations that are involved in the arts have constant questions about their future and operation. It is important that we have a stable structure that supports the arts and culture in Scotland. There is at present a structure that consists of creative Scotland and the Scottish Arts Council. The new structure, which we anticipate will be in existence in the first half of next year, will succeed that. There is no interregnum; there is a structure and there will be a structure. Organisational support and funding are there and are secure. They will become better when creative Scotland is in place. A great deal of work needs to be done to ensure that that happens. The whole Parliament has the opportunity to participate in that. I invited the Opposition culture spokespeople to the event at the Traverse on 18 February. I am happy to work with members throughout the Parliament and with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, which the member convenes and which has oversight of the matter, to ensure that we deliver creative Scotland in the best way possible. We can then put an end to what I have called the decade of debate about the structures of the arts in Scotland and ensure that we are doing the real job of supporting the arts by supporting creativity, access and participation.

The Scottish Government has no plans to request a long-term loan of the Lübeck letter. We have taken advice in that regard and we believe that such an arrangement would be contrary to archival good practice and could seriously damage an extremely important document.

Such is the state of technology that an excellence facsimile of the letter could easily be made available for display anywhere. There is a different issue around cultural return. The member is right to say that the letter was previously exhibited in Scotland. It has been exhibited here three times in the past 100 years or so. It was exhibited in 2005 when the National Archives of Scotland borrowed it for a single month—the maximum time permitted—to feature in the for freedom alone exhibition in the Scottish Parliament. In 1999, the National Museum of Scotland borrowed it for two months—that loan period was permitted at the time, but it is not permitted now—for display in the opening exhibition of the new museum. In 1911, it was borrowed for an unknown period for the Glasgow palace of history exhibition. However, the document is very old and very fragile. If we were to ask for its return on a long-term basis, even if we were allowed to get it—I think that that is very unlikely—the conditions that would apply would be onerous indeed. We do not need to get the letter to be able to display it in perfect facsimile form. I have spent a lot of time over the years working on the issue of cultural return. There are occasions when artefacts should be returned to where they came from, but I do not think that this example meets any of the criteria that are normally applied in cultural return.

The Scottish Government's aims for visual arts, as for other art forms, are to encourage and sustain people who create; to ensure that their work is widely accessible; and to give people of all ages the opportunity to take part in creative activities. The Scottish Government pursues those aims through working with our partners in local authorities, the national collections and the Scottish Arts Council, and through supporting the work of higher education institutions in the visual arts.

There are many reasons why the arts should be supported and why we should encourage people to take part. At the risk of being boring, I repeat what I have said in answer to almost every question. I regard the purpose of the Government's cultural policy as being: first, to encourage creativity—that is, to centre on the artist; secondly, to encourage access; and thirdly, to light that creative fire that exists in every individual, therefore to encourage participation. I see that purpose in the context of what one would call a national and international culture. Many people might write a host of detailed objectives around that, but that is what I am concerned about delivering and what I hope to deliver during whatever period I am in office.

I am delighted to do so. During the next couple of months I hope to have a range of meetings with a range of individuals in the colleges of art, to consider the work that they are doing. The colleges of art have a number of basic functions, which my friend the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning strongly supports. Those functions might be divided into, first, placing people within the tradition—that is, educating them in what art is and how the tradition affects them; and secondly, encouraging people to be daring, to go on to the cutting edge and to innovate as much as possible. I am sure that those are the most important things that art colleges do, although they do many other things. I hope to be able to encourage such activity.

A decision has yet to be made about the level of Government funding to support St Andrew's day activities in 2009. However, I aim to do that soon. I will certainly do it in the context of an outstandingly successful start to the year of homecoming, particularly in Dumfries, where between 17,000 and 20,000 people took part in an event on 25 January. I am happy to welcome Provost Jack Groom, provost of Dumfries, to the Parliament. I and the Government will do all that we can do to encourage events throughout Scotland, to ensure an outstanding finale to the homecoming celebrations, to mark our national day and to bring a wonderful thing to a conclusion.

Yes.

Improving cultural opportunities has to start with encouraging and sustaining the people who produce the artistic and creative output that people experience and enjoy, which should embrace all sectors, art forms and types of creative expression. We must ensure that artists' work can be accessed and give everyone the chance to take part in creative activity. Those are the basic building blocks; that is what we have put in place and will continue to put in place.

I hope that we will learn from good examples such as the one that the member mentions. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, who is sitting next to me, has indicated what a good example is provided by that project, which she knows well. I would have thought that we will follow those examples. Not every model works, or can work, in every different place but, within the confines that exist, I would certainly want to learn from the Bathgate example on a variety of aspects of good practice. I thank the member for drawing our attention to that.

Ministers and officials have regular meetings with intergovernmental organisations. It is difficult to define what an intergovernmental organisation is,  although the member might do so in his supplementary. Let me give some examples. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, has attended the fisheries council twice in the past few months. Ministers attended various European Councils on 17 to 19 December, 18 to 20 November, 27 to 28 October and 29 September. The Solicitor General for Scotland, Frank Mulholland, has attended the justice and home affairs council. Officials have been involved in meetings with the World Health Organization. The British-Irish Council meetings have been well attended—indeed, in my new role, I attended a meeting of the British-Irish Council along with the First Minister and Deputy First Minister two weeks ago. We have been involved in a range of such meetings, including this week's meeting of the joint ministerial committee, which I think would also qualify.

Just as the Scottish Government is united on the subject of the previous question, we are united on this one. Since 1 December 2008, a total of four directives have been transposed into Scots law.

I think that the member is talking about his interpretation of the policy note rather than the facts of that note. As a Government, we are strongly committed to ensuring that all resources that can be brought forward are brought forward to meet the present difficult circumstances. For example, in advance of next weekend's European Council meeting, discussion is continuing on how the European reflationary package might make available resources that can be focused on real need in Scotland. The transposition of directives is a complex process that involves a range of issues, including the requirements of Scots law and the requirement to ensure that the directives do not bear down unfairly on Scottish businesses and organisations that are struggling during the recession. If there is any way in which we can ensure that the procurement process benefits Scotland more, members should be under no doubt that we will take that route.

In my reply on 5 March to a written parliamentary question from Mr Butler, I gave details of the funding to local authorities for cultural services that is provided by the Scottish Government both through the local government finance settlement and via Museums Galleries Scotland, with which I had a meeting this morning. In addition, I understand that the University of Glasgow was awarded £35,688 this financial year by Museums Galleries Scotland. I intend to meet Bailie Liz Cameron and her colleagues in Glasgow to discuss the issue that the member has raised. I have made it quite clear  that I believe that the issue requires substantive discussion.

I think that everybody acknowledges the quality of Glasgow's collections. Indeed, Museums Galleries Scotland has acknowledged that in making available resources through its special collections fund. There is no doubt that many of the items that are held in Glasgow are of great importance, as are the collections themselves. It is difficult to draw a direct line between that and the funding of some of the national collections. Nonetheless, as I hope the member accepts, I acknowledge that the issue requires discussion and resolution. I acknowledged that when I was a shadow minister some six years ago, and I acknowledge it now. I intend to start a process of discussion with Glasgow that I hope will lead us forward. It will not be easy, particularly in a time of financial difficulty and recession. That said, not only am I sympathetic to Glasgow on the matter but I admire its collections and what it does with them.

The First Minister's recent meeting with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton marked the deepening friendship between our two nations. It provided a good basis for on-going dialogue in important areas of mutual interest, such as climate change and Scotland's renewable energy potential.

Scotland has a strong record of engaging with our counterparts in Africa, from the early work of the Scottish missionaries, who worked tirelessly across many parts of the continent, to more recent developments, such as the co-operation agreement with the Government of Malawi, which was instigated by the previous First Minister. Professor Harvie is right to draw our attention to the distinguished work of former and present members of the Parliament in that regard. The relationship between Scotland and Malawi enjoys strong cross-party support, and has benefited from the direct involvement of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in this Parliament. I hope to support that work visibly and practically. Scotland has much to offer and much to learn, and we are happy to share our experiences.

Mr Brocklebank will be aware that the classic definition of conservatism is not to do anything new, but to keep asking about things in the past. However, I am quite happy to ensure that as much information as possible is provided. In addition, I will be part of the ministerial group that will attend Scotland week this year and will make it my purpose to enquire about what has taken place in the past and to bring back to the Parliament up-to-date information so that we can benefit from an initiative that is strong, important and beneficial to both sides.

I had hoped to give a one-word answer, had the member restrained herself to one question. The answer to the first question is yes. The answer to the second is that we will build on our experiences in an effort to reinforce mutual friendship. If Margo MacDonald were to play a part in that process, people could only feel warmly towards us.

I should probably ask for other offences to be taken into consideration. Since the launch of the national conversation, there have been 470,000 hits on the national conversation website and more than 36,000 people have read copies of "Choosing Scotland's Future" online. Over the past year, more than 2,500 people have attended events organised as part of the national conversation. We will build on that success and will ensure that the people of Scotland are well placed to make an informed decision, based on the facts, in the referendum in 2010.

Christine Grahame makes a telling point, which gives the lie to the view that there is no connection between the national conversation, constitutional change and economic benefit. It is clear that such a connection is at the  centre of thinking in Shetland. I pay tribute to the council's far-seeing convener, Sandy Cluness, and the other councillors who share that view. I keep a close eye on all material that is produced on the subject of what Scotland's future should be and listen carefully to what is said. The whole purpose of the national conversation is to show that all points of view are heard. If only other parties in the Parliament were as open.

My colleague Dr Allan has made the point that it is better than Daleks. I am sorry that the noble lord is not familiar with the conventions of social networking or, indeed, of working online, even if people who work for him are, I believe, fluent in all such matters and often appear on such sites. The reality of the situation is that the Data Protection Act 1998 does not allow us to release the full names and addresses of the people concerned, even if they were given. I would like to see a full and open debate involving lots of people. If Lord Foulkes chooses to contribute to the website, I am sure that we will read what he says with great interest.

In response to the latter question, I will just say—if I am allowed to, Presiding Officer—that you ain't seen nothing yet. We will build on the success of the national conversation to ensure that the people of Scotland are fully informed. I do not frequent the jeremypurvis.org website, so I do not know whether contributions to it are moderated. It is never the practice to publish moderated comments: that would be quite contrary to the whole idea of moderation. Perhaps Mr Purvis needs to catch up with the reality of how such things work.

As this is my first opportunity to talk about my future frolic, I look forward to it very much indeed. I do not know what it will do for me, but it is certainly making a great deal of money for my publishers. I know that they are profoundly grateful. I have a certain sense of déjà vu this morning, because we have had so many of these debates in the past. To be entirely fair, we had them when the SNP was in opposition and now we have them when Labour is in opposition. However, perhaps none has been as gloomy as this one, which was led, of course, by the rainmaker of Scottish  politics, Johann Lamont, a woman who can conjure up the blackest of clouds out of the bluest of skies. I have to say that I was beginning to lose the will to live after about a minute and a half of that. However, a shaft of light came eventually from an unlikely source: Mary Mulligan. She talked about the debate being the result of pent-up "anger and frustration." Indeed, that is true and it shows up, I am afraid, the rather nasty side of what used to be called the people's party. The pent-up anger and frustration are not in the Scottish people, as Mary Mulligan indicated, but in the 46 Labour MSPs, whose sense of historic inevitability about their right to rule was shattered in May 2007. Until they recognise what they have done wrong, they will be unable to do anything right—I give them that useful contribution. I have long believed that what people in Scotland want is a positive approach to politics. They want ambition in Scotland. They do not want to be talked down to; they want to be talked up. What we have heard from every Labour speaker today, alas, is simply a talking down. It is frustration that they are not sitting in the Government seats in the chamber. However, the reason why they are not sitting in these seats is that they did so little so badly when they were here. I will devote most of my attention to the issue of the referendum. The Liberal Democrat amendment is a dangerous and worrying one that needs to be tackled seriously, so I will tackle it very seriously indeed. Before I do so, let me just say a word or two about infrastructure. We could talk about a range of other things, but nothing that we have heard about specific policies is true, so let us put that to one side.

Well, £2 billion-worth of investment is where we start, but I would ask Rhona Brankin to look in the mirror, view the achievements of a Government of which she was a member and then have a period of silence—something that Ms Brankin is not good at but from which she would learn. Before we come to the issue of basic democracy, let me just touch on the issue of infrastructure. I was very interested to see that both the opening and closing Liberal Democrat speakers talked about the need to drive forward infrastructure and the terrible delays in the system that were being caused by the Government. That is certainly one of the things that we read about in Scottish local papers. For example, there have  been calls for work on, to name but a few, a Nairn bypass; the Laurencekirk junction; accelerating the Aberdeen bypass; an Elgin bypass; the A9, A96 and A82; dualling the A9 north of Inverness; the Leadburn junction in Peeblesshire; and a Selkirk bypass on the A7 from Ladylands to Bridgeheugh. How exactly all that equates with the views of Nick Clegg, who said that the Liberal Democrats would pay for £20 billion of cuts by cutting major road projects by 90 per cent, does not appear easily understandable. Nor does it fit well with the views of Tavish Scott, who believes that the Scottish Government is being far too conservative in looking for savings in infrastructure projects. I am afraid that, on this matter as on many others, the Lib Dems appear to say one thing in the pages of "Focus" and quite another when they speak in Parliament. The real worry about the Lib Dem amendment, however, is contained in a single sentence that Mike Rumbles used earlier. He said that it was a "betrayal of democracy" to allow people to vote. What a curious view to have.

Well, I think that my ears did not deceive me. We shall find out, but I hope that I am correct. However, even if Mike Rumbles's words were not exactly as I said, the implication was there that it was a betrayal of democracy to allow people to vote.

I believe that it is a disgrace. I am glad that Mr Rumbles agrees. Self-censorship is a wonderful thing. Now he will be able to look back. It is 10 years since the Parliament came into being. We all remember those words of Donald Dewar when the Parliament opened: "'There shall be a Scottish Parliament'—I like that." Everybody at the Parliament's opening accepted that we were involved in a process, not an event. Over 10 years, the Parliament has learned a lot. Devolution has had its ups and downs—not the nonsense of today's debate but the real ups and downs of dealing with the governance of Scotland. After a decade, it is entirely legitimate to ask what should be next. Indeed, I remember the Liberal Democrats and others saying that there should be a time to consider how the Parliament works, then we should look forward. The period that they set for doing that was a decade. We have had that decade, and now we take things forward.

From a sedentary position, Mr Rumbles shouts, "Calman!" Let me say that there is a range of views. A real democrat, let alone a real liberal, would encourage a range of views to come forward. I want the people of Scotland to be given the facts. Knowing those facts, they can then choose how they want to go forward.

No, I am sorry, but I must make progress. It is far from a betrayal of democracy to allow people to vote on the facts. It is, indeed, the triumph of democracy to ensure that people are given the facts and then go forward.

No, I am sorry, but I will not. I go further and say that it is our duty as elected representatives to do exactly as I described, particularly when times are hard. Indeed, the history of constitutional change shows that, when times are hard, people need to look for the weapons that they need to argue for their future, to defend themselves in the international world and to ensure that they have the economic powers that can help them to survive. Those are the things that the Parliament needs and the issues that we need to discuss. The facts about that are what we need to put to the Scottish people. That is the job that I intend to do because it is about empowerment. It is about empowering the Scottish people and extending Scottish democracy. The Parliament's job is not to spend time on political navel-gazing that is born of resentment and bitterness, which is what we have seen. That is an irrelevance to the Scottish people. What we need to do is raise the ambitions and expectations of the Scottish people. We do that by telling them the truth about where we will go. The Lib Dem amendment is an insidious thing. We see in the Labour motion the usual girn and complaint. Labour has nothing to contribute to Scotland's future. However, if the Lib Dem amendment is really the will of the Parliament, it is an insidious attack on democracy. It is tacit support for Labour cuts and an undermining of the prospects of the Scottish people for their entire future. I will not be complicit in that. I came into politics to help the Scottish people and I will continue to do so.

Will the member take an intervention?

In the spirit of fairness—although I would not be entirely convinced by the members whom Paul Martin cited as evidence of that—does he accept that the projection study that the cabinet secretary mentioned today will give us the answer once and for all? I am sure that the member will be glad that we will all know the answer.

If the member can tell me one thing that she did to help kinship carers in the eight years in which Labour was in power, I will be immensely surprised. The Scottish Government introduced the policy and is delivering; the frustration has come largely from the Labour Party and Labour councillors.

At the outset, let me say that this should be my final appearance in fulfilling my previous ministerial role. I thank those whom I have worked with—and against—over the past 21 months. I pay a warm tribute and welcome to my successor, Roseanna Cunningham. She will be free to act as she will, of course, so I will not bind her in any way in what I say today.  I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate. The Scottish coastal path is an important issue that, as he indicated, he has discussed with me on a number of occasions. I am glad to say that, with officials, I have been able to help to begin at least to scope the task. The indicative map that we now have, which shows where some of the Scottish coastal path exists, is a foundation on which to build. I welcome to the public gallery Gil Campbell, who is running a Facebook campaign for a Scottish coastal path. Many people are interested in the idea and many of them are online—not many of them are in the chamber—but I am sure that Gil Campbell will take away the message that the Scottish Government has a commitment to the on-going development and promotion of the core path network throughout Scotland. We need to find ways to build upon that. I was struck by Elizabeth Smith's comments on the significance of the coast, which came to the heart of understanding the matter. The coast is not just an arbitrary line of some sort or even just a definition—although it is a definition—of who we are and where we are. It is a route and an explanation, and it has a huge significance for us all. A coastal path has more significance than many other long-distance ways—in Scotland most of all, probably—because the Scottish coastal path will be very long indeed. Alasdair Morgan suggested that the path might well exceed the Appalachian trail, and I think that there is no doubt about that. In fact, we do not know how long the path will be, as there are lots of questions about where it will run. Even if we have just a mainland coastal path—I am particularly fond of the idea of including certainly the larger islands—the Scottish coastal path will be one of the longest paths in the world. That is why our ambition will take some time to achieve. I entirely agree with Elaine Murray that the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 is a foundation on which we can build such an achievement. I pay tribute to the previous Administration on that. She and I will both regret that, so far, some of the weaker contributions to the core path network have been in Dumfries and Galloway—an area that both of us know well—both under the previous and current Administrations. I hope that Dumfries and Galloway Council is back on track—as I believe that it is—to be a contributor, as is required of all local authorities, in building the core path network in Scotland. Paths contribute in all sorts of ways, as Alasdair Morgan indicated. They contribute to the wellbeing and health of all our citizens by providing the opportunity to get outdoors. One of the 45 national indicators that were chosen to track progress  towards the achievement of our national outcomes relates to outdoor access. During 2007, 44 per cent of adults are estimated to have visited the outdoors once or more than once a week. That was the same as the figure in 2006. If we continue to develop, market and expand what is available, more people will go and see. The more that we talk about the paths and actively promote them by changing and developing things, the more we will achieve progress. I think that we can build on the success of the access legislation and be ambitious in taking the matter forward. Of course, there has been success. Examples of recent local approaches—coming from the bottom up rather than from the top down, which is an important point—include the Fife coastal path, St Cuthbert's way, the Cateran trail, the Kintyre way and the River Ayr way. I should also give special mention to the Cowal way; the path runs within sight of the house in which, some of the time, I live. Given that Cathy Jamieson has advertised a publication, let me advertise a new book, "The Cowal Way", which was written by Michael Kaufman and Jim McLuckie, who are members of the local community council. I believe that the publication is available now, at very modest cost. We now need a specific way of moving forward. Scottish Natural Heritage—I will come to Dr Murray's point about SNH in a second—believes that a bottom-up partnership is more effective than a top-down imposition. Of course, we need to work out a strategy that will make that work. SNH's paths policy paper will go to the SNH board this summer. Recommendations will likely be made in the autumn, so there is plenty of time to have an influence. I will come on to discuss the actions that my successor might, or might not, wish to take. Following the concordat between the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, it will be for access authorities, in consultation with communities and other relevant partner bodies, to make progress and create long-distance paths. The Scottish coastal path proposal is ambitious. Another existing proposal is for a pilgrim way. The origin of that proposal lies with someone who may have some influence in the days and months to come. The future of these proposals lies in the hands of Roseanna Cunningham and in the work that she chooses to do. At present, around 2,700km of the Scottish coast is served with paths. That is nearly 25 per cent. Of course it is right to make progress now, so I will respond to Alasdair Morgan's closing request. Yes, there is a commitment within this Government to take this issue forward. The path cannot be completed in a day, a month or a year. The issue will be affected by a shortage of resources, and, as I have said, ideas need to  come from the bottom up. We need to get the people around the coast to agree that joining up what they have, and developing new ideas, will be the best way to go. Out of such ideas will come a successful venture. This is a project for the long term, but there is a commitment to get moving. A quarter of the path is already there; how we use it and develop it will be a key issue. As I say, SNH will be considering a paper in the summer. There will be an opportunity—say, for a Minister for Environment—to talk to SNH about these issues and to indicate the will of this chamber. Even though we are few in number this evening, there clearly is a will to take the idea forward. We cannot commit vast resources to it, but we can take it forward. That minister might suggest to SNH, as it develops its paper, that it should take notice of what has been said this evening; should think about how to make progress; should perhaps think about other existing ideas for long-distance paths; and should see whether recommendations will emerge that we can take action on. That minister might want to bring the topic back to the chamber for a discussion on the contributions that long-distance paths can make to Scotland.  In conclusion, I will say that I have greatly enjoyed all the work that I have done in the environment. It has been an enormous privilege. I have learned a great deal; I might say that I have had a ball. I look forward to my future role, and I very much look forward to supporting Roseanna Cunningham in hers.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

I stress that, as the member knows, we are not yet at the proposal stage. I plan to meet local fishermen and representatives of the Barra and Vatersay community to hear their concerns on the potential designation of the two locations in the coming weeks. Under European rules, designation must be based on scientific evidence alone, but our professional advice is that, were the designation to come about, it would not interfere with responsible fishing activities. Scotland is rich in natural resources, which we need to protect for this and future generations, including the communities who rely on the marine environment for their living. The rights and responsibilities of communities and how they express those are very important.

I can do better than that—I can offer a physical presence as opposed to just a video presence, although some people might not think that that is a better offer. Seriously, I have said to the community that I am happy to hold a videoconference with the fishermen. I am also happy to visit Barra and will make arrangements to do so in the next few weeks. As well as meeting the member repeatedly to discuss the issue, I have met Councillor Donald Manford, who has made strong representations on the matter, and have heard from the MP, Angus Brendan MacNeil. I very much believe that the views of the community on the matter are paramount. There is no consultation at present. I will talk to the community before any consultation takes place, should one come along. I hope that we can have a constructive discussion, both about democracy, which is extremely important, and about how the community can benefit from designation rather than see it as a burden.

There is no question of a ban on fishing as a result of any such designation—I put that firmly on the record—but, as with all such issues worldwide, there is a question of balance. A balance must be struck between the national significance of the features that we are talking about and the socioeconomic interests of the community. As I have often said in public, it is a flaw of European legislation that socioeconomic issues are not germane when it comes to lodging objections to proposals. We need to have a balanced discussion. I stress that there is no question of a ban on fishing or of an imposition on earning a livelihood in Barra or in the waters around Barra.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I wrote to you about the matter on Friday last week, I spoke to you about it, and I copied my letter to the Opposition spokespeople, the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and the Scottish Parliament information centre. During Thursday's debate on forestry, I used employment statistics. On Thursday evening, the Forestry Commission drew my attention to the fact that its figures arose out of, as it put it, an error in its methodology. In short, the statistics for 1995 to 1999 were drawn up in a different way from those for 2006-07, and it was therefore not possible to make a complete and accurate comparison. I want to make my apologies to the Parliament and to the Opposition spokespeople for the error that occurred during the debate. The moment that it was drawn to my attention, I sought to correct it, as the Presiding Officer knows, and to ensure that others were aware of it. Again, I apologise both for making the error and for the fact that others repeated it during the debate.

I will briefly address some of the points that have been raised. John Scott and Nanette Milne made points about the important issue of woodland creation at the expense of productive land for food production. We need a more systematic approach to land use. Activity for farming enterprises to diversify and increase sustainability should focus on planting lower-quality land. We remain aware of the issue and will continue to consider it. David Stewart made a thoughtful speech, although I did not agree with all of it. The Forestry Commission's role has always involved operating in conjunction with the private sector. A public-private balance has always been necessary to increase woodland in Scotland, so it is not a new thing. He also raised the spectre of Rothschild on the horizon, which he called "Thatcher's favourite privatisation" organisation. Of course, it is also new Labour's favourite privatisation organisation, so perhaps that is not a fruitful line of inquiry for Mr  Stewart. It is important to point out that the idea of leasing did not originally come from Rothschild. In 1998, under a Labour Government, the National Audit Office said specifically on forestry that "the idea of leasing should be considered in any future programme". So the idea of leasing in this context has been around for more than 10 years. It has always been around—as Elaine Murray admits from a sedentary position—and was in the previous forestry strategy. Although leasing is not a new idea, I believe that its time has come. I wish to make one or two keen points in response to Robin Harper. He asked important questions and I want to answer them, but some were lengthy, so I offer him the opportunity to sit down and discuss the answers. I will address two of them briefly. We saw an example in Sweden of what not to do, how to do it on far too big a scale and in a way that monopolises the market. We have a mixed forestry in Scotland, which will produce much better results. There are other possibilities, of course, as I have said constantly during the consultation. I have also said that we need action now and resources as soon as possible. If we can take a mixed approach to planting trees, I will be happy, but we need to plant trees. That is an absolute that must be understood in this debate. Unfortunately, although Robin Harper and others made some good suggestions, we have heard none from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. I will now offer some clear guarantees. We have heard scaremongering on a grand scale this morning, so I will put the facts on the table: first, long-term contracts will be honoured; secondly, biodiversity and access are guaranteed by law; thirdly, there will be no effect on leisure and tourism; and fourthly, triple assurances on jobs have been given, and there will be new jobs. Those are all facts. As I said, we have heard scaremongering on a grand scale: if I may pick out an individual for dishonourable mention, it is Mr Jim Hume. I offer Parliament three brief cameos of the campaign since 4 November. Those who are connoisseurs of such things will remember seeing a stunning photograph of a group of Lib Dems wearing helmets in a forest in the south of Scotland. I presume that the helmets were worn to keep the ideas out rather than the brains in. Remarkably, the Lib Dems were in a forest that is not even affected by the proposal. They were led by a man—Mr Tavish Scott—who posed fetchingly like a young Viking on a bike. It is baffling why a man with no forests in his constituency is fighting against a plan to sell forests that does not exist. That is liberal democracy for you.  It goes further. Unfortunately, I was struck down by the lurgy after Christmas. I was lying in bed on 6 January feeling rather sorry for myself when I was cheered up by Jim Hume. He appeared on Radio Scotland in an interview after he had issued a press release about the threat to the Christmas tree that our proposals would produce. I have in front of me a transcript of the interview. I ask connoisseurs of such things to listen to this. In response to Mr Hume's assertion that there would be no Christmas trees next year, Gary Robertson said: "Yes. But it's just not true is it?"

No, I will not take an intervention from the former minister for forestry; I want to finish my point. Mr Hume said: "Well the main point whether that is. I mean, most people will relate to the Christmas tree that they see in their houses, so what better way to alarm them".

No, I am not taking an intervention. I thank Mr Hume, but I do not need any alarming this morning. Finally, let me bring in—gone but not forgotten—Mr George Lyon, who has been stamping round Argyll with that poor craitur Alan Reid, stirring up apathy everywhere he goes. I want Mr Hume to think about what the news website for Argyll says.

No, I will not. The news website says "There is nothing so tired, so dispiriting and so empty-headed as politicians focused only on scoring party-political points rather than doing their best for Scotland. There is nothing so dishonourable as politicians who don't do their homework while confidently trotting out wildly inaccurate statements for political benefit. ... In every respect" they do "not trouble themselves with the documented facts and it is a dilution of the currency of trust on which democracy depends. And it is irresponsible to frighten and destabilise people about the security of their jobs when no threat to them exists." That is true. That is what the Liberal Democrats and Labour have done; it is dishonourable. Let us now speak the truth about this great proposal that will plant trees in Scotland, fight climate change and preserve jobs. I commend the proposal to the chamber.

Will the member give way?

What does he mean that they mean nothing? That is nonsense.

It is the way he tells them.

I entirely agree that land use is a substantive issue. I am sure that the member will acknowledge that the work that has been done by the Scottish Government in its land use research, and the land-use policy that will come to fulfilment later this year in a land use event, are useful contributions.

I will deal with facts, which were in short supply in the speech that we have just heard from Sarah Boyack and will be in short supply in the speeches that we will hear from the Liberal Democrats, who made an entirely fact-free contribution to the consultation. I will start with some facts that might be hard for the Labour Party to take. The great defender of Forestry Commission jobs is the party that, when in power, lost 1,000 of them from 1999. Those jobs were lost under Labour and the Liberal Democrats; our proposals would increase employment in rural areas. Alas, the other fact with which I must deal is the history of consultation under Labour and the Liberal Democrats, in which the decisions were made before the consultation papers were issued. I understand those people who have difficulty taking my assurances at face value. For years, they have had ministers in Scotland whose assurances meant nothing, so I say at the outset that my assurances are to be trusted. [ Interruption. ] I know that it is an unusual concept for Labour to think of trust and ministers in the same sentence, but the reality is that there will be no loss of jobs, biodiversity or access.

I will not take an intervention from Mr Hume at any stage today. There will be no difficulties of the type that has been talked about. It is scaremongering.  Let us go to the facts. Scotland's forests represent one of our biggest assets in terms of natural and financial capital. A lot more forest needs to be planted to help us to achieve the world-leading climate change ambitions on which this Administration has led and which the United Kingdom Government is merely following. On what basis can I say that? The 2006 Stern report on the economics of climate change, which highlighted the importance of effective, early action, said: "Encouraging new forests, and enhancing the potential of soils to store carbon, offer further opportunities to reverse emissions from land use change". The AEA Technology report on policy options, "Mitigating Against Climate Change in Scotland", identified increasing woodland area as a high-priority, cost-effective measure. A total of 10,000 hectares of new woodland each year would lock up an additional 4.4 million tonnes of CO 2 a year by 2050. For comparison, 4.4 million tonnes of CO 2 is equivalent to 44 per cent of road transport emissions in Scotland in 2006. It would make a significant contribution. It is a pity that the Labour Party talks about action against climate change but is not prepared to do anything. Let us talk about how the proposals came about. For years, people have approached the Forestry Commission and asked to buy its land. As forestry minister, I will not sell Forestry Commission land. However, we need to consider creative ideas. When Rothschild came to us with a creative idea, I considered it and rejected it, because it was a proposal for 100 per cent of the forest estate. I needed to find a creative way to deal with the issue. The creative way is to take the 25 per cent package, get the value from it and invest that money so that we can grow more trees in Scotland. That is essential. Moreover, by putting that in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, we guarantee that it will be used in that way because it would be ultra vires if it were not. We have a win-win situation in Scotland. We have the potential to meet the target of 10,000 hectares, which existed throughout the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration but was never even approached. We can meet that target. Because we have access legislation, we can guarantee access. Because the proposals deal with specific areas, we can ensure that things such as the 7stanes and rallying are maintained and enhanced. We can ensure that leisure access takes place. All those things are guaranteed. Where are the downsides? There is a downside for scaremongers and for those who want to make political capital out of the proposals. The reality is that there are no downsides for Scotland and none for those who work in forestry.  The biggest criticism that the Labour motion makes is of being open-minded. I find that fairly astonishing. Of course, I am prepared to consider alternative ideas. That is what a consultation is about. I have invited those ideas, and I am grateful to the trade unions, for example, for coming up with the idea of increasing the amount of repositioning. However, there is a problem in that, because some of the arguments that we have heard against leasing, for example to do with the potential danger to the Galloway forest park, would, if they were true, be exactly the same if the land were to be sold, yet those are the precise areas that Labour is proposing to sell. Its proposal is not worked through or worked out.

An agreed repositioning package was started by Labour, which we have continued. The solution to the problem of how we plant 10,000 hectares of new woodland each year is not to sell more land to do so, because that will endlessly diminish the forest estate. The solution is to use the resource imaginatively and boldly, which is what the senior lecturer in forestry at the University of Aberdeen, Andrew Cameron, suggested. He said that if we invest the money in that way, we will plant trees. There are three classic ways of increasing tree planting. First, there are tax concessions. The Government cannot offer those. The second is borrowing. The Government cannot borrow—that restriction was imposed on us by Labour. Thirdly, there is this proposal. We need more trees. If there is a better proposal in the chamber, let it come forward. If not, let us ensure that we do something about climate change instead of just talking about it. I move amendment S3M-3325.1, to leave out from "widespread" to end and insert: "the consultation on climate change and forestry that has just closed; welcomes the widespread agreement that there must be a significant planting increase to assist the process of combating climate change; is grateful to all those who brought a variety of ideas and views forward, and looks forward to a report to the Parliament on the outcome of the consultation."

I will not talk about acting this evening; I will devote myself to the subject at hand. However, I understand that some tickets are still available for the performance at the Tall Ship in Glasgow at 8 o'clock tonight. This has been a positive and important debate, but I start with one particular contribution that summed up the real issue. It is not the minutiae of legislation or the speed of the planning process, although a lot of work needs to be done on that. It is not even the details of the COSLA-agreed formula on funding, which I will come to. The issue is the suffering and distress of individuals, and sometimes the loss of life. Often property can be destroyed, which also causes distress. That was brought home to me last year, when I visited Angela Constance's constituents in Broxburn after launching the Scottish Flood Forum. I shall come to that valuable organisation in a moment.  The debate, the bill and all our work is about people. We must keep our focus on those people and how they are affected by flooding. Anyone who has visited those who are affected by flooding knows that one theme is constant. Those who have been flooded out of their homes, sometimes for months or years on end, always say that when the rain starts, they begin to feel scared again. We must reinforce a feeling of reassurance that the tasks that we undertake will be effective. There will always be flooding. Some properties will always be affected by flooding. It cannot be eliminated, but there are actions that we can take to reduce the risk of flooding, which is precisely what we will do. The constant theme of the debate has been that we have a good bill here. The environment organisations say that the bill is good. The political parties say that the bill is good. Our job is to work together to make that good bill substantially better. We are trying to do so and I am pleased that we have been able to move forward on a range of issues today, just as we were able to move forward after the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on flooding. We accepted a large number of that report's recommendations and integrated them into our thinking on the bill. However, genuine differences remain. I start with finance. I have heard the issue discussed today in terms that I do not recognise. The formula is entirely clear. It is not a formula that has been imposed by the Government. It was negotiated with COSLA and has been agreed with COSLA. The formula is in three parts. First, existing flood schemes under way when the formula came into effect at the start of the last financial year were honoured. Secondly, schemes that had been published—that is schemes that were in the process of going through—were honoured. Thirdly, the rest of the money was divided, not on a crude population basis but on the basis of properties at risk according to the SEPA flood map. That is the formula that operates now and local authorities, through COSLA, acceded to it; indeed, they suggested it. The formula is not set in stone, however, and, in any new funding round it is possible that it will be developed or changed. It is the outcomes that are more important than anything else. Once we have better information and are more confident about what measures to use to address flooding problems, the funding pattern might well be able to change. It is important to recognise that the current allocation of money was made on the basis of what local authorities asked for and had in place. I must say to Mr Purvis, with the greatest respect—and not falling out with him politically—that there was no Selkirk scheme. No authority had brought  forward or published a Selkirk scheme. It has been admitted by Dr Murray—and I am grateful to her—that there was no Dumfries scheme. One had never been published. There was no agreed scheme, and the local authority had not come forward with one. Local authorities must come forward with their schemes and we will consider them.

I would be happy to have a meeting about that, and I have repeatedly said that we are open to discussion about existing schemes that have changed in their nature. I am not making any guarantees, but I am open to discussion. It is important that we understand what the financial provisions are and how they operate. They are not crude provisions made solely on the basis of population; they are fairly sophisticated provisions made in negotiation with COSLA. I am happy to continue discussing the matter, but those are the facts. Let me say a word or two about what we are trying to do. A great deal of work has been done so far. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee produced a very good report and we are in active participation, debate and co-operation with the committee. At stage 2, we will continue that process. As the bill progresses, the Government will continue, I hope, to foster that feeling of consensus about what we are trying to achieve, and that will help us, along with the committee, to make a good bill better still. We also wish to focus on some things that, although not central to the bill, are important. The support that the Scottish Government is giving to the Scottish Flood Forum is very important. The National Flood Forum has been of enormous benefit to people south of the border and the Scottish Flood Forum, funded by the Scottish Government, is now firmly established and is providing support to communities and individuals who are threatened by flooding. Those members who have constituents with such problems should talk to the forum. Some further issues are germane. One is that of insurance, which was raised by Helen Eadie. The agreement with the Association of British Insurers is now in place. After 150 parliamentary questions from and three meetings with Helen Eadie—in one of them, I think that we were talking about different cases, which would explain a great deal—I have not been able to satisfy Helen Eadie. [ Laughter. ] It does happen. In those circumstances, I would  welcome it if Helen Eadie lodged an amendment, so that some higher court can eventually decide on the issue that she has raised, which is important. If we do not build on flood plains, we severely limit certain types of development—and we would have to evacuate half the central belt. If that is the effect of the amendment that Helen Eadie wishes to lodge, I will allow the argument to speak for itself. The issue of emergency response was raised in the debate. That does not come under the bill, but the provisions for flood mapping and the transposition of the European directive will help to inform the whole process of emergency response. There will be a sharper, more effective emergency response on flooding because we will be able to deal with it more accurately with respect to where it takes place. I am conscious of the shortage of time, Presiding Officer, but let me deal with one or two other issues. We are having serious discussions with Scottish Water about how its plans dovetail with the bill. It is one of the bodies that is responsible for delivery. I am sure that its methodology and actions will develop as a result of the bill. The central concern of some members was about a lack of skills. Alasdair Morgan's and Roseanna Cunningham's suggestion that all young people should train as hydrologists was an interesting one. I cannot manufacture hydrologists out of nowhere. I do not deny that there is a shortage of hydrologists, but the bill will require not only the skills of hydrology but those of cartography, engineering and, importantly, environmentalism. Not all the solutions under the bill lie in the realm of hydrology. I encourage those who are keen to work in those other areas to work with us on the bill. I commend the bill to Parliament and I look forward to stage 2, when everybody will work to make this good bill better.

That statement was published—signed—on the day I gave evidence to the committee in December.

When I gave evidence to the committee, the member expressed an interest in that issue, which I assure him we take seriously. I have considered the questions that he asked and the evidence that the committee heard. We are preparing to lodge an amendment that will require local authorities to prepare a schedule of maintenance works. That will take care of the supervision of watercourses, because local authorities will know where they are and a duty to work on them will exist.

I will clear up a misconception. Mr McNulty made a comment about the population basis of the formula, which the member has repeated. The agreement with COSLA is simple. The allocation of money was done on a threefold basis, and was agreed with COSLA, which negotiated the formula. The money was allocated on the basis of, first, schemes that were already known about and, secondly, schemes that were in the pipeline; only thirdly was it allocated on a population basis to do with actual flood risk.  The Belwin formula, under which money is brought forward, and the SRDP are not population based. The formula that is being used is not a crude, population-based formula.

I want to emphasise the point that the member has just made. It is important to recognise that under the planning system, for example, the use of certain porous materials in building roads and patios and in other areas can make an enormous contribution. Methods to contain flooding exist outwith the bill, but we are conscious that they need to be joined up with other legislation and regulations.

As I stressed in evidence to the committee, I do not believe that there is a presumption in favour of hard solutions. There has been such an approach, but it is changing rapidly and our concession to the committee's recommendation, whereby the most sustainable solution will always be sought, will allow us to take forward the reality of what is beginning to take place.

I met representatives of Forestry Commission trade unions on 4 November 2008, when we published a consultation paper on the forestry provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. I have met union members since then at a number of consultation events. To help all staff consider the possible implications of those provisions, senior officials in Forestry Commission Scotland have organised staff meetings in Edinburgh, Stirling, Inverness, Perth, Aviemore, Oban, Dumfries and Stranraer. I have also met staff at other meetings.

No—I will not give that commitment, and I will tell Bill Butler why. I have not seen the proposals, and it would be very foolish of me to commit to proposals that I have not seen. However, I have said repeatedly to everybody involved in the consultation—particularly to those who are willing to listen and debate, which includes a number of people in the forestry sector but very few from the Labour or Liberal seats in Parliament—that I am entirely open to other ideas. Indeed, I have said repeatedly that a monopoly of wisdom on the issue does not lie in any one place and that the proposals can be improved. I stress again that there is no threat to jobs and that there is a triple jobs guarantee, which I gave at the meeting on 4 November 2008 and have given at every discussion since. I have also made it as clear as I can that the prospect of spending up to £200 million on forestry-related activity in Scotland will produce more jobs, not fewer. Perhaps Mr Butler would like to reflect on the salient fact that more than 1,000 Forestry Commission jobs were lost in the past 10 years, which is of course when Mr Butler's party and the Liberal Democrats—who have been active in the campaign but appear nowhere today—were the parties in power. They cost Scotland 1,000 Forestry Commission jobs. I want to increase the number of forestry jobs in rural Scotland.

There are a number of possible options. However, one of the great difficulties that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament have is that—bizarrely, in the world of democracy—the Government cannot borrow. It is also a Government that does not have full tax powers at its command. The classic means by which we could increase the amount of planting in Scotland, which would include tax incentives and mechanisms to support the price of timber—which might include borrowing to undertake activity such as we are talking about, given that it is an early investment in tackling climate change— are not available to this Government. We must therefore be inventive about how we increase the planting rate. We must raise the rate—which is at about 4,000 hectares a year—to 10,000 hectares a year, and we should try to take it higher than that. I am trying to find a way to do that and am open to any and all suggestions. If the suggestion of carbon trading were to be brought forward during the consultation period, I would look at it seriously. However, I must stress to members across the chamber that doing nothing is not an option, and that the worst option of all is to create anxiety through the scaremongering that we have seen, rather than addressing the issue honestly. There are members in the chamber whose behaviour has been disgraceful.

Of course I would encourage schools to make greater use of microgeneration. At the risk of bringing the issue too close to home, I know that my wife's school is using a solar panel and is interested in taking the idea even further. However, there are a range of routes by which such material can come to schools. For example, there have been some interesting innovations by power companies that are assisting schools. I agree that the eco-schools programme has to be driven forward by enthusiastic schools. I do not think it needs more and more layers of bureaucracy—I want the schools themselves to set their priorities. However, I would be very surprised if there were more than a few eco-schools that are not keen on new developments in microgeneration, so I would encourage that to happen. I am quite sure that that will be part of the programme as it evolves. Ken Macintosh will know that the programme is constantly developing, and that new topics come in every year.

I entirely agree that it is not an either/or situation—there are several good initiatives. The eco-schools initiative is specifically designed to involve not only the school, but the whole community. The forest schools movement, which is also successful, has been well supported by the Forestry Commission and other organisations and is involved in transferring a unique range of skills to young people and teachers. I want to encourage many different initiatives and to make it clear that involvement in environmental education, gaining knowledge of the environment and having a much more active relationship with the environment are no longer an option in education, but are part of the main stream.

I, too, congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing tonight's debate. I was not present at the previous debate—I was detained elsewhere for a number of years so was unable to attend—but I am sure that that debate also exposed strongly held views and was thoughtful, as tonight's debate has been. Having read that debate, I do not think that it was quite as free of political invective as tonight's debate will be, because I will make a single political point—Liam McArthur anticipated it, so I shall make it—before addressing the substance of the debate. The important political point that I will make at the beginning is this: whatever Government was in office at this time—whether it was this Government or that of our predecessors, who might have limped on—it would have reached this point. This point has perhaps been exacerbated and come a little sooner by the failure of our predecessors to invest in the scheme. Indeed, our predecessors negotiated the sale of one of the main farms. However, any Government would have got here for a range of reasons. I am glad to say that this Government is producing a range of new possibilities. Having shown the reasons why we have got here, I will go on to talk about the new possibilities that exist.  Not only one but two independent reports have questioned the benefits of the bull hire scheme. I am surprised that no one has mentioned the 2003 report—undertaken for a previous Government—in which the Scottish Agricultural College concluded that the scheme did not represent value for money in terms of genetic improvement of crofters' cattle.

No, I want to make a little progress. I know that the member will dispute the report. That report was unequivocal in suggesting that the scheme did not do what members have claimed for it. That is not to say that the scheme did not do that in the past—John Farquhar Munro was absolutely right to pay tribute to the work of Alastair Coutts—but, by this decade, the scheme was not delivering those advantages. Secondly, I specifically asked members of the Shucksmith inquiry to consider how the bull hire scheme should go forward. Without demur, they said that the scheme needs to be replaced. Therefore, the decision has not been a whim of this Government or of this minister but has been subject to consideration over a period of time. I believe that that consideration would have been reported in the same way to any other Government, which would have found itself in the same position. I will take Liam McArthur's intervention.

I cannot deny the truth, but I am not Fergus Ewing. I was not present at that debate. I regard that report as being part of the mosaic of evidence. Who knows what individuals will say in the heat of debate that might later be quoted against them? I am sure that even Mr McArthur will find himself in that position in future. There are strong reasons why independent advisers have said that the scheme has come to the end of its useful life. Those assessments include problems that exist with state aid. I have not said—and do not say—that the scheme could not continue to run under state aid de minimis arrangements but, as I shall show in a moment, the risk that is run is becoming commensurately greater the more that the scheme costs in terms of individuals. That is a problem. However, the central problem is that a lot of money is being spent on very few people. Only 433 of the 13,000 crofters benefit from the scheme. That is low by anyone's reckoning.  We have not only independent advice that the scheme is not producing the right genetic results, but the Shucksmith committee's consideration of the scheme in the widest context. There is also the basic issue of affordability.

Let me first finish the point, Mr McGrigor. In those circumstances, it is absolutely right for us to ask whether the scheme is the best way in which to spend public money. In September 2007, I raised the issue with the Scottish Crofting Foundation at its annual general meeting and asked it to consider the point. As a Government and a people, we spend something close to £43 million on crofting. It is entirely legitimate for us to do that—the spend is about £1,300 per man, woman and child—but we must constantly ask whether the money is targeted in the right way and whether it is producing the right result. Regrettably, in this case, it is not. However, there are alternatives.

I am afraid that the productivity of individual bulls is a matter on which I am not nearly as well briefed as Mr McGrigor is. I take his word for it. In 2004, when the cost per hire rose to £500, there was a decline in take-up. If the scheme were to continue into the future, the cost would have to rise to £1,250. That near 150 per cent increase in charges would result in yet lower take-up. There is no doubt that take-up is cost sensitive. In those circumstances, the economics and benefits of the scheme would no longer stack up. It does no service to either crofting or crofting interests in Scotland to deny that. The important thing is to find alternatives.

No. I want to make progress. Indeed, I need to; I have only two minutes remaining and I want to lay out some alternatives. First, as we have said, stud farm bulls will be offered to ex-hire groups at a set cost. That will allow appropriate groups the opportunity to adjust to the ending of the hire scheme and to set up their own hire operations, should they wish to do so. Alasdair Allan pointed to the difficulties in doing that, but there are circumstances in which it will be appropriate. We have made it clear that the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme can provide assistance  with building overwintering facilities and for the transportation costs that are involved in overwintering on the mainland. SRDP money will be made available for alternatives. Of course, there is always the alternative of artificial insemination. I am pleased to say that I can add to the package. I want to ensure that crofters get independent advice. People fear that they do not know enough to be in this market. That is a problem. I encourage any organisation that has experience to come forward and make a proposal to offer targeted, individual advice to crofters on bull hire, the use of artificial insemination and other methods. I am certain that that could be assisted under the SRDP and in other ways. Indeed, I imagine that bodies such as the Scottish Agricultural College and possibly even the Scottish Crofting Foundation would find it useful to offer such services. Liam McArthur spoke of emerging alternatives. If people have a scheme that they want to bring about, I am happy to sit down with them and discuss the matter. All that I am saying is that the current scheme does not, cannot and will not work. I have overrun my time, Presiding Officer, and I am aware that you are keen to conclude the debate. My final point is this: I want the resources that are tied up in the scheme to be liberated for the benefit of crofting. I have said a number of times that I want the benefit that will accrue from the sale of stud farms to be applied to crofting. I want to ensure that we take no money out of crofting. I am repeating myself, but I say again: it does no benefit to crofting to carry on with things that do not work. We have to find things that work. That is what I am devoted to doing.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

In May last year, I had the pleasure of launching the second phase of Forestry Commission Scotland's woods in and around towns programme. That three-year, £24 million programme continues to support the creation and management of urban woodlands to help deliver health, education and regeneration benefits to people who live and work in Scotland's towns and cities. The programme now supports around 140 schemes, and we are all working hard to ensure that that figure continues to increase.

That is an interesting idea. I am enthusiastic about the work of the range of organisations in this field, and Drumchapel is an inspirational example. The Forestry Commission is in close contact with local authorities, community groups, woodland organisations and, indeed, landowners to ensure that there is a comprehensive awareness of the woods in and around towns challenge fund and the forestry for people challenge fund. Interest in those funds remains high, and the results of the first judging round will be announced later this month. High-priority locations for woodland creation have been identified through the work of local initiatives, such as the central Scotland forest and the Glasgow and Clyde green valley network, and by using data sources that are available to the Forestry Commission, such as its social investment through forestry tool and the register of vacant and derelict land. Individual members have a role, too: knowing that there is interest in their communities, they will be welcome to approach me or the Forestry Commission directly for further information.

I am not concerned about that in the slightest, because it is simply not going to happen. The reality is that the funding that I have just mentioned will continue to be available, including, I hope, in future tranches of funding and spending rounds. There is no relationship between the two sets of funding, so I would advise the member to look at the facts and not to listen to some of the spin from her Westminster colleague who has been particularly active in spinning a web on this matter that has little contact with reality.

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this debate and absolutely agree with his opening remark that this is about the churches' active involvement with and leadership in the community. Indeed, it is all about communication, which is a central aim, along with mitigation and adaptation, of the Government's climate change programme. Although this issue affects every one of us, some people have to be drawn to change. Eco-congregations play a considerable role in that respect. Every member who has spoken has mentioned some church or other that is in the programme; I will mention a church that, I have to say, is not in my area. Earlier today, Mr John Swinney told me about Auchtergaven and Moneydie parish church in Bankfoot and the efforts of that congregation to recreate the church after the original building burned down; to involve the wider community in its work and to provide a spiritual and physical centre for the community. Those efforts have been helped by leadership not only from the church but from individuals. The Rev Iain McFadzean, for example, has acted as a leader in allowing that church to rise again in the community and in setting an example of how to construct an environmentally friendly and entirely sustainable building within a community. I am sure  that there are people in each eco-congregation who provide such leadership. The debate is not just about leadership and community; it is also about spirituality—and we should not be afraid to say so. Tackling climate change is a spiritual and moral imperative for many congregations. Stewardship, interdependence, justice and international development issues come within that. Indeed, members who have read Alastair McIntosh's works will know perfectly well that the connection between climate change and spirituality needs to be made. We need to recognise the imperatives that operate in the area. The church plays an important role in all our communities. It tackles poverty and social exclusion, it is involved in regeneration and community cohesion, and it deals with some of the most difficult and intractable social issues. It deserves recognition. It adds enormous value to the lives of innumerable individuals and to communities. Scotland would be a much poorer place without its rich and diverse religious heritage and the active work of all the churches. Scotland also has a future in which the climate change problems that we face and the responses that individuals, communities and the nation can make to them must be recognised. The church is definitely living up to its mission by including climate change and responsive environmentalism in that mission and ensuring that it leads with those issues. How can it do that? I will deal with one or two points that have been made. Mr McNulty referred to the £27.4 million climate challenge fund, which we debated in the chamber last week. The fund was launched in June, and 190 expressions of interest have already been made. I understand that eco-congregations have already expressed interest in it, as Mr McNulty said. The grants panel met today. When the eco-congregations make a formal application to it, I am sure that it will be enthusiastic. I cannot anticipate the outcome of the panel's consideration, but such an application sounds like the type of thing that it will be interested in. That is only one area in which the Government can and does support the eco-congregations movement: I understand that climate change officials will meet the movement early in January, when they will be able to draw attention to the various other ways in which churches can be assisted. Many churches are historic buildings. Historic Scotland can offer sustainability advice and guidance on how to improve the energy efficiency of traditional buildings. An energy efficient church will have substantially more resources, as fuel costs are very high. Historic Scotland has, for example, grant aided St John's church in Edinburgh. Repairs were carried out to  the building's stonework and windows, which eliminated draughts, created a warmer church and reduced carbon emissions. That is practical Government action that assisted a church.

I do not think that it has been further delayed. The Government is enthusiastic about microgeneration and energy efficiency, and I hope that we will drive forward those things with the Liberal Democrats' support. Churches are, of course, eligible for support through the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. Advice and encouragement have been provided under that initiative for projects such as the Bridge of Allan parish church's solar panels and heat pumps project and Yester kirk's biomass heating project. Interest-free loans of up to £100,000 are available under the scheme for the installation of energy-efficient and small-scale renewable technologies on church buildings. The energy saving Scotland advice network, which can also offer advice and support, was created earlier this year. There is a range of means by which support can be offered; I have described only some. Mr Kelly mentioned Burnside Blairbeth church in Glasgow, which recently received advice under the Government-funded envirowise programme, as has Scottish churches house in Dunblane. There is also the smarter choices, smarter places project, which will create seven sustainable travel demonstration communities in towns and cities in Scotland. I am sure that churches will be deeply involved in those movements. Many things are happening and the eco-congregation movement can take advantage of and be plugged into all of them. Also important is the fact that the movement can influence all of them, because there is a two-way street. The learning, experience and enthusiasm of eco-congregations must tie in to the Government's policies and plans, so that we learn from the movement. I welcome the commitment of Scotland's churches and faith groups through their involvement in the eco-congregation movement. I congratulate all members who have spoken in the debate but, much more, I congratulate the 200-plus churches that are trailblazing. The reality, of course, is that every congregation will have to become an eco-congregation as time goes by. Mr McArthur mentioned the eco-school movement in Scotland, which started small but is now the largest in the world—it involves virtually every primary school in Scotland and is developing into  secondary schools. I hope that, in time, every congregation in Scotland will be an eco-congregation, because they will see at the centre of their mission and concern the questions of sustainability and a better planet.   Meeting closed at 17:45.

I suppose that, in the spirit of the debate, I should thank Patrick Harvie's mother for creating the circumstances in which this debate has come about. I also congratulate Patrick Harvie on securing the debate and I thank my colleague Richard Lochhead, who has worked closely with Mr Harvie and others in bringing the fund into being. I mention at the outset those who are here from the groups that have applied successfully to the fund. Their enthusiasm is driving it forward. It does not reflect well on a lot of members that those people outnumber us considerably this evening. The fund is about empowering communities to take the lead in the current economic climate; to reduce their carbon emissions; to save money; and to set an example for every one of us. I am grateful to Margaret Curran for her support. I would never expect her to be anything other than assertive. I expect that there is great veracity in her account of what happens at her dinner table; I suspect that the mood would be argumentative. The fund, which amounts to £27.4 million in 2008 to 2011, will enable communities to take direct action on climate change. I am glad to say that communities are coming forward in huge numbers to lead projects. There was latent demand in Scotland for communities to have access to resources to undertake this type of activity and to deliver real change and real carbon emission reductions. The fund was launched six months ago in June 2008 and, already, we have had 190 expressions of interest. Some 36 community projects have been funded to date, including four exemplar projects, which I will mention in a moment. Another grants panel—the panel is independent—is due to meet on 17 December to consider 30 further projects involving more than 60 communities.  The crucial point is that it is communities that are eligible for the fund. The fund puts resources into the hands of people who know what they want to do and are able to do it. We have insisted strongly that communities should lead the fund. That is working well, although some non-governmental organisations are also involved in supporting the communities by providing information and assistance. Presiding Officer, you will be interested to know that the total estimated carbon savings for the panel-approved projects to date are 52,574 tonnes of CO 2 . That is an actual achievement that we are going to see. The fund is well resourced and will carry on over the period that we have set for it, so the figure for carbon savings will continue to grow quickly. We will continue to encourage community-led projects. The fund is well resourced and communities can access it easily—we want to ensure that they do so. A number of members have raised the issue of allotments. It is vital that they are included. Some interesting work is being done in that regard. The Toryglen gardening club, which has been mentioned, has received £135,000 to maintain community gardens, orchards and woodland and to sell the produce to the community through local outlets or box schemes. Many communities could find available land; indeed, the Government has said that Government-owned land is available, which we want to release for the purpose of local food production, to allow people to gain experience of growing food in their community. I encourage people in every community out there who think that there would be a demand for allotments—I suspect that that would be the case in virtually every community—to think about how they could fulfil that ambition, to discuss it with the council and the Government and to find a way to apply. I turn to the four exemplar projects, which are used to give direction, to act as examples for the purpose of knowledge transfer and to provide an inspiration to community groups. The Perth and Kinross carbon reduction project has been awarded almost £300,000 over three years to launch a groundbreaking project to reduce the carbon footprint of a whole village, in partnership with Perth and Kinross Council and Scottish and Southern Energy. The money has gone to the Comrie Development Trust. People all over Scotland will be able to learn the lessons from that. Barra and Vatersay Community Ltd is to receive £62,000 over two years to develop a community-led action plan for the first practical steps on carbon reduction. Of course, Barra and Vatersay have won the United Kingdom and Scottish Calor village of the year competition as a result of their  wide variety of community activities to protect and enhance the environment. I was lucky to launch the start of the Scottish crofting produce mark in Vatersay just six weeks ago. The going carbon neutral Stirling project will receive £750,000 over three years for capacity building across an incredible 520 community groups and working with them to develop action plans across the Stirling area that involve all the community. Its partners include the Big Lottery Fund, Stirling Council and WWF. Today, we have heard about the transition towns; Shirley-Anne Somerville described how effective those are. Transition initiatives are community-backed groups that are concerned about climate change and peak oil. The climate challenge fund is supporting the transition movement as an exemplar. We will continue to engage ever more closely with the partners that I have mentioned and many others to support the community delivery of projects, recognising the fact that they are in the lead of the changes that need to take place in Scotland. In the current economic climate, projects such as the Comrie, Alyth and Letham street-by-street energy efficiency project will not only attract media interest but mean new jobs and opportunities for people in the area.  The climate challenge fund is a good example of how Government can make a difference. Of course, it can do that only if it works across parties and across communities, which is exactly what we are doing in this project. I am glad that so many people—even some MSPs tonight—have expressed support for the initiative. I look forward to its going ahead and to communities benefiting from it over the next three years. Any community that is thinking about the project should stop thinking and start applying now.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

Raptor poisoning is a crime that offends the Scottish public and disfigures our countryside. We are determined to see it consigned to history. We are fully implementing the recommendations in HM inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland's  review of wildlife crime. We have built and strengthened partnership working between all those with an interest in countryside management, including by revitalising the partnership for action against wildlife crime. We are making encouraging progress in much of the country. However, we will not rest until poisoning ceases to be a problem anywhere in Scotland. We will use all the tools at our command to achieve that end.

Christina McKelvie makes an important point. Many people think that the use of cross-compliance rules has been one of the most significant steps ever taken on wildlife crime in this country and that the approach has brought defining moments in demonstrating the seriousness of the matter. Of course, cross-compliance remains in place. The deliberate killing of a protected bird is a breach under the current cross-compliance legislation and will remain so under the new approach, because the link with article 5(a) of the birds directive will remain in place. That means that if a carcase is found and it can be shown that the bird was deliberately poisoned under the responsibility of a recipient of common agricultural policy payments, that will constitute a breach of cross-compliance. The removal of the link with article 8 of the birds directive from cross-compliance legislation means that there might no longer be a breach if poisoned bait but no carcase is found. However, I stress that the use of plant protection products that are not approved under the Plant Protection Products (Scotland) Regulations 2005 (SSI 2005/331) will constitute a breach of cross-compliance legislation. That means that the use of carbofuran—the most common chemical that is used to poison raptors in Scotland—will constitute a breach of cross-compliance legislation. Therefore, cross-compliance will continue to be one of the most significant tools in our armoury for the defeat of wildlife crime.

Yes. I have had such discussions. Dr Murray is absolutely right to draw attention to the fact that we need to keep better and better figures on what is taking place in the countryside. I will continue to discuss with my colleagues the ways in which we can do that. More reporting—and we are having more reporting—will help police officers and others to realise the seriousness of the matter, as a result of which they will press for better classification.

I have some reservations about linking the two issues under the question heading. Any linkage is utterly wrong. Of course, as Mr McGrigor knows, and has been told, Scottish Natural Heritage is conducting intensive work with crofters on the issue. We have made it clear that we are prepared to act once we have the information to hand. I treat the matter seriously, but it is not linked in any way to wildlife crime, and it should not be.

We should keep the sea eagle issue out of this. There is a continuing problem with poisoning in Scotland. I would be happy to redouble my efforts, but I think that we are running pretty much at full tilt as it is. It is important for Mr Morgan to realise, as many people in Scotland realise, that every effort is being made to ensure that such crime is rigorously investigated, prosecuted and punished. We will continue to do that. The strong impression and fact that we have to get out into Scotland is that crime against wildlife is crime like any other and that it will be punished like any other crime. We are making progress on the issue. It is too early to look at the full figures for the year, but those for the first half indicate that bird poisonings have dropped. I want them to continue to drop. We will do everything to ensure that that happens. Progress is being made. I pay tribute to all the organisations that are involved in that.

I and my officials have frequent meetings with SEPA. I have a wide-ranging quarterly meeting with the chief executive and chairman, I attend a board meeting annually, and there are special meetings on special subjects including flooding. Richard Lochhead met SEPA's chief executive on 8 October to discuss SEPA's contribution to the Scottish Government's economic recovery plan.

We regularly review the state of readiness, as does the civil contingencies group in the Scottish Government. Last year, after the flooding in England and Wales, we took special steps to ensure that the eight regional groups felt that they were adequately prepared. The Flood  Risk Management (Scotland) Bill gives SEPA an enhanced role, including not just flood alert activity, which is extremely important, but flood warning functions. Mr McCabe is right to say that climate change is producing new challenges in relation to flooding. I believe that the bill rises to those challenges.

After my recent discussions with leading representatives of the forestry industry about the impact of the current economic downturn on the sector, I announced a range of measures to help to ease the pressure on hard-pressed businesses. We also discussed the representatives' views on the consultation that I launched last month on climate change and the national forest estate. On 18 December, I will attend a meeting of the Scottish forestry forum to hear further comments on the matter from stakeholders who represent all parts of the sector—economic, social and environmental.

We have just heard from Sarah Boyack a strong statement about the imperatives of climate change, which Mr McCabe also mentioned. It is important for members to consider any proposal that comes forward that could resource actions that would reduce greenhouse gases and make an impact on climate change. Forestry is one area in which that could happen. Of course there is a relationship between these plans. Indeed, the consultation is designed to ask people for their views and to improve the proposals; alternatively, we might reach a stage at which we decide that we cannot take them forward. I encourage Mr Peacock—and every other member who has an interest in the matter—to consider the proposals seriously, to consider the imperatives of climate change, and to be ambitious and thoughtful about the changes that we will have to face.

There are absolute guarantees that that will not be so, and they have been made obvious. In addition, the potential to spend up to £200 million on climate change measures within the forest estate would mean new jobs and new opportunities to enhance the environment. There are many positive things in the proposals. I stress again that there is a consultation on the matter and that members' views are welcome. I hope that members will come forward with their views in a constructive and thoughtful way.

I can see why the latest issue of Am Bratach , the Sutherland magazine, carries a letter that says that Mr Gibson has a deep knowledge of Highland culture. It is clear that he has a deep knowledge of woodlands because he knows how important it is to plant new trees—[ Interruption. ] Jackie Baillie appears to question Mr Gibson's qualifications from a sedentary position; I am sorry that she does so, because Mr Gibson's qualifications to talk upon these matters are great. He knows that community ownership of forests has worked well in the Highlands and Islands. He knows that early investment in climate change measures is recommended by the Stern report. He is taking a forward-looking view. I am afraid that all that we hear from the Labour benches is carping and criticising. Labour members will be judged on their inability to engage with forestry and climate change or to think constructively. It is sad that they are backward looking in forestry as in everything else.

Environmental projects in Fife, and indeed throughout Scotland, are able to access a wide range of funds from across the public sector, including the INCREASE grant scheme, the Scotland rural development programme and the climate challenge fund. The climate challenge fund is focused on climate change, as we all should be.

I do indeed and I had the pleasure of meeting Jack Chalmers and members of the Coaltown of Balgonie community council when I visited the Bleachfield site some weeks ago. It emphasised two things to me: one was that the role of volunteers is extremely important and the other was that communities should be ambitious for their area because things are changing and communities have to change with them—a message that I commend to others in the chamber.

The Scottish Government supports crofting communities by investing in public services and creating opportunities for sustainable economic growth. The rural affairs and environment portfolio currently provides more than £40 million a year in financial support to crofting communities through specific crofting grants, the less favoured areas support scheme and wider agricultural and rural development support.

The SRDP offers the opportunity to access considerable sums of money, and we want to make that as easy as possible. My colleague Richard Lochhead has already announced that there will be a review. The forestry elements are being considered by George McRobbie and his team, and I am grateful for the effort that they are putting in. The previous Government devised the SRDP with stakeholders, and we would like a higher take-up of the scheme, although take-up has already been substantial. To that end, we will ensure that when the review takes place, it will emphasise access—easy access in particular—to the scheme, although many of the schemes are competitive, as they should be. I have addressed those and other issues at crofters' meetings this week in Benbecula and Harris, and the crofting community knows that we are concerned and that we want to move forward. I can offer some specific assistance to John Farquhar Munro: training in computer skills will be available as part of the scheme and, as a retired crofter, he is probably eligible.

I express my gratitude to Dr Elaine Murray, who has filled more than half the time that was available, which means that my summing up will be shorter than hers. I congratulate her, as I have been able to throw away a great deal of material that I would otherwise have commented on. I shall make two points at the outset. First, I was slightly surprised that several members talked about the strange timing of the debate. I cannot imagine that anybody would be suspicious of my motivations, but I will make it clear that it has been sensible to hear MSPs' views before the revised framework is finalised. Of course we intend to discuss it in Parliament following its publication, and of course it will have to interface closely with the provisions in the marine bill. That is entirely accepted. Today's debate has been a good opportunity to hear from members a variety of views that we will integrate into the Government's  thinking. I am grateful to all members who have contributed. Secondly, I say to Rhoda Grant, who raised this issue, that I am passionately committed to reducing bureaucracy. It is a little rich to be criticised for not being so committed when I am trying to deconstruct a system of bureaucracy that was created by her party in government. Nevertheless, I believe that the debate overall has been positive, and I will go through a range of speeches. Many members focused on planning and sites. Members seem to accept that a lack of information has been a difficulty, so we have taken a big step forward today by publishing the map of sites. We now need to do several other things. We know that fin fish production takes place in 263 sites out of the 458 sites that have been consented. There is a gap between the number of consents and the number of sites that are being operated. That gives us an opportunity. We want to develop a siting tool that will allow us to examine all environmental and other considerations—along the lines of the spatial planning to which Mr McNulty referred. Development of the tool will allow informed decisions to be made about exact siting—where opportunities are great and where there are potential difficulties, including with interactions. It is important to note that the SEPA consenting process involves close consideration of the carrying capacity of the environment. No site that would degrade the environment at any stage is consented. In addition, the good practice of rotating cages allows environmental recovery from the small amount of damage that is done. In the summer, I was at a fish farm in Skye that operates the system on three sites: one site is fallow and two are occupied. We are concerned about environmental issues, which our policy on consenting sites allows us to consider. We and the industry are concerned about inconsistencies in the approach to planning. I am glad to say that planning fees are being normalised. The expert working group on sites has gathered information on all sites, and inactivity will be a factor in the system for deciding future priorities. There is much work to be done, but we recognise that a modern approach to sites is needed. We must also remember that the cost of production is often dependent on the site, its carrying capacity and the size of the installation. If the industry is to remain competitive in Scotland, it will have to recognise the drive towards larger and more efficient sites that is taking place in Norway, for example, but it will have to do so with full recognition of the environmental difficulties that  such an approach may cause. I am sympathetic to the environmental points that the RSPB makes but, as ever, we must ensure that we strike a balance between environmental issues and commercial imperatives in a sensitive and forward-looking way.

I entirely endorse the member's view. Working in partnership and co-operation is a huge issue for the industry. Other important issues have been raised. For example, Mr Peacock mentioned the protection of shellfish waters. There are some inconsistencies, which we are trying to drive out, but it is important to recognise that 112 waters in Scotland—the number was previously 105—are now protected under the shellfish waters directive. Seven waters—Loch Ailort, Sandsound Voe, Baltasound Voe, East of Burki Taing, Muckle Roe, South Wick and Loch Fyne coastal strip—were designated this month. In 2007, shellfish growing waters achieved 100 per cent compliance with standards. We are always aware that the quality of the environment and of the water is what makes the industry successful, because it makes for a first-class product. Environmental and commercial issues must be kept in balance, and we will endeavour to do that. As new species are introduced, we will have to recognise what they need in terms of clean water and nutrients. I say to Mr Hume that although tilapia is an interesting possibility it flourishes best in the warm waters of the Nile. So far, despite global warming, we do not have the warm waters of the Nile, even in the Solway. The Government intends to support the amendments, but I want to make our position clear on the policy positions that the other parties have helpfully put forward. I will deal first with the amendment in the name of Dr Elaine Murray. The renewed strategy will sit within the marine management provisions of the proposed Scottish marine bill and the marine management organisation. We are entirely aware that we will have to ensure that this set of policy proposals is sensitive to those provisions and that the timing is correct. Aquaculture policy will develop alongside and dovetail with wider EU, UK and Scottish initiatives, including the water framework directive. Dr Murray recited well just some of the conventions and directives that apply in the area and of which we are extremely aware. We are happy to accept in full the two points that she makes.  With regard to the amendment in the name of John Scott, we have a robust commitment to reduce the number of escapes. That is clear under our existing policy and in the renewed framework. Dr Murray asked how that had been achieved. Despite what Mr McArthur claimed, I do not have a net and some very large waders that I am using to block the escape of the 66,000 fish I talked about.

I am sure it is a pity, but they just do not exist. The combination of a number of factors has allowed progress to be made. One is zero tolerance. The Government has zero tolerance of escapes. Escapes should not take place on the scale that they have been, and the figure of 200,000 plus was a nonsense. Good practice means running a fish farm in a way that stops escapes. A further factor is continued investment—ensuring that investment is up to date and that equipment does not fail. There is also new technology. All those things have come together. The biggest factor is determination that escapes should not happen. The figure for escapes in Norway is substantially lower than the figure here. It simply should not be happening, and we are continuing to press the matter. I entirely respect the view of the angling community, which thinks that escapes are a big downside to fish farming in Scotland. Good neighbourliness will develop for a variety of reasons, one of which will be if escapes stop happening. Sea lice infection is of great concern to us. Inspections for sea lice and containment under the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 will commence next week. We will continue to work with others, including other countries—we are working with Norway on the matter—to ensure that we have the right regime for sea lice. Reduced escapes and sea lice issues are key themes of our approach under the "Fresh Start" document. The traceability of escaped fish is a further issue. If escapes take place, we want to know where and why they happened. There is of course a legal requirement to report them. The industry knows that we mean business on that. John Scott spoke about Gyrodactylus salaris. I appreciate the points that he made, and he is absolutely right that we should eliminate any threat from well boats—but we already do that. Legislation bans imports from GS-diseased areas. That will continue. We have guarantees that there will not be such imports. We are able to regulate imports from all diseased areas, and we are doing so. We have a Gyrodactylus salaris contingency plan in place and we have a concordat with the Norwegian Government on the provision of  assistance and expertise should we have an outbreak—which we absolutely intend not to have. [ Interruption. ] Finally—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am very glad that you have found the subject interesting. I do, and many members do. Had some other members been here during the afternoon, they would have learned a great deal. In the few minutes still available to me, I shall give them some information. For example, the regular public awareness campaigns on the dangers of introducing the parasite go on. Most recently, the BBC went on a G salaris fact-finding mission to Norway. The Scottish Government was there too, and we now have a new video on YouTube, which helps. We will continue to push the matter. Dr Murray looks surprised. We continually place on YouTube videos that give interesting information. Finally—[ Interruption. ] There is even one about beavers, which I made myself. I do not want to self-advertise at this late stage in the day, though. Finally, I turn to Mr Hume's amendment. As I have mentioned, we are developing a concordat—a memorandum of understanding—for mutual benefit between Scotland and Norway. Regulation is a key issue, but everything I have said today is about reducing the burden of regulation, and all the organisations involved know that the guiding principle from the Government is that regulations should encourage good practice and not just stamp out bad practice. That is what is happening in the aquaculture industry, as in every other. Significant advances have been made in streamlining the aquaculture regulatory burden. A new framework will be made to facilitate a further lightening of the load—rather than to increase it. A lot of things are imposed on us; our job is to ensure that we do not impose on others. The renewed framework will highlight skills issues. I take issue with Mr McArthur—the skills issue is included, and the framework highlights the importance of the industry in rural and other parts of Scotland. This has been a good and productive debate in which many other points that I do not have time to cover have been made. I was startled at one stage to hear Rob Gibson call for us to serve lobster as Christmas dinner. I cannot imagine lobster with bread sauce, but no doubt somebody has done and is already making it. That point aside, the aquaculture industries in Scotland are good industries with huge potential and they are doing well. Our job as a Government is not to get in their way; our job is to encourage their development. The debate has provided us with a lot of information about how to do that. I am grateful to  all members who participated. I hope that, like me, they will support not just the motion but all the amendments.

I understand that priority goes to Norway and Chile and that we are the third-largest producer in the world, but Norway is not a member of the European Union, of course.

It is surprising to hear that an offence was created, given that the Norwegian foreign minister and the Norwegian ambassador were at pains to say publicly that no offence had been created, and to apologise for any other impression. I would not want the member to mislead Parliament about matters Norwegian, nor about any other matter.

The member raises an important point. The marine spatial planning powers in the marine bill will be extremely important not just because of cost considerations, but because all users of the marine environment need to be considered as legitimate users. The map that we have produced is of vital importance because it shows us, for the first time, where fish  farms and shellfish farms are so that we can ensure that they fit into the matrix.

I know that the member regards me as being capable of achieving much, but I am not capable of implementing a massive and unwieldy bureaucracy in 18 months. If such a thing exists, it was created by her Government; if it does not exist—I do not think that it does and we are, of course, always lessening the burden of bureaucracy—what she has said is wrong and unfair. One way or another, she is wrong.

It is important to note the difficulty that was experienced in Scotland with overproduction and dumping on the market. We need to remain vigilant about that. I am sure that the member will acknowledge that we have said publicly that, should it recur, we will immediately seek renewed action at a European level.

The member raises an important issue, but it was not possible to address the matter in a comprehensive way until we knew where all the sites were. Incredibly, the work that has been done on sites over the past year has enabled us for the first time to map them and to compare them with designated sites in Scotland. That will allow informed decision making for the first time.

Will the member give way?

It is to correct an inaccuracy.

I am very pleased to introduce the debate. I will start with some facts, if members will bear with me while I recite them—this is a bit of a litany, but they are worth remembering. In Scotland in 2007, we produced 130,000 tonnes of farmed salmon, and the figure is estimated to rise to about 136,000 tonnes this year. Farmed salmon is worth around £380 million, which is more than the value of our catching sector. We also produce about 7,500 tonnes of farmed rainbow trout, brown trout and sea trout, worth about £10 million, and smaller amounts of cod, halibut and Arctic char. We have a highly successful shellfish sector in Scotland; we grow more than 5,000 tonnes, worth more than £5 million. Production is dominated by mussels and Pacific oysters, with small quantities of native oysters and queen and king scallops. We are the largest producer of farmed salmon in the European Union and the third-largest producer in the world, behind Norway and Chile. In 2006, the value of all fish exports from Scotland, including aquaculture produce, was £425 million, which accounts for 61 per cent of all food exports. Farmed salmon supports 1,195 direct jobs in salmon production and 3,733 full-time, part-time and seasonal jobs in salmon processing—a significant number. Even with today's dispiriting news from Inverness, the sector continues to operate well and the projections are good. Production of trout and other fin fish supports an additional 247 jobs, with another 292 in processing, and shellfish production supports about 400 jobs. There are about 6,000 aquaculture jobs in total, most of which are in remote and coastal areas in the Highlands and Islands. Scotland has a tremendously important aquaculture industry. The industry also makes a worldwide contribution. In 1980, only 9 per cent of the fish consumed throughout the world came from aquaculture; today, the figure is 43 per cent. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization reports that aquaculture is now seen as the only way to meet the increasing demand for seafood. The quality of what we produce in Scotland is high. Scottish salmon has held the French Government's top quality award, the label rouge,  since 1992, and was the first non-French food to receive that accolade. Scottish farmed salmon enjoys protected geographical indication status alongside Arbroath smokies, Parma ham and Scotch beef.

Black pudding is soon to come, as Mr Peacock shouts from a sedentary position—perhaps he has had too much. Aquaculture is a good-news story and we must build on our success. However, in the past year there have been difficulties that we have needed to overcome, and there are more difficulties ahead. I point particularly to the loss of the minimum intervention price, which we fought hard to maintain, but which was not maintained. People in the industry are working together, however, and there is every indication that that difficulty has been overcome. We have taken advantage of the change to re-establish a good relationship with Norway in particular. In my meeting with the Norwegian minister, Helga Pedersen, earlier this year, I agreed to develop a memorandum of understanding between the Scottish Government and the Norwegian Ministry of Fisheries and Coastal Affairs, to share expertise and experience in areas of common interest in aquaculture. We are moving ahead in a way that is underpinned by our ambitious vision for aquaculture in Scotland. We want a sustainable, ambitious, thriving, growing, diverse and profitable Scottish industry. We believe that Scotland's coastal waters provide excellent conditions for further growth in the fin-fish and shellfish farming industries. When I opened the Scottish shellfish farming conference in Oban just a month ago, I discussed with delegates the potential for growth and expansion. The Scottish Government is committed to forward planning for the industry. Next spring, we will launch a new five-year framework for continued success and growth in the industry. The process of putting together the framework, branded a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture, has been inclusive, consultative and collaborative. The Government is not the creator of the industry, but we recognise the important role that we can play in facilitating growth and development driven by the industry in co-operation with communities in rural Scotland. Our fresh start proposals incorporate the industry's own seven-point plan for growth, which looks at a range of issues, including environmental ones. The consultation is now closed and although the responses are still being analysed, the early impression is that stakeholders broadly support the key themes that we have included in the  framework: health; planning consents and sites; containment; markets, marketing and image; and finance. Our policy will be based around those themes. Of course, we are also mindful of present challenges. I was struck by the questions that were asked during the previous item of business and the question that Tavish Scott asked the Deputy First Minister this morning about some of the threats to growth and small businesses. Aquaculture is a sector in which there have been financial threats aplenty in the past. The support of the banks is vital to the industry. Some of the stories that I have been hearing in recent weeks of unilateral changes in terms and conditions are very worrying indeed. The industry is vital for Scotland, so we have to ensure that it is helped forward in difficult times—and in good times, too. The support of the banks is important, and I am making that point to them. Provided that they give that support, we can have a profitable aquaculture sector in Scotland. We have included the sector in our economic recovery plan. I am happy to say that the European fisheries fund opened to bids on 15 September. We face a challenge, which I am bringing forward today. By the end of the year, we will have money available for projects that are of the most strategic importance and which will have the biggest and most immediate impact on the industry's needs. Today, we published a new map of Scotland that shows for the first time the location of all the fin-fish and shellfish farms. We have a fantastic coastline but there is a need for strategic investment, and the European fisheries fund could help in that regard. We are also helping by bringing forward further legislation. The marine bill will enhance planning and sustainability in Scottish aquaculture. If we have a strategically sited industry—the new map shows that we have that, but we could do better—we can also develop what we need: an environmentally sensitive and socially responsive industry, which is extremely important. The industry has been criticised as a bad neighbour that does not respect those among whom it lives. That needs not to be true if the industry is to go forward. The industry, the wild fish sector and the community must live in harmony. To date, I have been very pleased with the work of the tripartite working group, but I acknowledge that the wild fish sector continues to have concerns about the operation of the aquaculture sector. I am sure that we will hear about those concerns during the debate. Of course, fish farming has some impact on wild Atlantic salmon and sea trout stocks. We know that along the west coast of Scotland a decline in  wild stocks began before fish farming arrived and that stock recovery to date has been patchy. Some stocks, particularly of sea trout, are severely depleted. The reasons for that are complex and multifactoral. Fish farming might be one of the contributing factors, but it is not the only factor. Even so, the tripartite working group structure is designed to assist in those circumstances. I have pushed strongly and positively the working group's priorities. This month, we launched a new inspection regime under the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007, which will help to enforce the good practice that exists, supported by the industry itself. We have worked very hard on—and, as many members know, I have put my support behind—achieving a dramatic reduction in escapes. In 2006, 204,749 fish were lost, and in 2007, 210,643 fish were lost. Those figures are absolutely unacceptable. I am glad to say that, in the year to date, the figure is 66,471. However, that is still too many and we will continue to drive the figure down, just as we will continue to ensure that problems of health and lice infestation are tackled effectively. We have new regulation in place to encourage and ensure best practice. We have published the fish farm sites map. We are challenging the industry to optimise existing sites. We have developed a siting and database management tool. We are bringing forward funding under the EFF, having accelerated the opening of that programme to ensure that people take part. We have driven down the number of escapes and we have got through a difficult period in which the loss of the minimum import price at least rattled the industry. More than that, we have shown that we are behind the industry and the work that it wishes to do. We are also behind its economic impact, which is vital to Scotland, and to rural Scotland in particular. For all those reasons, our aquaculture industry can do well and go on doing well. Even with the challenges on consumption in the domestic market, I am glad that the industry believes that production has not yet been affected and that opportunities lie ahead. The favourable dollar to pound exchange rate and the gaps in supply in the USA because of a drop in production in Chile, for example, provide opportunities at a time when some might think that threats were appearing. Indeed, the number of salmon servings that are consumed in the UK increased by 22 per cent from 179 million two years ago to 219 million this year. For all those reasons, the debate is about a positive: the Government is taking positive action. It would be appropriate if that action were the  subject of consensual debate and the Parliament's unanimous support. I move, That the Parliament notes the recent consultation, Scottish Aquaculture: A Fresh Start; supports the continued development of an ambitious, sustainable, thriving and growing Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; supports efforts to advance the enviable international reputation of quality Scottish aquaculture products, built on high environmental standards and excellent health status when compared to competitor nations, and welcomes the engagement of the shellfish and finfish industries and other stakeholders in the development of the new Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture, to be published in spring 2009.

This is an important issue. The recovery and disposal of CFCs in demolition waste forms part of a European Commission proposal to recast and amend the existing European Community regulation covering the elimination of man-made ozone-depleting substances. In light of that proposal, the Scottish Government is working with the United Kingdom Government and the building industry to assess the current infrastructure that is available for disposal of materials containing ozone-depleting substances from buildings that are being demolished, and the technical and economic issues that may arise.

I am happy to ensure that SEPA provides the member with information on the enforcement action that has been taken under the present regulation. As the member is aware, we are dealing with the way in which the regulation will be recast and recodified to meet increasing need; his question referred to that. On 28 November, the European Union working party on the environment will discuss a firm proposal for regulations. The Government is keen that the existing regulation should be recast in an effective way, and we are taking SEPA's advice on the issue. As soon as the regulation has been recast, we will take all appropriate steps to ensure that the building industry and some wider organisations are aware of the issues and act promptly and effectively to ensure that releases of CFCs do not  take place, because such releases make a significant contribution to climate damage.

The member raises an issue of importance. We must ensure that we do not keep our eye on a single ball—there are many balls in the air, so to speak. However, I hope that when the bill is published the member will be satisfied by the actions for which it provides. If he is not, I am certain that he will say so.

The member will be aware of the report from RSPB Scotland that was published on 30 October, which issued details of the levels of seabird breeding success on the RSPB's Scottish coastal reserves. The key issues that were highlighted in that report include a substantial lack of breeding success for the Arctic tern, Arctic skua and kittiwake in 2008. However, "other seabird species appear to be weathering the storm. Great skuas, gannets and cormorants have experienced modest increases in their numbers, while herring gulls have remained stable." The Scottish Government is committed to protecting our world-renowned seabird populations. We are working closely with bodies such as the RSPB to actively monitor our seabird colonies to find out just what the problems are. To strengthen seabird protection, we have recently consulted on proposals to extend 31 special protection areas into the marine environment, and we expect to make an announcement in the new year. Climate change could well be an important factor. The Scottish Government is taking a leading role in developing our understanding of the impact of climate change on the natural environment. We have announced proposals for an ambitious climate change bill, which will help to develop solutions for global action to moderate the effects of climate change. That should be beneficial.

I am sure that the member would accept that action that we would like to take for the Isle of May must be in the context of action throughout the whole of Scotland and in the context of climate change and variations in the availability of sand eels, in the case of puffins in particular. I am sure that the member is aware that the tendency of puffins to eat pipefish instead of  sand eels when supplies are scarce adds to the problem, as very little nourishment is available from that fish. Scotland has a good track record of being positive with respect to the needs of seabirds. For example, the efforts that were taken at the Wee Bankie off the east coast specifically focused on sand eel availability. We continue to be concerned about the problem and to address it, not just on the Isle of May—which I am concerned about—but in every area where there has been a decline.

The proposed boundaries of the extended areas are based on robust scientific data, but it is obvious that there must also be a justification that local people accept and understand. In all the work that I and my colleague Mr Lochhead have done with communities on such issues, we have been determined to ensure that proposals are acceptable and have support, because the health of the local environment should be important to every citizen. The proposals on Cape Wrath were endorsed in the context of the science by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee and Scottish Natural Heritage. The proposed 2km extension for Cape Wrath is part of the Scottish Government's commitment to protecting seabird populations. I have communicated with the member many times about bombing activities at Cape Wrath, which I think could be undertaken more sensitively—if bombing can ever be undertaken sensitively.

The member makes an important point. There is an extremely limited sand eel fishery—if there is one at all; I would have to come back to the member with the exact details. The decline in sand eels appears to be partly a result of climate change and partly a result of previous overexploitation, which is a problem that we have to address. SNH and others are working to find ways of increasing populations. However,  we must remember that climate change is a factor and will mean change.

The provision of flood defences is of great importance in a time of climate change. Earlier this week I launched the Scottish flood forum, which will support people who are at risk of or have suffered flooding. The Scottish Government has given local authorities the freedom, flexibility and respect to meet national and local priorities and to manage their own resources, as agreed in our concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. That is why in 2008-09 we have rolled up more than 40 specific grants, worth almost £1.7 billion—an amount that includes record sums for flood defences.

I am happy to undertake to write to the member and to co-operate positively with her on this and any other matter. The issue of flooding should unite members of all parties. I am unaware of specific representation. However, the member has more experience as a minister than I have, so she will know that although local authorities and others write to ministers regularly to ask for more resources, that does not mean either that those resources exist or that—perish the thought—the demands are always justified.

We are considering the issue to do with the fire and rescue service, which is the responsibility of my colleague the Minister for Community Safety. I have agreed to meet representatives of a number of bodies to discuss the service's involvement.  We must ensure that there is a speedy, prompt and effective response to any flooding situation. I visited victims of flooding in Broxburn on Monday afternoon and I know the tremendous suffering, upset and disruption that flooding causes, with the tremendous loss of precious items and, occasionally, the loss of life. We must do everything to guard against such loss, which is why the Scottish flood forum is working effectively to support victims of flooding.

By and large, this important debate has been positive and it has produced many interesting ideas and shown the great concern that the Parliament has about the situation. One of the most startling contributions came from Charlie Gordon, who managed to cover Marx, Thatcher and FDR in a single speech. He reminded me of the famous words in FDR's first inaugural address: "There is nothing to fear but fear itself." John Park echoed that in his closing remarks. The worst thing that we could do would be to talk ourselves down and destroy any sense of confidence. What FDR meant and what we must do is ensure that we work hard and that we are confident in the work that we do, so that we can carry Scotland forward in these difficult times. The Scottish people will judge all politicians in Scotland in the same way, both as party members and as members of this Parliament—and, indeed, the other Parliament, too. They will judge us not just on what we do but on how we do it—how we manage to come together and work together. There is no doubt that, like people in other places, we face an economic situation in Scotland that is as severe as most of us have ever seen—perhaps more severe than most of us have ever seen. For people under 30 or 35, it is certainly as severe as—or indeed more severe than—any that they will have experienced in their lifetime. I emphasise that the point is not just what we do but how we do it. I regretted the contribution from Wendy Alexander. I make it absolutely clear that she made a number of points that simply cannot be substantiated. She said that the VisitScotland budget for next year has been slashed, but that simply is not true. VisitScotland's budget, which is set out in the budget document, does not include funding for homecoming. The figures that she quoted are wrong. Funding for VisitScotland will exceed funding for VisitBritain next year. Secondly, she said that the energy efficiency budget will be slashed. We are maintaining energy efficiency spending. We will continue to spend increasing amounts, because it is cross-portfolio spending.

No. I am sorry, but I will not. Wendy Alexander had her opportunity and I want to rebut the points she made, because they are not justifiable. She said that it has taken 50 days since the Lehman Brothers collapse to have this debate in the Scottish Parliament. The clear implication was that ministers had been doing their knitting and were not concerned in the slightest. Let me give Wendy Alexander the facts. Ministers are working each and every day on this issue.

On 14 September, Lehman Brothers collapsed. The HBOS rescue merger was announced on 18 September. The FM convened a meeting with the Scottish Council for Development and Industry on 22 September, which included the leader of the Opposition, which at that stage of course was not Wendy Alexander. Parliament had a debate on HBOS on 24 September. This Government is acting strongly and will continue to act.

The tone that Wendy Alexander struck in her speech was regrettable.

Let me come on to some more positive issues in the debate. There was a question about PACE.

No. I am making it clear that I will take no more misleading statements in this chamber. PACE stands ready. It is a world-beating and unique structure. We are going to continue with the effective work that it does and I am glad that parties throughout the chamber agree that that will make a difference. Of course, we have to do more and take more action. I acknowledge the great difficulties that are being felt in my portfolio areas. I have been talking to the aquaculture and forestry industries in the past few days. Those sectors are badly affected, but to talk of sectors does not touch the real issue. Member after member reflected on the reality: the crisis is about people and the effect on them. Roseanna Cunningham, Iain Smith and Charlie Gordon all reflected on that. Ross Finnie was absolutely right to take that a step forward and to  point out that everything needs to be done to help businesses and people. The banks have a responsibility to do that, but many people are finding that the banks are falling short of that responsibility.

I am sorry that Mr McNulty has listened to nothing that we have said today. The details about economic recovery have been in the cabinet secretary's speech and in my speech and are constantly debated in the chamber. Mr McNulty might believe—as Wendy Alexander did—that publishing a glossy document makes a difference. We have lived through those years. The reality is that it does not make a difference. From day one, the Government has taken action that has made a difference. We have slashed business rates, frozen the council tax, scrapped bridge tolls and got rid of the graduate endowment. We are getting rid of the tax on ill health that is prescription charges. I say to Mr Purvis that those are tax cuts, not all of which he supported. We have now developed a Scottish economic recovery plan that uses the powers that are available to us. It is designed to help businesses and households to maximise jobs and investment and to provide a solid foundation for Scotland to take early and speedy advantage of any recovery. Of course, we retain strong flexibility.

The local income tax will save people money—that is another way in which it will contribute. I say to Margo MacDonald that the Government is flexible and that it listens. We match ability to need. Capital city funding, which she raised with the cabinet secretary, needs to be addressed in the context of changed times and changed circumstances. We have taken early and decisive action within our powers and we are doing more. Given the dramatic decline in house building, we are bringing forward £100 million of investment in affordable housing and expanding our open market shared equity pilot throughout Scotland. That is helping home owners and the construction industry.  The UK annual inflation rate for the poorest 10 per cent of households is estimated to be 7.9 per cent, so the extension of free school meals next year to the children of families who are entitled to working tax credits will be welcome relief. That is making a difference. Soaring energy bills are landing on the doorsteps of our vulnerable pensioners, so the Government is putting an additional £10 million into the free central heating programme this year, which will help many of our poor pensioners to stay warm this winter. That is not just talking; that is acting to tackle fuel poverty.

We have a range of other initiatives, including the £25 million home owners support fund. That is not scaremongering about repossessions, but acting against them. All those measures are being taken and are providing practical help. The whole crisis is about people. Members of our greatest generation fear the cost of heating their homes this winter. Children are going to bed at night whose parents doubt whether they can meet mortgage payments. Some of those who work in business are not only having to lay people off, but seeing their businesses go. That is the reality. The duty of this Government and every Government is to provide those people with help and answers. We are shouldering that duty. We are not scaremongering and we are certainly not using the situation as a heaven-sent opportunity to talk down Scotland's abilities and attack our neighbours. Jeremy Purvis seemed to think that attacking the Icelandic Government was a great advantage of the economic crisis.

Finland, Norway and Denmark are all expected to grow at a rate that is above the European Union average in 2009. The Irish economy might be in recession, but it has performed well. I believe, Presiding Officer—

The case for an independent Scotland is strengthened by the situation. I support the motion in Mr Swinney's name.

The debate has been positive and constructive, but before I get into the substance of it I will deal with what might be called the two invasive contributions, which were somewhat different from the rest. Jamie McGrigor strayed off the subject of the debate and stayed off it. By contrast, John Farquhar Munro never got on to the subject of the debate. Let me make it clear that the issue that we are talking about is clearly defined in the strategy and in the motion. Sea eagles are not an invasive species. Let me also make it clear, for the avoidance of doubt in the reporting of the issue, that the Government is concerned and has been active. SNH is also active. Yesterday, I had another discussion with Andrew Thin, the chair of SNH, about the issue. We are determined to help the affected crofters. We know that there is a problem, but a constructive rather than a destructive approach will be taken. I hope that that is understood by everyone involved. The debate has been positive and well informed, just as the strategy that we are dealing with is positive and well informed. I am pleased to accept both amendments, but with two slight caveats. First, on the Labour amendment, legislation is not the sole answer to the problem. Indeed, legislation tends to be at the extreme end of the problem, because very few people deliberately take invasive species in and deliberately mean to do damage. There are an awful lot of accidental actions in this regard—ballast waters, for example, which Rhoda Grant referred to. A lot of problems are caused by material coming in that we have difficulty stopping because of global trade. Equally, some of the problems that we face are because, over several centuries, people have brought in plants—ornamental plants in particular—that they thought were well adapted to the area. They did not know that they were too well adapted. Of course we will continue to consider legislation. We are happy to accept Labour's amendment—we are looking at the matter seriously—but legislation is not the sole solution. Local action, of which we have seen good examples, is required. Mr Hume referred to the Tweed invasives project, under which an immensely impressive series of actions are being taken by a range of stakeholders who know that their livelihoods and their area are being badly affected. A national overview is needed, although we must recognise that the problem varies from place to place. National overviews allow us to link things together. Roseanna Cunningham made the wise point that there is a particular problem on islands. Hedgehogs and mink have been referred to. Each  area has its own difficulties with invasive species. We need to ensure that there is local action and a national strategy. I am happy to accept both amendments with those observations. There are, of course, differences north and south of the border. We have willingly signed up to the strategy, which we are implementing, but it is important to recognise that the strategy document is not just a discussion document; there is a framework in it that we have signed up to, which is already in place. It is devoted to action. That said, there are climate differences north and south of the border, and differences in the effects of climate change, in habitats and in natural environments. We have a set of common tools by which we can address problems, but we will of course address them piece by piece, paying attention to particular things that we can do in Scotland. I will conclude by referring to some of the things that we are doing here. [ Interruption. ]

Work is progressing under SNH's species action framework. As members know, that framework provides a list of species, action on which over the next five years could make a difference to biodiversity. The wider context of the debate is Scotland's biodiversity and how we wish to preserve and develop it. Six non-native species are included in SNH's species action framework, which not only encourages species that we want to see in Scotland, but addresses the problems that are created by non-native species. Those non-native species are the American mink, the grey squirrel, the North American signal crayfish—the Presiding Officer knows about that subject—Rhododendron ponticum, the New Zealand pygymy weed and wirewood. We will focus on all those species over the next five years to ensure that we reduce their impact. It is important to note—as Richard Lochhead said at the beginning of the debate—that we are not, alas, talking about total eradication, because we have already reached the stage at which reintroductions have been so widespread and severe that we can talk only about control. Rosanna Cunningham raised the interesting issue of biocides and the possibility of going for total eliminations by means of some sort of magic bullet. That has been talked about for signal crayfish and Himalayan balsam. She asked for the Government's reaction to that proposal. We are cautious. We know from elsewhere that the use of biocides can be remarkably successful, but there can also be unintended consequences. Cane toads have been mentioned twice in the debate.  [ Interruption. ] I am sure that those who have just arrived in the chamber are so familiar with the cane toad issue that they do not need to know any more about it. The case of cane toads provides an example of introducing one species and producing terrible results for other species. Scotland is particularly vulnerable to invasive species: it has a long coastline and many islands. Many translocated species have been brought from elsewhere. We will remain exceptionally vigilant. We will continue to do the work that we can do through SNH, our biodiversity strategy and, of course, our national objectives, which include a number of biodiversity objectives. We will also work closely with the other Administrations in these islands and in the European context. I draw the debate to a close on that thought. The problem is not only a Scottish, a UK or a European problem. In an era of globalisation and climate change, the whole world is changing. We must fight strongly to maintain—[ Interruption. ] I am sorry, but I am fighting strongly to hear myself, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. If I cannot hear myself, it is clear that something is wrong. We must fight strongly to ensure that we maintain the Scottish environment with climate change. There is an alternative. We could cease to worry about the topic, throw the strategy document away and say that it does not matter to us. That would mean that we would lose Scotland's environment as we know it and as we must hand it on to our children.

I counsel the member to be cautious in what he says. It is important to point out that Scottish Natural Heritage, with the community, is investigating what is taking place. We have made commitments to find out exactly what the situation is and to ensure that we do things to help the crofters in Gairloch—that is where the problem is—with the difficulty. Unfortunately, the tenor of the member's remarks veers towards suggesting that crofters themselves might take other actions and implying that the eagles should not be there. That is a dangerous thing to start to say, and I remind him of the law on birds of prey.

Does the member accept that the beaver is not an invasive species and that, indeed, the beaver has been in Scotland for longer even than the McGrigors, who probably do equal damage to the salmon and trout population?

It is not over yet.

Investment plans to address issues relating to flooding in the east end of Glasgow are matters for the local authorities, Scottish Water and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. I have visited the metropolitan Glasgow strategic drainage partnership and I welcome the progress that those bodies are making by working together to solve the problems.

Everybody who has any knowledge of flooding is aware of the fear and alarm that the member rightly draws attention to. The work to be done in the east end of Glasgow is major work, which is why the draft national planning framework has identified it as a national priority. The challenge of addressing issues of flooding and water quality in the greater Glasgow area is immense, reflecting the lack of investment in infrastructure over many generations. I would be happy to meet the member and his constituents to discuss how we can continue to support the necessary changes.

I welcome Rhoda Grant to her new—albeit temporary—role, while Karen Gillon is away breeding an even larger majority for herself in Clydesdale. I offer my congratulations and those of my party to Karen and her new arrival. I also welcome Liam McArthur to his new position. I am sure that he will not mind my saying that he chided me yesterday for not having welcomed him, but I am glad that I waited until today because I saw a truly remarkable performance. I have never heard a member speak twice in the same debate, but he could go further: I would now like him to speak for and against a motion in the same debate to prove his versatility. Those who do not want political plain speaking should look away now, because I have three strong political points to make before I get to the consensual part of my speech. First, Peter Peacock's remarks on political influence on decision making were disgraceful. He used dog-whistle politics of the worst sort to play to the lowest common denominator in the Labour Party, which demeaned the debate and his contribution to it. There is no evidence that there  was such influence: Scudamore specifically says that there was not, so it should not have been referred to as it was. Secondly, I will speak about compensation, which flows from that. DEFRA speaks about cost and responsibility sharing, but on this occasion it shirked its responsibilities and refused to meet the cost. There is no way we can get around that fact, so it is surprising that Labour members did not mention it. The farmers did not come to the Scottish Government asking for resources. They went to the UK Government because all the law in practice said that that is where they should go, but they got nothing. The Scottish Government, with its limited resources, had to step up to the plate and provide a package. Those are the facts, and we should have them on the record. Thirdly, I am disappointed that neither Labour nor the Tories will support the Lib Dem amendment. In our usual generous way, we will support all the amendments, but there is an important point to be made about the Liberal Democrat amendment, which should be supported. It is not just that we support the ideas that it contains, nor even that the Lib Dems support them; it is that the ideas are supported by NFU Scotland, whose press release states: "Animal health and welfare is a devolved matter but the budgets are not and these remain buried in Westminster. Scotland's Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs ... has voiced his concern over this arrangement and he has our full support in having this anomaly addressed as soon as possible." Scudamore makes the same point in paragraph 21 of the report. Many people suspected that the Calman commission was always going to be a fig leaf and an excuse for inaction. When there is consensus and a clear demand for action that will make a practical difference for our farmers, it should be supported. I hope that, even at the eleventh hour, the Conservatives and Labour will change their view of the Liberal Democrat amendment.

First, the matter is urgent, so we cannot wait—DEFRA budgets are already shrinking. Secondly—to use an agricultural term—fine words butter no parsnips. We should take some action and not just talk about it. The rest of the debate was consensual, so I will draw attention to some of the issues that Parliament has addressed and agreed on. The first is regionalisation, which we are happy to  accept is an opportunity and not a certainty. The Scottish Government is committed to engaging with stakeholders throughout the supply chain to get clear agreement on what regionalisation means and under what circumstances it would work for Scotland. Our trading partners and the European Commission must agree to the proposals, but the door is open to discussions on regionalisation and what might arise from it. We should support that progress. Secondly, the islands were mentioned first by John Scott and then by Alasdair Allan, Rob Gibson and a number of other members. The Scottish Government did give the islands special treatment based on the science, and would expect to do so wherever possible. We can possibly get EU support to allow the islands to continue to export, subject to particular circumstances, and the matter will be much to the fore in our upgraded contingency plan. Given my responsibility for crofting, I remember that difficulties arose daily. We need to build into any contingency plan any arrangements that operate as of right, but we have to negotiate that. We cannot impose it. On welfare slaughter, which Sarah Boyack raised, the role of the welfare slaughter scheme will be reflected in the contingency plan. It will not and should not be a first choice, and the need for it can be reduced by effective contingency planning. On drivers' hours, which she also spoke about, we continue to raise the matter with the UK Administration: we are engaging directly with the UK Government on the matter. We must avoid the difficulties that arose in 2007, because they impacted both on animal welfare and on individuals' earning opportunities. We all agree about abattoirs and we know that further action is necessary. This summer, I visited the small abattoir on Tiree, just as last year I was at the small abattoir outside Castlebay on Barra. An effective service can be provided close to the supply route, but we have to ensure that we do that as a matter of negotiation; we cannot impose that, either. It is important to recognise that not all is doom and gloom. Movements in prices in the past year have benefited a variety of producers in all sectors. There are many problems, but they can be addressed. The Scudamore report, like the Government in its actions, segments the problems, addresses them and tries to build confidence in the sector. Earning capacity is based on confidence. One of the confidence-building measures will be a contingency plan on which we can consult. Rhoda Grant mentioned risk assessments related to the contingency plan. Part of the consultation on the full contingency plan will have to be consultation on risk assessments.  We could go into a whole range of other issues.

I will resist the temptation. A number of members spoke about the human cost of foot and mouth. Elaine Murray said that, when she received her call from the cabinet secretary last year, she was outside the catacombs in Paris. I was outside the Dumfries and Lockerbie show, and the feeling there was one of extreme nervousness and worry. People in Dumfries had enormously bad memories of 2001, and those memories came flooding back. The nervousness was made especially obvious by the fact that the animal lines at the show were empty. Normally, they are completely full. That was a feature of show after show during the summer. The shows that survived were almost empty because there were no animals. The impact of foot and mouth is still felt in the south-west of Scotland. On Sunday I was in Moniaive, where I was opening the "Striding Arches" project—Andy Goldsworthy's new sculpture project within the landscape. The genesis of the project was Andy Goldsworthy's concern for the area, and the feeling that there had to be new things happening and new signs of hope. Foot and mouth is still a strong memory in the area. The job of any Government is to communicate and to build confidence. A number of members have paid tribute to Richard Lochhead in the role that he played, and I want to tell one story that brings that home, because it is not just Scudamore who acknowledges Richard Lochhead's important role. The first thing I was told when I arrived at the Dumfries show in the morning was that he had already spoken to the show's secretary to reassure her about the arrangements that were being put in place. The cabinet secretary did not just chair national meetings, but was in touch with the people who matter on the ground. It was the leadership that was shown by him, by the Scottish Government and by the people who worked for the Scottish Government—in alliance with the farming community in Scotland—that made all the difference. The one thing that we must remember is that we did not get foot and mouth. Unlike in 2001, when the infection caused enormous problems, in 2007 the disease did not come here. We had effective controls, we had leadership and we had plans that worked. As every member has said, all outbreaks are different. We do not know what the future will bring: future outbreaks will not be the same as previous outbreaks. However, if we have a flexible contingency plan, if we have the right risk assessments and if we have the will of the farming  and rural communities to support the difficult, costly and time-consuming measures that will have to be put in place, then we will have a real opportunity—[ Interruption. ]

If we have all those things together, we will have a real opportunity of taking this issue forward and ensuring that, if there is any threat in the future, we will overcome it. I will return to two points. First, the responsibility that we expected to be shown by DEFRA was not shown: the cost was not paid, so the Scottish Government measured up as it had to measure up. Secondly, we do not rest on our laurels. The Scudamore report was commissioned in order to find out both what worked and what did not work. We will now take the report forward. We are always keen to do better: that is the hallmark of this Government and it is fortunate that we are here to do it.

I think that everybody would welcome the member's point about regionalisation. He talked about his experience in 2001; one of the big differences between 2001 and 2007 was the growing appreciation in 2007 that regionalisation could provide the solution. Does he accept that that argument has now been made in the farming community?

I point out to the member, as he mentioned the SEARS project, that this week I chaired a meeting of the SEARS board and we are already well on target with the reduction inspections. I have already met farmers who have been inspected once instead of three times by the agency. The work is progressing well, but we have more to do.

Scottish Water is aware, as is Duncan McNeil, of the flooding issues in the Greenock and Inverclyde area. As part of the current 2006 to 2010 investment programme, there are regular discussions with Scottish Water on how it is addressing sewer and other flooding to achieve a net reduction in the number of properties subject to flooding.

I agree that external flooding is becoming a key issue. When Scottish Water's objectives were set for the current period, external flooding was not seen as the highest priority. Instead, it was agreed with the previous Administration that internal flooding, which causes a public health problem for residents, should be tackled. Scottish Water has made good progress in reducing the number of properties that are held on its internal flooding register. I agree that we must now take external flooding much more seriously. External flooding will feature in the objectives for 2010 to 2014. The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced only two days ago, will address all types of flooding, including sewer flooding.

The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill contains a range of provisions that should make it easier for a range of authorities to tackle flooding issues. For example, flooding will be dealt with at a catchment level, so that all authorities can work together and bring together their resources to tackle it. The bill will transpose the European Union floods directive, so it will address all types of flooding. We will also have much better flooding maps. Most important, the very lengthy period that it takes to take a flooding scheme from conception to delivery will be considerably truncated, and people will be able to influence the process much more.

Flood risk management schemes are the responsibility of the local authorities concerned, not the Scottish Government, as local authorities are best placed to assess local need. That will continue to be the case under the new Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.

I am entirely happy to support the member's call for the Met Office to provide the coverage to which he refers. In the report on its inquiry into flooding and flood management, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee recommended that such coverage be provided. As the minister responsible, I accepted that recommendation, which we are continuing to take forward. We are in regular contact with the Met Office to ensure that it provides the coverage that people in the Highlands and Islands and other areas where coverage is lacking deserve. Weather radar is an important part—although not the only part—of the flooding early warning system.

Funding for flooding is part of the historic concordat between the Scottish Government and local authorities. How flood defences look and fit in with the surrounding landscape is an important consideration. We are keen to encourage greener flood defences—natural flood defences often fit more happily into landscapes than traditional concrete walls do. Equally, there are ways of constructing flood defences that are not intrusive. I entirely accept Dave Thompson's point, as does everyone who is involved in designing and providing flood defences. Everything is done to ensure that flood defences are appropriate, especially in places such as Inverness, but they must also be effective.

The member is right about the need for radar coverage throughout Scotland, and that the financial responsibility for providing such coverage lies with the UK Government. The Met Office is the agency that should provide it. I would, of course, be happy to work with members across the chamber to ensure that the Met Office and the UK Government fulfil those responsibilities.

Funding for flood alleviation measures was included in the record levels of funding for local government over the period covered by the 2008 to 2011 spending review. We have also allocated £8.6 million to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to deliver a national flood warning dissemination programme for Scotland and another £1 million to enable it to fund a new flood warning scheme for the north-east of Scotland. We have allocated £235,000 to research projects to inform and provide evidence to support the development of flood risk management policy, and we have agreed to provide £179,500 over three years to assist the National Flood Forum, which has done tremendously good work south of the border, to establish a presence in Scotland.

Dr Simpson raises important issues. Defending against flooding is not simply a matter of building concrete walls. I do not want to go into the details of why the concrete walls in Milnathort did not work, because on-going legal issues are involved. Individuals must realise that they can suffer unexpected flooding and they must be ready. Flooding can happen very quickly, including in places with no experience of flooding, especially if there are extreme weather events. In all circumstances, the Government advises and will continue to advise that people should have adequate insurance. We will discuss that matter a great deal as the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill is considered in the Parliament. Such insurance can be obtained in most places. If there are difficulties with obtaining insurance, it is often possible to make changes to properties to allow it to be attracted. There are also means by which people can defend their properties. If a property has been  flooded, its reinstatement to a higher flood resilience status will make an enormous difference. Development work has shown that having a resilient property as opposed to a non-resilient one can reduce the time taken for people to move back into their property from months or years to weeks or even days.

Mary Scanlon has pointed to one of the reasons why we need the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. We need to modernise flood legislation so that everybody can work together. By taking the catchment approach and bringing together all the bodies that are involved, we will resolve issues of the type to which she refers. I am certain that the issue that she raises will be resolved, because there is good will on all sides and a desire to ensure that the flood defences in every part of Scotland are effective. The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill will make the resolution of such issues easier than ever. I am glad that we are now getting round to changing 50-year-old legislation that is around 25 years out of date.

When we last met to debate crofting, on 15 May, there was a near unanimous welcome for the final report of the committee of inquiry on crofting. Following a period of reflection on the committee's recommendations, I am pleased to announce today the publication of the Government's response to the report. Crofting is a distinctly Scottish phenomenon that the Government is determined to nurture and sustain. Consequently, we will support those who choose to croft. We do so not because crofting is unique, but because of its outcomes. Crofting is an engine of sustainable economic growth, which is the Government's central purpose, and is needed more than ever in the present difficult times. Crofting brings social, economic, environmental and agricultural benefit to remote parts of Scotland. It contributes to the provision of local food, helps to retain livestock on the hills and underpins many fragile and remote communities. Without crofting and the hard work of individual crofters, the whole of Scotland would be the poorer. We should, as a Parliament, say that loud and often. Of course, we must also match words with deeds. The purpose of the Shucksmith inquiry was to modernise crofting in order that it might continue to provide those benefits in the 21 st century. Since the publication of the committee's report, there has been considerable debate about its recommendations' merits, with opinion ranging from outright rejection to ringing endorsement. Let me make it clear that I believe that Mark Shucksmith and his colleagues did exactly what they were asked to do, and I remain grateful to them. The committee of inquiry consulted extensively and reached its conclusions after hearing the views of around 2,500 people in written evidence and at a series of public meetings. I remain very positive about the committee's recommendations. Since the report's publication, the Government has carefully reviewed the recommendations and listened to the comments that have been made. I spoke to many crofters during the summer and  attended a range of formal and informal meetings, but crofting is about more than reports and structures, so I was keen at those meetings—and I am keen now—to discuss a range of positive measures that will help individual crofters to continue with their work and attract new people into crofting. It would be fair to say that we support the main thrust of the committee of inquiry's recommendations, which promote localism and community. However, we have not accepted all the recommendations. I start with governance. We have not agreed to the abolition of the Crofters Commission and its replacement with a federation of locally elected crofting boards. I agree with my friend John Farquhar Munro that the commission has a wealth of experience and knowledge that needs to be preserved. It will be. However, the commission could do much better. In particular, I want it to be more democratic and accountable. We therefore propose to reconstitute the commission as a small and focused central body working through a limited number of area committees that will have an elected component, which should ensure that policies and decisions better reflect regional circumstances. We have agreed to separate the functions of the Crofters Commission as recommended, and to the Registers of Scotland being responsible for creating and maintaining a new register of crofts. Lead responsibility for the development of crofting communities will go to Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and the management of crofting agricultural grant schemes will go to the rural payments and inspections directorate of the Scottish Government. That is because we strongly believe that the proper role for a regulator is regulation, and that more effective regulation is needed for crofting. The equally important task of developing crofting communities, as opposed to focusing on individuals, should be the responsibility of the body that has been charged with a strategic development function in the Highlands and Islands, and that body is HIE. It is developing the exciting new growth at the edge approach, which will provide crofting communities with the assistance that they need to develop their futures. We will streamline resources to put more effort into fragile areas to accelerate growth. HIE will achieve that by engaging with crofting communities and local authorities, so that it can better understand the communities' ambitions, develop plans and work with the communities to grow their populations, their economies and the many opportunities that are needed. Grazings committees will also have a part in that. Those that are inclusive and imaginative will encourage the development of new life, and we will encourage them.  I turn to the bull hire scheme. On support for livestock improvement, the Government accepts the committee's view that there are better ways than the centralised bull stud facility to maintain cattle operations in the crofting counties. The fact is that last year, from approximately 13,000 crofters, the bull hire scheme was used by just over 100 groups, involving approximately 430 individuals. Accordingly, the cost to crofters—£500 at present—would have to rise to around £1,250, which clearly is unrealistic, so the Government proposes to close the central state-owned stud facility by the summer of 2009. Nonetheless, we will continue to support livestock quality and numbers in remote areas. We propose to put in place new arrangements through the Scotland rural development programme to mitigate the costs of private bull hire. As a transitional measure, we plan to offer stud farm bulls for acquisition at modest cost to the crofting communities that have used the hire scheme in recent years. Many members have made representations to me about a range of matters in the Shucksmith report, and many went out of their way to consult local crofters during the summer. I am grateful to them. One recommendation above all others has caused substantial concern. Most people can see the reason for the committee recommending that an occupancy burden should be placed on housing on land in crofting tenure. For many years, there has been real worry about speculation in land and housing, and the insidious effects of perpetual absenteeism. However, as my colleagues Alasdair Allan and Rob Gibson have rightly pointed out, the recommendation ran the risk of creating a two-tier housing market within the Highlands and Islands, and it might have weighed unfairly and too heavily on some individuals. Accordingly, after a great deal of thought, I have rejected it. We still need to take action to dampen croft land speculation for the purpose of building houses that will be used as second homes, not least because the effect of such speculation puts the price of crofts beyond what local and young people can afford, thus preventing new entrants and the infusion of new blood. We do not wish to prevent decrofting per se, because it is important that new houses continue to be built in order to meet local community housing demand. Often, the only available land for housing development in remote communities is a small part of croft land. However, croft land should be used only to meet demand from people who are willing to live in those fragile communities permanently. We therefore propose to consult further, with local authorities in particular, on the utility of applying some form of occupancy condition at the point of decrofting, and  only at that point, and on the best way to implement such a condition. [ Interruption. ]

I am unaware of that. My pacemaker is working perfectly at present. On land in crofting tenure, better enforcement of existing legislation that requires crofts to be put to purposeful use and crofters to live within 10 miles of their crofts will address absenteeism and the neglect of crofts. We will review the existing legislation to enable the regulator to take more effective action and we will consider the provision of renewed direction to the Crofters Commission—even in the short term—to achieve that aim. The Government's response accepts the committee's recommendations for creating stronger rural economies and agrees to review the support for croft housing. Many of the recommendations that the committee made in the land and environment section of its report on support for crofting agriculture and rural development are already the subject of reviews and consultation, and we will provide a fuller response to those recommendations once the outcome of the consultations is known. However, as we have said before, the committee's concerns about and desire for positive action in such areas mirror our concerns and views as a Government. The key principles that underpin our response need to be set out. First, the Government will endeavour to maintain the amount of land that is held in crofting tenure, because it is important to continue to secure the economic, social and environmental benefits that crofting delivers. I am sure that all members were pleased to note the Crofters Commission's recent approval of six new crofts on the island of Jura. That is just the type of innovation that we should seek. I am also encouraging public bodies that own land in the crofting areas to review their holdings to establish what land could be freed up for crofting, particularly for new entrants, and I am pressing Forestry Commission Scotland for early implementation of its mechanism for creating forest crofts. Secondly, we believe that land in crofting tenure must be put to productive use. Land is our most basic natural resource, and it must always be used, whether for producing food, for delivering environmental benefits, for creating business premises or for providing housing. Of course, the definition of land in productive use should be drawn widely to allow croft land to be used for a variety of purposes but, overall, we must make it clear that Government and crofters need to stimulate the creative and productive use of land.  Our third guiding principle compels us to ensure that housing in crofting communities makes a full contribution to the local economy. The fact that an adequate supply of housing is vital to maintaining and increasing the population of any area makes it central to securing economic growth in the remote rural areas of Scotland. Moreover, occupation of such housing is essential to providing a resident population. We must try to ensure that more housing in the crofting counties is lived in and contributes fully to the economic and social life of those communities. We must also give more power to local people to determine their own futures. A key component of successful rural development is the local mobilisation of individuals and communities, with the support of appropriate agencies, to take control of their futures. By devolving power, we enable communities to plan their own futures and take decisions that are appropriate to their needs and circumstances. However, with power comes responsibility, and it is important to ensure that those people who take decisions are representative and accountable. Our final principle is that we must look to the future and find a way to help young people and older new entrants into crofting, because without them crofting will not survive. I am sure that the debate on the future of crofting will continue, and I look forward to hearing the views of individuals and communities on what I have said and what is being published today. It is obvious that the status quo is not an option, but it is equally obvious that only consensus will drive us forward. The Government will now proceed to draw up a draft bill for consultation on the legislative changes that are needed, and we hope thereafter to be in a position to introduce a crofting bill in the Parliament. I should also tell members that the Government has accepted the Shucksmith committee's recommendation on the simplification of crofting law, and that a separate crofting consolidation bill will be drawn up for introduction at some future date, perhaps in the next parliamentary session. However, there are things that we can do without legislation. For example, we can reform support for croft housing, reform the crofting development function and modernise support for crofting livestock quality improvement. We will continue to work on those areas with vigour. Crofting provides people with the opportunity to be part of strong communities, to enjoy a rich culture and to live in one of the most spectacular environments in the world. In other words, crofting has everything going for it. That is why people choose to croft and will continue to croft, and it is why many people want to remain crofters. Crofters must work together and with other people in the  community to build a strong and secure future. Government must do what we can to support them. Through that partnership between crofters and Government, I believe that crofting can be, and will continue to be, an activity that more and more people want to do. It will also be a model for effective rural, social, economic and agricultural development.

Let me try to accentuate the positive. I am glad that Sarah Boyack welcomes some of our proposals. There has been no change of heart. We never responded to Shucksmith's committee to start with. What we did, properly, was listen to the committee and, over the summer, listen to the vast range of opinion. However, I am disappointed that Ms Boyack does not see the virtue of accountability and the involvement in decision making of elected individuals within communities. At the end of my statement, I stressed the importance of empowerment. Unfortunately, if Sarah Boyack is still on the side of the unelected, the disenfranchised and those who want decisions to be made distantly, she does not understand what rural development is about in general, and she certainly does not understand the importance of ensuring that crofters are enabled to make decisions about crofting. That was the solid theme of Mark Shucksmith's recommendations, and it should be the solid theme of all our rural activity. We have to put power into the hands of communities. Indeed, that was a solid theme of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's review of Scottish rural policy, which commented favourably on the previous Government's work on decentralisation. Far from reconsidering, we will pursue the issues in consultation with communities, which will help communities to make decisions about themselves. On consultation and timescales, the Shucksmith committee consulted 2,500 people. There was considerable debate in the summer. I have been more than willing to attend meetings, to listen at events, to receive correspondence and to talk to people. I will remain open in every way to the discussion, but we have to move on. We will draft a bill and it will be put out for consultation. We will have another opportunity to debate the issues and then, I hope, we will have legislation. If we continue to delay, crofting will continue to decline. That may be what Sarah Boyack wants, but I am not on the side of a continued decline in crofting.

I am caught between two opposing forces: one thinks that I am going too fast, and the other thinks that I am going too slow. Perhaps that means that the speed at which we are going is just about right. I agree that priority should have been given to pushing crofting legislation. We are moving as fast as we can. Mr Scott should not be too worried about the second bill, which will codify and consolidate all the existing crofting legislation. What we are trying to do—

From a sedentary position, Ms Boyack says that it will never happen. It will happen if this Administration is re-elected in 2011, so clearly there is no commitment from Ms Boyack's side. We therefore already know whom to vote for in 2011. We have two steps to take. One is to make the immediate changes necessary. In my statement, I said repeatedly that it is not all about legislation, and that there are other actions that we can take. We are going to do so. The second step is to consolidate the entire—I was going to say mess, but I should say mass of crofting legislation. We have to make it understandable so that people can work their way through it. That is the right thing to do. As Mr Peacock said at an early stage, it would have been virtually impossible to take on the consolidation task with the other proposals. I think that we are doing things in the right order, and we are making progress.

I am glad that Mr McArthur welcomes some aspects of the report—although he did not actually mention any of the aspects that he welcomes, which was a pity. Let me make it clear to him that I have not ignored any of the issues. The Presiding Officer would not have allowed me to read out the Government's complete and detailed response, but I have it here. In that response, which was published today at the same time as my statement and is available in the chamber, we have responded to every recommendation. None has been ignored. I mentioned in passing that we are taking forward an immediate review of the croft house grant scheme and two other rural house grant schemes—the rural home ownership grant and the rural empty properties grant. The review will specifically consider the detailed recommendations that were made by the Shucksmith committee of inquiry, which I take very seriously.  Liam McArthur knows the great importance of the croft house grant scheme, as does anybody with experience of the crofting areas. We entirely accept that we must continue to emphasise its importance. With regard to HIE, I ask Mr McArthur to undertake a Coleridgean willing suspension of disbelief. We have to make progress on this issue. If it is accepted—and the report makes cogent arguments for it—that the proper role of a regulator is regulation, it follows that development is the proper role of the body that is charged with strategic development in the Highlands and Islands, which is HIE. We must ensure that HIE attracts and develops the confidence of the crofting communities in undertaking that task. I indicated in outline—although I had only a brief time in which to do so—some of the ways in which that will happen, and I am happy to sit down with Mr McArthur and any other member to discuss the ways in which we can ensure that HIE fulfils those functions. I am sure that Mr Mather, as the minister with responsibility, will also take part in those discussions.

I know that there will be concern about that. However, last year, at the Scottish Crofting Foundation conference, I made it clear that I was asking Mark Shucksmith and his colleagues specifically to consider the issue. They have come back with some clear information. I repeat the information that I used in my statement. Last year, the bull hire scheme was used by just over 100 groups involving 430 individuals out of some 13,000 crofters. However, we recognise that some people will be disadvantaged by our decision. So, yes, the resources will remain within crofting—I made that clear last year. Secondly, we have structures that will support commercial bull hire, including applications to the Scottish rural development programme. Those are immediately available and will continue to be available.  In addition, as a transitional measure, we plan to offer stud farm bulls for acquisition at modest cost to crofting communities who used the hire scheme in recent years. It would be an unconventional Christmas present, but perhaps not an unwelcome one, were someone to give a community a bull. Those bulls will be available. I suspect that there will also be grant aid available under the SRDP for the costs arising from the creation of wintering quarters for bulls. In all regards, we are covering the demand that exists within the available resources and in a way that will continue our concern with maintaining the quality of cattle in the crofting areas.

I welcome Elaine Murray to her new post. I think that it is the first time that we have crossed swords, so to speak, and I am sure that it will not be the last. I look forward to those exchanges. I will not enter into a debate about resources in the context of the work of HIE. I disagree profoundly with what Dr Murray says, but I will not enter into debate about it. Of course, the resources that are presently applied to crofting development will be transferred from the Crofters Commission to HIE. What resources are being used will be transferred—that is absolutely clear. The GATE initiative is a little narrow and may exclude some of the crofting areas, especially if there is an expansion of the crofting areas—we may discuss that matter later. In such circumstances, we will consider the ways in which HIE can operate in those other areas. I repeat the offer that I have just made to Liam McArthur. We have work to do to ensure that the policy operates properly and I want to do that work; therefore, I will sit down with representatives of the crofting communities, with individual crofters, with party spokespersons and with members who have a constituency interest in the matter, so that we can work things out properly. I have a strong commitment to the development of crofting. It is very important that new people are allowed to enter crofting, and—I did not mention this in my response to John Scott—we have specific schemes for new entrants. I want to  ensure that the work is done effectively, and HIE will take on the task of doing it effectively.

I would not rule out the inclusion of all and every consideration, although I think that it would be difficult to overcome the worldwide difficulty in the obtaining of loan finance specifically for the crofting community and in relation to only one small area of concern. Roseanna Cunningham is right to say that the proportion of Government support changed in the way that she describes. One of the reasons for that is that commercial finance became available more easily and more cheaply. It would have been wrong to continue with a scheme that was more expensive to crofters. Those circumstances might be changing, and we might need to reconsider the position. I give Roseanna Cunningham the commitment that the review will be thorough and comprehensive and will, I hope, be informed by the work that her committee is doing on rural housing. I would welcome the committee's assistance in our thinking on those matters.

I would not wish to be misrepresented and I am sure that Mr Peacock would not wish to misrepresent me. Therefore, let me make it absolutely clear that there is no intention to impose a burden. We have not accepted that recommendation. I would not like reporting of this matter to be accompanied—even inadvertently—by quotations from people who say  that the situation involves something that is a burden by any other name. The burden will not be imposed. We are consulting on whether there should be an occupancy condition at the point of decrofting. That would have the effect, were it necessary, of retaining occupancy in houses. It would not be a title burden. We have rejected the title burden. I am happy to express that in as many different languages as the member wishes, just to make it absolutely and utterly clear. On the area committees and the assessors, I am surprised that, once again, a Labour member opposes democracy. Labour has suffered rather badly because of democracy in the past 18 months, but I would have thought that Labour would want to see a democratic element in the decision making on crofting matters. It strikes me as axiomatic that those who know about something and are engaged in it through the sweat of their labour—in this case, crofters—should be involved in the decisions that govern that activity. If the Labour Party wishes to resist that type of progressive thought, I think that it will pay the price.

I feel like referring the member to the answers that I gave a moment ago, as I have answered all his questions. However, I will address two of them. I regret the fact that some people will be adversely affected by our decision on the bull hire scheme. However, the number of people is not nearly as great as Jamie McGrigor has indicated—last year, the scheme was used by about 430 people. Further, the inevitable increase from this year's cost of £500 to almost £1,250 would create state aid issues. The SRDP alternative is a good  one. In addition, I repeat my earlier offer—I have never previously been in the position of being able to say twice in one day, "I'd be happy to give you a bull"—and say that crofting communities that have the potential to acquire one of the bulls from the stud have the opportunity to get one. There is a great deal of potential in that course of action. The member asked about the elected element. We are trying to ensure that crofters are involved in making decisions about crofting. That principle is made clear in Mark Shucksmith's report, and I endorse it, as most members have done. Worries have been expressed that such a system would work on too narrow or too small a level. It was feared at one stage—Peter Peacock and I addressed a meeting in Skye at which this fear was mentioned—that grazings committees would, like some sort of small-district soviets, make decisions about every regulatory issue in their area. That was never proposed. However, there is an optimum size and an area structure within the existing Crofters Commission. We have examined that and tried to work out the optimum size for locally based decision making within a much more focused commission structure. That principle is important and it will work; in addition, it will appeal to crofting communities in which decisions are made by people who know what they are talking about in all the relevant circumstances. We can then consider the right method of election—I have mentioned one or two methods in the document—and the way in which we can make the system work. I ask the member not to try to exclude decision making by people who know what they are talking about.

I am sure that very few people have ever described John Farquhar Munro as an extremist, but he is taking an extremist position on this matter. It is contrary to the position that he has previously taken in the chamber and which he took at the meeting that we addressed in Skye. At that meeting, John Farquhar Munro said twice that his main objective was to ensure that the Crofters Commission was not abolished. I would have thought that he would be skipping with delight today—a concept that I am sure we can all imagine—as he was content with the issue, and that he would work with the rest of us to ensure that the best recommendations were taken forward as legislation. I do not think that John Farquhar Munro believes that everything must remain the same—indeed, he made the opposite point at the meeting in Skye. He should not find himself stuck behind the debate; he should be within it to welcome the real potential for change that will produce real benefits for his crofting constituents. I have listened to him—I hope that he will now listen to me.

As the member says, I have twice addressed meetings on the island of Arran to speak about the issue. There has been a consultation process, the results of which I intend to announce next week. I hope that the member will not be disappointed by them.

To hold me responsible for the credit crunch would be taking things a little far.  Rhoda Grant is a member of a party that was in government and made a bùrach—if I may use a Gaelic word, Presiding Officer—of the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007 and now proceeds to lecture us on how to legislate for crofting. We have reacted strongly and positively to a range of recommendations and we have taken principled positions on others. We have indicated where we want to continue consultations and to look at the recommendations to provide more help to the crofting counties. We should all be involved in that process and we should all be focused on the benefit of crofting. I would greatly regret it if a narrow partisan view were to develop in this debate instead of a view that benefits crofting. The party that takes such a position will have to answer not only to the chamber, but to the crofters who want consensual change and who want real debate about change. It is regrettable that I have not as yet heard such an approach from the Labour Party.

Often, people who say that they were not consulted just do not like the outcome of the consultation. I am determined that we should continue to debate and discuss all the issues. Until now we have had 18 months of consultation. The Shucksmith committee was very detailed in its work: it went right round the country, took a great deal of evidence and listened to many people. When its report was published, there was strong unanimity of support for it; members will see that if they read the Official Report . We continued to have debate and discussion during the summer. I attended a variety of meetings and listened to a range of people—that included sitting on the games field at Durness listening to a group of people who have a website called "Bin Shucksmith". I have had those discussions and we now have a response that indicates how we can take the matter forward. There will be a formal consultation period when we publish a draft bill in the spring. Between now and then, I am happy to have creative and constructive debate—not negative debate along the lines that we should throw away the whole thing and start again. We will publish a draft bill, on which we will have a formal consultation, and we will then move to legislation.  We cannot go on talking for ever. We should accept that there are problems in crofting and that we need to set them right; some of those problems can be solved by administrative action, but the rest must be addressed by legislation. I want the legislation to be debated and passed in the Parliament and to see crofting benefit from it.

Yes. I am happy to give that assurance. The spirit of those comments is exactly the spirit that I would like to see. I commend Jamie Stone for that. We can work together to ensure that this works. We will put in place a means of assessing the situation and we will ensure that some of the developmental work that we want to see being started starts well before the legislative process. As I said in my statement, there is much that we can get on with now.

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on achieving the debate. I also congratulate members on the wealth of knowledge and erudition that has been displayed. All the members who are present—they are a small but select number—recognise the importance of the subject. Murdo Fraser was right to say that the time has passed when if one raised the issue of squirrels with political colleagues they seemed to find it amusing. The issue is important—those of us who came into politics to change the world and who have ended up talking about squirrel contraception do not in any way feel that we have diminished our contribution. There are important issues to be addressed. I hope that I will cover many of the issues that members have asked me to respond to. The ultimate prize will be to give Peter Peacock reassurance that, as his granddaughter grows, there will be red squirrels in all parts of Scotland that she can watch and enjoy as he enjoyed watching them when he was a child. It is important to keep in mind that we are talking about the continuation of an important part of our heritage and biodiversity that is genuinely at risk. As members have said, several cases of squirrel pox in red squirrels have been discovered in the south of Scotland in the past year. I distinguish between the issue of squirrel pox and the more general issue of grey squirrels and their nature as an invasive species. It is an urgent priority that we do something about the squirrel pox in the south of Scotland. It exists only in the south of Scotland, but we must ensure that it travels no further. On 27 August at Drumlanrig, I launched a new stage in the red squirrels in south Scotland project that is particularly focused on that threat. The project brings together resources from the private and public sectors and focuses them where the need is greatest. I say to John Wilson that the need at present is to create a cordon sanitaire in the south of Scotland that prevents squirrel pox from travelling north. If it travels north, it will begin to decimate the red squirrel population in an even greater way than the presence of grey squirrels does. Work is being done. I am glad to report that the Forestry Commission Scotland will deploy an additional four full-time-equivalent grey squirrel control officers to contribute to the effort. That is in addition to the two grey squirrel control officers and the four red squirrel conservation officers that SNH employs. The private sector is matching that effort. We have a comprehensive effort throughout the south of Scotland, with a clear aim and that is supported by Government, the private sector and non-governmental organisations. It is important  that organisations such as the Scottish Wildlife Trust are involved. We have the prospect of stopping the spread of squirrel pox. That is our aim and what we will try to do. If we achieve that, we must then consider what we need to do more broadly in Scotland. We are already taking action. As members probably know, in April, a grey squirrel was reported at Farr in the Highlands, on the outskirts of Inverness. A second grey squirrel was also found in the vicinity. Both of them, I think, are no longer there. [ Laughter. ] I am using a euphemism. We are currently preparing a strategy under which we will look at the distribution of grey squirrels and match our effort to that distribution. As Mr Wilson mentioned, the Fife and central Scotland area is one of our priorities. We have, however, to do more. The issue is not simply how to remove grey squirrels but how to strengthen the presence of red squirrels. At present, the Forestry Commission Scotland and SNH are working to identify red squirrel woodland stronghold areas across Scotland. If the greys spread further through the country, those woodland areas will offer the best opportunity for long-term retention of the reds. I am pleased that the chamber is unanimous on the need for a mix of actions, both positive and—regrettably—those that will remove grey squirrels, including by way of their humane despatch. As long as we agree on the range of activities, we can make progress. One activity is the development of habitats to encourage red squirrels. Our aim is to identify 20 sites that can be managed as active refuges for red squirrels. We hope to complete the process of identification by the end of the year and publish the list for consultation in early 2009.

I was about to come on to that. Funding for the process that I have outlined will range across a number of bodies. As I said, the Forestry Commission Scotland and SNH are involved and there are, of course, resources in the SRDP to deal with invasive non-native species. The work that we can do to remove grey squirrels and increase better habitats for red squirrels can therefore be funded under that programme. I am sure that many of Mr McGrigor's constituents will wish to respond to that confirmation. The non-native species strategy is an important part of our work in this area, as is the Forestry Commission Scotland's biodiversity programme and our wider work on biodiversity. In that wider   strategic work, we have to focus on squirrels as we do on other species. I am pleased to be able to tell Marlyn Glen that Scottish Natural Heritage is providing partnership funding of £18,000 a year to support research into immunocontraception. Investigations into the development of an oral option for the existing injectable fertility control vaccines that are used in the United States of America are underway. That may require us to spread it on peanuts in pubs in London, as Mr Peacock indicated. We need to find a way to ensure that it works, but let us hope that we do not have to go that far.  Peter Peacock:  As long as there is good labelling.  Michael Russell:  Indeed. On 1 October this year, the Moredun Research Institute will begin work on developing a different vaccine. The institute is trying to devise a means of distinguishing between the reds and the greys in providing a vaccine against squirrel pox for red squirrels. The work is being undertaken under a three-year Scottish Government funding programme. I am pleased to say that funding is also being provided by the Wildlife Ark Trust, which has raised £300,000 for that purpose. We are looking into immunocontraception and for a way of vaccinating red squirrels against squirrel pox. As I said at the outset, the issue is important. Work to stop the spread of squirrel pox and to encourage areas where red squirrels can flourish and grey squirrels can be removed is underway. A variety of actions will be required if we are to succeed. I am grateful to each and every member in the chamber who was interested enough to attend or speak in the debate. I hope, too, that they will be interested enough to encourage action in their areas. In that way, we will ultimately succeed in our aims.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

I am sure that the member would agree that it is important to put on record that the project in the south of Scotland, which does take precedence, is a collaborative project between Scottish Natural Heritage, the Forestry  Commission, the Scottish Wildlife Trust—a non-governmental organisation—and the private sector. Its strength comes from that broadly based approach, which is what we need in every part of Scotland.

I welcome the general tone of the debate and I stress that very little divides the Government from the committee and its report. It is important to emphasise that point at the beginning of my summing-up speech, and I will do so repeatedly throughout. As our formal response to the committee report will show, we welcome most of the recommendations. We have indicated where we think the recommendations are already happening, as well as areas on which we need to have further debate. There is a growing unanimity of approach, which I hope will be reflected when the bill goes through the committee. However, I will come on to one or two significant areas of difference. Last night, I attended the launch of Alastair McIntosh's new book, "Hell and High Water", which is his personal and influential response to climate change. In the book he talks a little about his experience in January 2005 of talking his mother, who lived on the seafront in Stornoway, through the enormous hurricane that was taking place. He relates her fear and distress as she experienced that dreadful event, which led to deaths in a part of South Uist that is very well known to me. David Stewart referred to those events in his speech. From the beginning of the debate, we must recognise that we are developing legislation for a changing situation and a changing Scotland, and we will have to work on it together. I think that  we can work on it together because the prize is very important: protecting ordinary people and allowing Scotland to change and develop to take account of what is happening in the world. There has been only one unchanging thing in the debate: Mr Rumbles's contributions, which have not changed from the beginning of the Aviemore incident and will not change no matter what evidence is presented.

I will not take an intervention from Mr Rumbles.

Everything on the Aviemore case is in the public domain. There was and is no case to answer. In Stalin's Russia, absence of evidence was proof of guilt, and that is exactly the approach that Mr Rumbles is taking. I advise him in a friendly and supportive way to have a period of rest during the recess that may aid his recovery from what is becoming a dangerous obsession. Mr Rumbles accepted that the debate has been good. The only real difference of opinion that exists is on funding. I am sorry that there is a difference of opinion, but let me outline clearly what the situation is now and say where I think there will be developments. Funding has been committed to schemes that are under construction. There is no danger with those schemes. The total funding over the next three years—which is a record amount—takes into account the needs of submitted schemes that will be ready for construction over the next three years. With respect to the general distribution thereafter, funds will not be equally divided across authorities, as has been implied; rather, the distribution will be based on the properties that are at risk in each council area. Considerable misunderstanding of that matter has been displayed during the debate, and I want the facts to be on the record. The new funding regime that the flooding bill will anticipate will develop things further. The national flood risk management plan that SEPA develops  will set out long-term objectives and measures for managing flood risks. The plan must and will include a cost benefit analysis involving identified measures. Money can then be allocated under any future regime through the capital grant as part of a future spending process within the context of the national plan. We can debate how that takes place, but it must be predicated on the fact that the Government is committed to local decision making. There is no conflict whatsoever between catchment management and local decision making.

I was about to talk about single outcome agreements. If that is the issue that the member—

I have outlined the formula clearly. Mr Scott and others have assumed that local authorities do not, in some sense, care or worry about flooding. The local outcome agreements will prioritise tackling flooding where that is a priority for local authorities. We should trust local authorities to get things right. I believe that democracy is a good way forward and that local democracy is one of the best ways forward of all. I want to refer briefly to some of the other issues that can unite us. We regard radar as an important issue; indeed, we are consulting SEPA and the United Kingdom Government as closely possible on how radar coverage can be extended in Scotland. We recognise that radar is an important tool.

No. I am sorry, but I must make progress. Various initiatives that relate to education and warning the public are under way. This year, SEPA is receiving substantial additional funding to develop a warning system, and there is a possibility that we will welcome the National Flood Forum to Scotland and help it to work with the Scottish public. I would support that. On planning, of course there is a presumption against development on flood plains. However, let us think carefully about the matter for a moment.  There are, for example, brownfield regeneration areas in the middle of the city of Glasgow that are on a flood plain. We could not abandon and walk away from those areas. Therefore, a blanket proscription against developing on flood plans would be impossible to fulfil. A careful approach needs to be taken, time after time. A presumption should exist that we do not want to create difficulties, but there should not be a blanket ban.

I am sorry, but I must make progress. The issue of natural flood management goes to the heart of what we are talking about. We are trying to provide the maximum protection and adaptation, but we are also trying to ensure that we develop such measures in keeping with and by working alongside the other forces in nature, rather than working against them; Robin Harper made that point strongly. I repeat our commitment to the natural flood management approach. In our view, there must be a much better way of undertaking sustainable flood management, and the bill must reflect that. I make it absolutely clear that the recommendations in the committee's report will be echoed in much of the bill. I hope that that will be seen in committee debates and discussions as the bill proceeds. Where we have differences—on funding, for example—discussion will have to continue, but I think that on most issues we will be able to unite to protect Scotland. The comprehensive effort that the committee and the Government have made to gather evidence and views from key stakeholders and the public has been extremely important. The evidence that we received in our consultation will inform the development of a bill that will be important to every community in Scotland. I was struck by a point that Bill Wilson made. Of course, there are communities that are deeply at risk—we know where they are and must work with them—but every community in Scotland could be at risk from extreme rainfall events and the effects of pluvial flooding. Communities such as Newmills never expected to be affected but have suffered devastating floods. We must raise the profile of the issue, make the whole of Scotland understand how important it is to the Parliament and to Scotland generally, and find the appropriate methods of moving forward. I am grateful to the committee for its work and hope that we will be able to work well with it. The debate has been helpful and has taken the issue forward.

The money is indeed distributed among the 32 councils—it is distributed on a needs basis and on the basis of schemes that are going ahead. Can the member name a single scheme that will not go ahead because of the distribution formula? If he cannot, perhaps we can nail that idea once and for all.

I give that assurance. The Government regards as essential the work that is being done on natural flood management. There is a strong shift in the balance towards natural flood management.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The issue of flooding is a very serious subject for debate. If Mr Rumbles is addressing not the issue of flooding but a previous incident, his account of which varies greatly from my own and that of many others, is he sticking to the subject of the debate?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am not the planning minister, so I hope that Mr Rumbles is not misleading the chamber. Perhaps that point could be noted.

I congratulate Mr Hume on securing his second members' business debate. I also replied to his first members' business debate, almost a year ago, on local food. If Mr Tolson aspires to the same record, perhaps another minister could mark him. First, I congratulate Dumfries and Galloway Council on its recent improved waste management performance, which is the hub of the motion. In 2006, Dumfries and Galloway Council landfilled 82,417 tonnes of waste and had a recycling and composting rate of 19 per cent. In 2007, the council landfilled 70,190 tonnes of waste and had a recycling and composting rate of 29.9 per cent. It is clear that the situation is improving. However, Elaine Murray was right to draw attention to issues that arise from the establishment of the Ecodeco plant, which involves a remarkable piece of large-scale machinery. One issue is that the plant requires a substantial throughput of material, which means that the incentive to reduce the amount of waste is comparatively limited. That is a downside of a PPP project, but I will not make that point too loudly in response to what Elaine Murray said. Nonetheless, Dumfries and Galloway Council has moved forward substantially as a result of the  building of the plant. The technology, which is originally Italian, is remarkable. The plant's opening in December was important for the council and the community and I was pleased to attend with the local member, Elaine Murray. Dumfries and Galloway is doing well, but everybody can do better. Nobody can rest on their laurels. Indeed, one of our waste officials was in Dumfries and Galloway this week to discuss the next steps on recycling and sustainable waste management. Scotland's overall performance on waste and recycling used to be dreadful, but it has improved considerably. As for whether it is dreadful, we are moving towards respectability on the European targets, although we are not there yet. Mr Hume is right to record that waste production is increasing. From 2001 to 2006, municipal waste in Scotland grew by about 1.5 per cent a year. We have the challenging target of stopping the growth in municipal waste by 2010. Some tentative signs show that waste growth is slowing, but the target remains challenging for every local authority. We must take action on packaging as part of the process, but we should start by accepting that the issue is not as straightforward as we feel that it is. Some packaging is required to ensure that goods reach consumers in a fit state, and sensible packaging can prevent food waste. Food makes up nearly 20 per cent of the average household bin, and I agree with Elaine Murray that oversensitivity to use-by dates can be part of the problem. The packaging industry acknowledges that overpackaging is a bad thing. It is working hard to reduce packaging within the existing legislative framework—it is important to note that framework. The EU packaging directive operates and the Packaging (Essential Requirements) Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/1941) govern the composition and characteristics of packaging. Those are the mechanisms by which we can currently deal with the matter, but we need to move forward. The Producer Obligations (Packaging Waste) Regulations 2007 (SI 2007/871) were made on a UK basis. We would like to move forward with those and with particular Scottish schemes that can make a difference. Mr Hume's estimate of the amount of packaging waste in Scotland is broadly accurate; the motion estimates that it is 1 million tonnes, although it is probably around 900,000 tonnes. However, around 600,000 tonnes could be recovered each year in Scotland if we move forward in the regulatory way that we anticipate. There is a lot of voluntary work on packaging. The waste and resources action programme—WRAP—which is funded by the Scottish Government and the Department for Environment,  Food and Rural Affairs, is working with retailers and their supply chains to reduce packaging. They are working specifically on the issue of Easter eggs, among other things. The work is designed to implement an agreement known as the Courtauld commitment, which aims to design out packaging waste growth by 2008; to deliver absolute reductions in packaging waste by 2010; and to identify ways of tackling food waste. Work on that is also being carried out in Scotland by Waste Aware Scotland. Other work includes an innovation fund; the dissemination of material on international best practice; encouraging companies to move to best-in-class and lightweight packaging; and the provision of technical advice. A large number of issues have been raised during the debate, and I will touch on one or two of those in closing. Binding packaging reduction targets could be a way forward. There will be a consultation on the waste legislation shortly, which Mr Hume mentioned in his opening speech. I hope that he will submit his views, which we will consider carefully. Mr Stewart raised the issue of fining by local authorities. We are reviewing the landfill allowance scheme with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in line with the concordat, and that issue will be addressed in those discussions. Mr Stewart also raised the issue of incentives for households. I am struck by the constant growth in that area, particularly in composting. When I was at the Gardening Scotland show two weeks ago, the single small stand that had last year encouraged people to take up composting and to use the reduced-cost composting bins that the Scottish Government supported was this year a three-part stand, with a variety of new products on show. More and more people want to take part in composting and recycling. Indeed, over 80 per cent of people are already doing some recycling. We have to encourage them to do more. Christine Grahame was right to draw attention to the buy-one-get-one-free incentives—or the BOGOF incentives, as she expressed it. That is a key point. The growth in the number of single person households does not match the growth in consumerism. We have to resist that growth, because it is leading to substantial waste. I welcome Nanette Milne's commitment to our zero-waste target. I am sure that her party will echo that. If we all gather round the zero-waste target, we will make progress. It is good to see the initiatives that a variety of organisations are making along those lines. We should pay tribute to those commercial organisations that realise the problems. For example, I draw members' attention to Tesco's plans. It aims to reduce the amount of packaging on both branded and Tesco own-label products by  25 per cent by 2010. It hopes to have own-label packaging labelled according to whether it can be reused, recycled or composted by the end of this year. It aims to reduce the proportion of waste that it recycles from its own operations from 71 per cent to 80 per cent, and to double consumer recycling at sites where there are automated recycling units. That company is doing lots of things, and we encourage all companies to do that, as it is important that they take part. A variety of other issues has been raised in the debate, which we will listen to. Jim Tolson mentioned the issue of a season ticket for small businesses, which already exists in Fife—we want that to be rolled out throughout the country. We will consult further on our zero-waste target—for example, the zero-waste think tank will examine packaging at its next meeting on 23 June. As we roll our policy forward, we want to hear good ideas. Many were expressed in the debate and others will come from elsewhere. We will listen to them. We plan to consult on possible provisions on waste in our climate change bill, and the consultation will cover packaging. Some members mentioned things that do not work. Although I am sympathetic to Jim Hume's suggestion that there should be a trial of waste points for excess packaging in stores, a trial that Asda undertook tended to show that consumers want to take the packaging home. Sometimes they need to do so because it shows cooking instructions or other information. The shop might not be the place where packaging should go—

No. I am in my final minute and I would like to finish. Given the way in which the Presiding Officer is looking at me, I think that I am over my final minute. Some things do not work, but we should try lots of things and see what does work. Good ideas are welcome. All of us are against sin and against excess packaging. It is one of those things that nobody wants to encourage. There is a need for some packaging, and we need to recognise what packaging is good, but if we reduce the amount of packaging, increase the amount of recycling and use a variety of approaches, of which the Ecodeco plant is only one, we will all contribute to the aim of a greener Scotland, and also the aim of a wealthier Scotland, because packaging is usually waste.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

The metropolitan Glasgow strategic drainage partnership involves a number of bodies including seven local authorities, Scottish Water, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Enterprise, all of which are contributing to its aims. The Scottish Government is represented on the project board with observer status and I am being kept abreast of progress as the project builds.

As Mr Gordon is aware, it is important that that part of the plan is implemented before some other parts. I visited the strategic drainage partnership some months ago and was shown the work that requires to be done in that part of Glasgow. The leaflet that the strategic drainage partnership published recently starts to set out what will be required in relation to its overall plan. No approach has been made to the Government yet in respect of support for that, but obviously it will have to be considered as the plans go forward. The Government recognises that Scottish Water in particular will play a significant role in achieving the strategic drainage partnership's medium and long-term objectives. We will have to consider carefully the future investment objectives for Scottish Water to ensure that it can make the  appropriate contribution to meeting the challenges that lie ahead. The project is undoubtedly a major one. The draft national planning framework identifies it as a national priority. As Mr Gordon knows from his experience, it deals with the replacement of a drainage infrastructure that is more than 100 years old and which, in some places, is worn out. The opportunities are great, and the first opportunity is to properly service the Commonwealth games site.

The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is responsible for monitoring the Loch Lomond byelaws. As the member knows—she is well aware of what happens in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park—the revised byelaws were introduced only in May 2007, and one season is insufficient to draw firm conclusions  about long-term effectiveness. The park authority has two strands to applying the byelaws: a preventive approach, which aims to raise awareness about the byelaws and the speed reduction areas, and dealing with byelaw contraventions when they occur. I recognise that changing behaviour is a long-term goal, and the park authority needs to continue to monitor the results before we can show whether trends are desirable.

I am happy to go along with the member and send that signal. It is important that the byelaws are observed. They exist not as decoration, but because they are required. However, it is important to point out that enforcement is taking place vigorously. For example, operation ironworks was launched in March 2008. It is a partnership among Central Scotland Police, Strathclyde Police, Tayside Police, the national park authority and the Forestry Commission Scotland. It is a six-month operation that is aimed at tackling antisocial behaviour of all types, and it covers the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. The operation aims to promote responsible behaviour in the countryside and to deter antisocial behaviour and criminal offences being committed. During the six months of the operation, there will be 42 different initiatives targeting issues such as speeding, parking, traffic, litter offences, theft, vandalism and noise disturbance. High-visibility patrols will be carried out by officers on bikes, as well as officers from the road policing unit, the dog section and the underwater search unit. A mobile police office will be in evidence. I am sure that members will be pleased to know that, as part of operation ironworks, a camper has just been fined for taking a chainsaw to a 30-year-old tree. Although that was not a speeding offence, the case indicates the seriousness with which we take all such matters.

I find myself in some difficulty, because the opening sentences of my speaking notes say: "This has been a very valuable and useful debate. I welcome the contributions and views that have been expressed". I publicly dissociate myself from that opinion. This has not been a "valuable and useful debate." It is of some significance that not one member has declared an interest—because there has been no interest in the debate. Outside the chamber, there will be no interest in the debate. By insisting on holding this debate, Robert Brown has succeeded in wasting everybody's time. Labour members have been very cute—they knew that first of all.

No, Mr Brown, do not waste any more of my time. My keynote for this summing-up speech is just to get through it. At the start of the debate, only three out of 16 Lib Dem members were present. They were not going to have Mr Brown wasting their time. Mr Chisholm did worse—only six out of 41 Labour members were in the chamber for the start of the debate. Even Mr Fraser managed just three out of 16. Those absent members knew that this afternoon's debate was pointless. It was a pointless occasion, and it was one of those occasions that do the Parliament no good whatever. Let us be ruthlessly honest about it: this was political theatre for those who are paid to be here. The debate had no other meaning.

No, I will not give way. My intention is just to get through this. I just want to get through it and go home. Just understand that, all right? [ Interruption. ]

Yup.

It is appropriate for ministers to tell the truth, which is what I intend to do. Let us consider the record of Labour in opposition when it matters and the issues that it has brought to the Parliament. In the past year, Labour has had 19 debates and of those—this is a fact and facts are chiels that winna ding—only five contained a policy proposal and one of them was on the Calman commission, which does not count as a policy in any way. That leaves four policy proposals, of which only two were new ideas. Labour in opposition is not moving Scotland forward, it is moving itself backward. There was nothing new in the five Lib Dem debates either—not one new policy was proposed. Even the Tories have a better record than that. This afternoon, we have heard several dismal speeches that were designed only to carp. I accept that many of them were fairly entertaining, but I want to single out one that was not. I can describe Johann Lamont's speech only as a sour and bitter attack full of smears and false innuendo all shrouded in a cloak of false indignation about parliamentary accountability. What annoys Johann Lamont and so many other Labour members is not that we have failed to be accountable but that the people of Scotland like what we are doing. I understand the frustration that somebody who has spent their career saying that something cannot be done will feel when they discover not only that it is being done but that it is being done well, but my advice to Johann Lamont and to other Labour members is to get over it and start contributing to the debate. That has been the constant theme of the debate. There can be no criticism of things that are not happening—that is not possible.

No, I will not. The criticism is of what has been happening—the successes that are taking place and the intention to continue to make things happen. Let me be absolutely clear on the issue of smaller class sizes. I am happy to do so, as it is a policy with which I am proud to be associated.

Smaller class sizes are vital to Scotland. We have argued for them constantly.  The concordat with local government creates the framework for their operation.

No, Mr Fraser. Councils and the Government are working hard to achieve that.

No amount of self-serving, head-of-a-pin, pettifogging opposition will stop smaller class sizes in Scotland. That is my message to Jeremy Purvis.

No, I will not give way—I am sorry. I want to finish and I am going to finish.

Presiding Officer—

No, I am sorry.

Believe me, Presiding Officer, I am showing all the courtesy that I can summon at this stage in the debate. Some of the criticism has involved accusing the Government of being populist, but the real objection is that we are popular, not populist. The Government's mission is to meet and match the rising ambitions of the people of Scotland and to improve their daily lives. That is a popular ambition and one that we will fulfil. Moreover, people know it. Research that was carried out between May and November showed that trust in the Scottish Government had increased by 20 percentage points in a year, from 51 per cent to 71 per cent,  which is twice the level of public trust that is placed in the Westminster Government. We have laid out a range of proposals and activities that we will bring forward. The First Minister will set out the full details of our legislative programme in September. As he did two weeks ago, he will mark a visionary course for Scotland—one that is full of detail, that will continue to drive Scotland forward and that will appeal to the Scottish people. The only critics of it will be those who do not understand the thirst and ambition of the Scottish people for change.

Oh!

The Scottish Government will publish its response to the Shucksmith report after the summer recess and will welcome debate on its conclusions. If legislation is to be brought forward, the Government will have a full public consultation on a draft bill before its introduction.

The Shucksmith report is complex and its arguments and thinking are dense. It has been broadly welcomed, as John Farquhar Munro said. I will use a variety of mechanisms to help to devise the Government's response. If John Farquhar Munro has views on the matter, I would be happy to hear from him; I would be happy to hear from any member and people in the crofting communities or elsewhere. On the formal side, yesterday I had the first of several meetings with the full Crofters Commission to discuss its perspective. I will also meet other crofters' interests before I publish our response after the summer recess.

The part of the Shucksmith report that reflects on the need for local democracy and local accountability is important. On land tenure, Rob Gibson is right to point out that, in Shetland for example, a great deal more  combinations of crofts will be worked and there will probably be more owner occupancy. The principle of local democracy and accountability is correct; the big issue is how we reflect it in any detailed legislation that we introduce.

That is a helpful and positive suggestion. I am positive about it and would like to find out how we could allow an economic assessment to take place. I will be happy to discuss it with Peter Peacock and I shall discuss it with officials.

As I did last week in the debate on wildlife crime, I pay tribute to all members who took part in the debate—all members except one, that is. Unfortunately, I refer yet again to Mike Rumbles. The situation repeats itself. I feel as if, almost every Thursday, I enter an alternative universe—one in which I hear the world according to Mike; a world that bears no relationship to the world in which the rest of us live. It is the political version of Tourette syndrome: it starts and then goes on, and on, and on. The serious point is that the Liberal Democrats had the opportunity today to make a positive contribution to an important debate but, in six minutes of winding-up speech, Mike Rumbles made not one new or positive statement—not a single one. I suggest that wiser heads than his in the Liberal Democrats—should they exist—consider the matter and ask whether what he says in such debates helps to achieve what the party wants to do for rural Scotland, or whether his endless playing to the gallery is destroying the reputation of not only the Liberal Democrats but the Parliament on the matter. I turn to the positive contributions of every other member who spoke in the debate. Their speeches were done very well indeed, and I will list some of the real, not artificial, issues that were debated. Robin Harper's intervention on Richard Baker seemed almost like a speech. He was wrong to say that the Government is not considering the issue of climate change. Only two weeks ago, we published the important report by Henry Graham  and colleagues on the contribution of agriculture to climate change. We will take the issue forward at the Royal Highland Show, where we will hold the first of a series of seminars on how farmers and others can contribute to addressing the challenge of climate change. I turn to the serious, as opposed to the artificial, points that were made about modulation. The Government was asked to give an absolute guarantee that "any increase in compulsory modulation must be offset by a corresponding reduction in voluntary modulation". I can give that absolute guarantee. That is what the Commission intends to do; we support it. The Commission has said that that is what should take place. Members should set their minds at rest on the matter. Jamie McGrigor is one such member—although his other points, including a request for quad-bike subsidy, were not quite so well agreed. Of course, all suggestions need to be taken into account as we debate the CAP health check. Peter Peacock's opening remark that it is important that Scotland has the opportunity to debate the matter and that the Government should listen to all the views is exactly the right point to make. Many of the points that he raised in his speech are views that will have to be debated strongly. One such issue is set-aside and whether there is any conflict between John Scott's position and that of Peter Peacock. My view is that there is no conflict between growing crops and ensuring environmental benefit. However, we have to have the debate and find out how we should go forward. The issues that Peter Peacock quite properly raised about LFASS are issues about which I, too, feel strongly. The Scottish Crofting Foundation, among others, has made strong representations to the Government on the matter. We must look at the LFASS and see how it fits into our overall policy. Indeed, Peter Peacock tempted me to speak warmly and approvingly of Brian Wilson. That is not something that I have ever done in my life, and I do not want to start now. That said, initiative at the edge was important. One of the big reasons for that was its concentration on asking communities to face the unpalatable. It asked them to look at the issues and ask: does this community have a future? It was an important debate for a number of communities, and it will remain so. John Farquhar Munro sensibly raised some of the issues in the Aylward plan that the European Parliament debated this week. I make it absolutely clear that we have a commitment to work with the sheep sector to find the right practical solutions to issues including tagging. We will continue to do that. The Aylward plan contains interesting material on which we need to reflect.  A range of other issues were raised in the debate, such as the SRDP. It has a monitoring committee, which can consider adjustments and does so regularly, so we will not get involved in some massive, overbureaucratic review and restructuring, particularly because the SRDP as it went to Brussels was very much a creature of the stakeholders and the previous Government. We have consistently said that we will continue to review it, because we want it to be well tuned to Scotland's demands. The point that a number of members made about how that relates to some of the issues in the Shucksmith report is interesting, and we will have to reflect on it as we take the report forward. Sarah Boyack raised a number of points in her closing speech; I will address one of them in particular. She asked about the next stage of the food policy. We will roll out the next stage of that policy at the Royal Highland Show. There are no easy answers to some of the procurement questions, but we want to make progress on them and I hope that she will engage with us in that process as we begin to set out where we are going to go. This has been a key discussion. We must now send out a clear message about the importance that the Parliament and Government place on the future of agriculture in Scotland. Agriculture is valued because of the important contribution that it makes to our economic life, environmental life and social objectives. We must ensure that it contributes to the vision about which Richard Lochhead and I often talk when we go about the country: the vision of profitable and sustainable businesses in a populated landscape. That is what our ambition should be for rural Scotland. We have heard interesting and challenging speeches, but this debate is the start of the process. We hope that when we issue the consultation document, we will receive responses from throughout Scotland and that those will reflect the views of the political parties and of the many others who have no politics but who want to ensure that we are capable of achieving the vision of profitable and sustainable businesses in a populated landscape. Sarah Boyack was also right to point out that we need to learn lessons from previous experience to find out what we can do to improve our record. Single farm payments have been in operation for three years and it is right to examine how well they function and whether any changes can be made to the system to make things easier and more productive for farmers and land managers. We take the point on progressive modulation and will have to consider it. We stress that everybody in the Parliament will make every effort to strip out unnecessary red  tape. Simplification, which is close to the First Minister's heart—as the speeches that he has made in the Parliament show—and to my heart, can be part of the CAP review, but we need to do it in the right context and we need to know where we want to go. Let us keep the vision of profitable and sustainable businesses in a populated landscape before us; if we do so, everything that we do in the health check will focus on that clear objective. The Commission will need to hear the voice not only of the Scottish Government but of the Scottish people as they say what they want to take place in the country. Therefore, I encourage as many people as possible to take part in the consultation once we have issued the document. We must all let the Commission know what we want the future of Scotland's landscape, agricultural industries and greenness to be.

That is unusual.

I congratulate Dr Allan on securing the debate. From the passion that has imbued every speech, it is clear that everybody knows how important the issue is. Jamie Stone was absolutely right to focus on the effect of fuel costs on individuals, as well as on the economy throughout Scotland and not just in the island communities. I will mention two individuals. I know very well the people about whom Jamie Stone spoke. This debate is about Iris Mackay and the services that she provides to the community in which she lives. Providing those services is becoming more difficult and supplying goods to that community in a very remote part of Scotland is becoming ever more expensive. It is a debate about Hector Stewart, who was quoted today in the fishermen's press release to  which Lewis Macdonald referred. He is a fish processor in Uist—I have known him well for years—and he said: "We receive the same price for top quality lobster and scallops as we did 15 years ago but our operating costs have nearly doubled in the last 6 months." I accept—the Government accepts—the reality of that situation. It is about the expectations, the hopes, the lifestyles and the survival of the people we are talking about and of the work that they do. I could quote many more examples. I had an e-mail this morning from David Sulman, who is well known to many people in the forestry sector. He pointed out that, in the forestry sector, costs are rising again and again and there are real questions in what was, and still should be, a good time for forestry in Scotland. I will focus on one or two specific sectors, but first I will say this. In conversation with Hector Stewart, Iris Mackay and David Sulman, I would have to make a key point. I make it without political prejudice, but I still make it. The simplest solution is often the best: Occam's razor applies in this situation as in any other. Clarity in the decision-making process would come about if this Parliament had the powers to make the full difference. It is frustrating to me, as a Scottish Government minister, to have to stand here and talk about a balance of powers—to have to say that, although this Government will be doing everything that it can, it has limited powers in this area and must look to a United Kingdom Government that, so far, has done nothing.

I am sorry, but I want to make some progress. My honest response to Iris Mackay and Hector Stewart is that this Government will do everything that it can do—within its powers—to make a difference. Let me start with fishing. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and I have been in close touch with the fishing industry in recent weeks. I met representatives from the Mallaig and North-West Fishermen's Association in Oban on 5 May, and Richard Lochhead met representatives on 18 April and 12 May. What Mr McGrigor said in that regard is wrong—the decisions that were made at that meeting on 12 May, the ground for which was prepared by my meeting on 5 May, were acted on very quickly. The fuel task force will meet later this week to undertake its urgent task. Its membership is wide-ranging and represents all parts of the industry. Whatever we can do with that task force, we will do. Our first step was to commission a report on the trends in fuel prices and the implications that that  has for our fleets. The fuel task force is looking at short, medium and long-term measures and at the provision of short-term assistance with non-fuel costs—which is something that is within our powers—such as the cost of the vessel monitoring systems warranty and the annual maintenance of life rafts. That might sound small, but we will try to make every contribution that we can. We have raised with the UK Government the wider issue of the steps that can be taken to reduce the cost of fuel to the fishing sector as a whole, and we are continuing to press the European Commission on the need for a level playing field on subsidies. We are moving ahead in every way. On 19 May, Richard Lochhead spoke to Hilary Benn in Brussels and he also spoke to the commissioner. We will continue to press the UK Government about the seriousness of the issue.

We will make such representations and have often done so. We need the UK Government to show the same sense of urgency that the Scottish Government has shown—then we will get progress, I am sure. Our fuel task force will report for the first time at the end of August. That is the first action that will be taken in the medium term, following on from the short-term measures that I have described. We also have a long-term plan. We are trying to do as much as we can. We have already committed £300,000 to extend payment of the VMS warranty and we will provide a further £400,000 for the annual maintenance of life rafts. I am clear that there must be a level playing field across Europe and we have been pressing hard on that. We have been monitoring the development of the French and Spanish schemes to support their industries and we have made it plain to the European Commission that we expect it to ensure that everyone abides by the same EU rules. There is no easy solution to the problems of the fishing industry, but this Government will continue to do all that it can do to help.

I will certainly undertake to have those conversations, and I know that my colleagues are already having them. Of course, the context in which such discussions take place involves the pressure that we are under due to the UK settlement. However, there is no doubt that we recognise the pressure on local authorities—no one is denying that pressure; to assert that we are denying it is wrong. I notice, for example, that Highland Council today pointed out that its costs have risen by £725,000. A proportion of that is taxation to the Treasury, so there is a solution available that the UK Treasury should volunteer. I was going to make this point later, but I may be running out of time already. The UK Treasury is receiving £4 billion more in revenue than it expected. Where is that money going? Is it being ploughed back into Scotland's rural communities or given to petrol consumers? It is not. Gordon Brown had a brass neck to come today to Aberdeen—the oil capital of Europe—carrying not a rebate cheque but some vague promises. We need action from the UK Government.

No, I will not. We need action for the haulage industry, which is immensely dependent on fuel. Fuel prices for hauliers have risen by 32.5 per cent in the past year, which represents a 14 per cent increase in haulage costs. Ministers have met the haulage sector and Mr Swinney has written to the Chancellor of the Exchequer on several occasions. In December, he wrote seeking a differentiated scheme of taxes for rural areas; the Treasury rejected it. The First Minister wrote to the chancellor in March asking him not to implement the planned 2p increase in fuel duty, and seeking the introduction of a fuel duty regulator to stabilise prices and a study comparing UK haulage prices with those in other EU countries. The chancellor's decision to postpone the proposed 2p per litre increase was welcome, although it is only a postponement. We still await a reply to the other points raised. Mr Swinney has just written in response to the UK budget, highlighting once again the impact that high fuel costs are having on our rural communities and businesses. I long for the day that we can act rather than write, and I hope that that day will come soon. I will finish by talking about the huge issue of fuel poverty. In fact, we could spend all evening discussing the variety of pressures on life in Scotland from higher fuel prices, but I will make one final point. The cost of domestic heating oil, which has often to be used when there are no alternatives, has  risen from 16p to 61p a litre. There are fears that the price may top £1 by next year. That affects 113,000 Scots households—I declare an interest in that one of them is mine. To put those figures into perspective, we are talking about 25 per cent of households in Highlands, 30 per cent in Shetland, 33 per cent in Orkney and 46 per cent in the Western Isles. They are often the households of those who are most vulnerable. It is their only possible heating source, and some people face bills of up to £3,000 this year. A single fill of a tank of 1,000 litres has risen from £180 two and a half years ago to £550 now. That is a very difficult situation, and we must have a regime in Scotland that can deal with that and help to defer some of the global impacts, as well as those from domestic policy decisions. This Government will do everything that it can within its present powers, but the situation is a clear illustration that we need real powers to make a difference.  Meeting closed at 18:07.

I will dispose of the Liberal amendment immediately. I am sorry that we have been distracted by it—it is absolutely clear that the amendment is a waste of chamber time, which is deeply to be regretted. Peter McMahon, who is now a correspondent for The Scotsman , once wrote a piece entitled "What are the Liberal Democrats for?" It is a question that many of us ask ourselves, and we find great difficulty in finding an answer. However, this afternoon they are for wasting chamber time: their amendment asks a body that does not exist to do something that cannot be done. If there could be a bigger waste of time, I cannot imagine it. However, it is worse than that. We have heard political posturing of the worst sort—playing to the gallery. No doubt Mr Rumbles will announce in a press release immediately after this debate—if he has not already done so, and I would not bet that he has not—that this Government is in favour of penalising farmers. The system of cross compliance is clear. He knows the system and I know the system. Were we to do what the amendment suggests, Scottish farmers would lose every element of the single farm payment. It is a disgrace that he lodged his amendment, and it is a disgrace that he has wasted Parliament's time.

Mr Hume is not going to waste any more of my time this afternoon. As I proceed to address the serious issues in the debate, I note that Mr Hume never referred to them in his speech. I will deal first with strategy. I agree entirely that we should accept the recommendation that the Government should have a comprehensive wildlife crime strategy. At its meeting two weeks ago, the PAW group  accepted that recommendation. As the Solicitor General said, we will discuss the matter over the summer and return to Parliament in early autumn with a strategy to be debated and a timetable for implementation of recommendations. We will aim to do that in September, although I am glad that Sarah Boyack acknowledged that the timetable may slip a little. The level of wildlife crime in Scotland continues to be unacceptably high. Figures on poisoning for 2007 show little improvement on the corresponding figures for 2006. There was an increase in the incidence of badger baiting and hare coursing continues to be a problem. Poaching is a wildlife crime, and the number of offences of poaching deer and salmon has risen. Abuse of habitats is also getting worse. Recently, there have been reports of hillsides being deliberately set alight in Sutherland, which is completely against the Muirburn code. All those acts are abuses of Scotland's natural heritage. That is the crime, and it is a crime that offends all Scotland. The answer to wildlife crime lies not in the posturing that we have heard from the Liberal Democrats this afternoon, but in the serious debate in Parliament, in bringing people together and in ensuring that people move away from entrenched positions. We will make real progress only when land managers and conservationists share their experiences and knowledge and work together to isolate what I called in my statement on snaring the "cowboys and criminals" who still damage the countryside. I accept the points that have been made this afternoon on snaring. Presiding Officer, you will not be surprised to know that I am not moving away from the statement that I made on 20 February, but I agree that we must enforce rules and regulations as they are set. The current failure to do so leads to incidents such as Christine Grahame described. I confirm to Sarah Boyack that we hope to use a sub-committee of PAW to take forward the regulatory and legislative framework to which I referred. I accept that the group should be inclusive in nature and would be happy to talk to organisations that genuinely wish to be part of the process of improving regulations. The thematic review has been vital. To be fair, it should be called not the Tomkins review but the Tomkins-O'Donnell review. I pay tribute to the entire team in the review: Paddy Tomkins, Joe O'Donnell, David McCracken and Maura Lynch. I congratulate them on having worked superbly well. We must now build on that work. I am pleased to announce this afternoon—[ Interruption. ]

I am sure that members will wish to quieten down when I start to talk about money. I am pleased to say this afternoon that we will provide PAW with the funding that will be necessary to support new law enforcement projects, which was one of the recommendations in the report. We believe that such projects will show the way to a more professional and systematic approach to combating wildlife crime. SNH will provide the funds—a total of £220,000 in the current spending review period. Substantial sums of £100,000 a year in 2009-10 and 2010-11 will be provided, along with some start-up resources this year, as PAW gets under way. That money will be invested in the future of fighting wildlife crime. The report accepts that wildlife crime is a crime like any other; we can now move ahead on the basis of that definition and we have accepted the recommendations that affect the Government. As the Solicitor General said, the recommendations that affect the Crown Office have not only been accepted but are being implemented. I know that chief constables are taking seriously the recommendations that affect them. We still have a big job to do. We must not only outlaw wildlife crime but change the attitude to it. We must make it clear that wildlife crime is as morally unacceptable as any other form of crime and that it must disappear from Scotland. We will do that as a Parliament if we work together. I am heartened by what we have heard today from almost all parts of the chamber, although it seems that the hardest people for us to reach are the Liberal Democrat spokespeople, which is deeply to be regretted.

I could not possibly say whether the Ministry of Defence was guilty of a wildlife crime, but I think that Rob Gibson's point  illustrates the need for a responsible approach to land ownership and land management so that people do not run the risk of damaging nature. I hope that the Ministry of Defence will bear that in mind in future.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You have had notice of this point of order, which relates to the Liberal Democrat amendment to the motion. As is my normal practice, the full text of the motion to be debated today was distributed to Opposition spokespeople on Monday with a request that if issues arose that were worth discussing, they should be discussed before today. I saw the Liberal amendment last night and, on reflection, I found that there is a substantial difficulty with it in terms of the operation of the Government and the Parliament ultra vires. I want to make the situation as clear as possible, but I will be brief. Referring to a body that does not exist, "the Legislation, Regulation and Guidance sub-group of Partnership for Action Against Wildlife Crime", the amendment calls on the Government "to give full consideration, in consultation with land users, to the proposal that loss of single farm payments should occur only in cases where responsibility has first been proven in a court of law". It would be impossible for that proposal to be given any consideration because it is ultra vires in terms of the regulations on rural payments. Indeed, were it to be accepted as a proposal, it would run so contrary to the present situation that all single farm payments would be put in jeopardy, as would a substantial part of the £1.6 billion that we plan to spend on the Scotland rural development programme. I made the point to Mr Hume at lunch time today, when I notified the Presiding Officer of the issue. I asked him to seek a manuscript amendment to alter the situation. He agreed to do so. I understand that such an amendment was sought but that Mr Hume subsequently withdrew permission and reverted to the original amendment. I have had a conversation with him, as has the Solicitor General for Scotland. The situation remains that, if the amendment were agreed to and an amended motion were passed, it would instruct the Government to do something that is illegal and which would put at risk every farm payment in Scotland. Inter alia, the amendment also fatally confuses civil and criminal law. The way in which the matter is dealt with is that criminal conviction for wildlife crime can be considered as an element in the existing three- stage appeal process, which includes in the final stage an appeal to the Scottish Land Court. In those circumstances, the amendment is incompetent and therefore should not be called for debate this afternoon. I seek your ruling on that, Presiding Officer.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Although, of course, I entirely accept your ruling, would it be possible for the detailed thinking behind the ruling to be made available to the chamber? That would assist in the  avoidance of doubt in such circumstances in future.

For the most part, the debate has been overwhelmingly positive and fruitful. I guarantee at the outset that today's debate will be reflected upon and will help to inform thinking as we prepare the Government's response to the committee of inquiry's recommendations. I am grateful, as ever, for Karen Gillon's support. The fact that she commends me for proceeding slowly is welcome, but I assure her that we will have a sense of urgency. When we come back to the Parliament, I hope that we will do so with clear recommendations. Several members made the crucial point about the difference between legislative and administrative action. There are issues in the report that can respond to administrative action. We will do our best to identify those issues and to take them forward. One issue that has been identified is the need for changes to the croft house grant scheme. I accept that it is illogical to have a system in which people can get a grant for a croft house only if it is no longer a croft house. I have indicated that I am supportive of a change to the Registration of Leases (Scotland) Act 1857, which would make a difference to that. However, the question whether the scheme should provide loans as well as grants is more complex. The previous Administration—I am sure that Sarah Boyack will not mind my saying so—discontinued the loan element that was available under the former crofters building grants and loans scheme, so before reintroducing that element we should carefully consider the reasons for its discontinuation.

Absolutely. I will make no analogy about more pleasure being taken in the sinner who repents. We will take the issue forward together. I pay further tribute to the people who were involved in the report, including the members of the committee of inquiry. As well as Mark Shucksmith, who is in the public gallery—he will have enjoyed hearing the debate—I want to name the other committee members: Jane Brown, from Shetland; Fred Edwards, who is also in the public gallery; Professor Jim Hunter, who resigned from the committee during the process but was present in Stornoway to welcome the publication of the report and to make some important comments on it; Susan Lamont; Norman MacDonald; Professor Donald MacRae; Agnes Rennie; and Becky Shaw. I also thank the committee's secretariat, especially Fiona Spencer and Jim Wildgoose, who helped with the launch of the report. However, the report is not about in with the new and out with the old. The present and previous members of the Crofters Commission have done sterling work for crofting, as have their staff. I can clarify for Sarah Boyack that, at the same time as the report was launched on Monday, the commission's staff were involved in a meeting with Scottish Government officials to discuss the issues. The guarantee of no redundancy holds and I would indeed be happy to take forward the discussion and to have further discussions with the staff. Later this month, I will meet the whole commission to discuss how we might move forward with the report. I pay tribute to the present commission members: Drew Ratter, its convener; Sarah Allen, who is in the public gallery; Davie MacLeod; Murdo MacLennan; Robin Currie; Robin Callander, who has, alas, recently resigned from the commission; Ronnie Eunson; Angus McHattie; and, of course, Nick Reiter, who is the chief executive. As I said in my opening speech, the report is not about the end of the Crofters Commission but about the future of crofting and it should be understood in that way. Of course, crofting also has a much wider constituency. The iconic Norman Leask has already been referred to by two front-bench spokespeople, so I will mention him, too. People such as Neil MacLeod—the new chair of the Scottish Crofting Foundation—and a range of others have been passionately involved in debating the future of crofting. It has been good to hear informed debate in the chamber, too. I will refer briefly to some of the points that have been raised and provide some answers. On access to the SRDP, things are going well. Applications are coming in and the pre-application  process is under way. Every help is being given to people to apply using the computer system. Alas, the allocation system has to be complex, because of European regulation, rather than our regulation. However, last year we decided to provide an additional £100,000 per year to enable the Crofters Commission to help crofting communities access the SRDP. [ Interruption. ] There appears to be a marching band in the chamber, but I will try to carry on. I have never referred to Christine Grahame as a marching band before and I suspect that I will not be allowed to do so again.

It would be utterly wrong to say that the SRDP of £1.6 billion is not fit for purpose. That would be a case of, to quote Robert Frost's poem, "New Hampshire", "looking down on mountains." We can change the SRDP according to the circumstance; Tavish Scott knows that it is possible to do that on an annual basis. We want to do that, so we will bring forward changes on that basis as necessary. Presiding Officer, I am sure that you would expect me to make specific points on the bull and ram hire schemes, which have been referred to several times in the debate. I want to be sure that there is no misrepresentation of what Mark Shucksmith said. I asked him to include the subject in his report during the process. Paragraph 3.2.19 of the report states: "The bull scheme appears expensive, relative to private hire where this is available ... Only 2% of townships now participate in this scheme ... Our view is that support for bull hire should only be made available in those areas where ownership of a bull is impractical and commercial opportunities for bull hire are lacking—ie. where market failure exists." The paragraph goes on to propose that there should not be a centralised facility.

I must make progress. I am not making an announcement, or accepting or rejecting that recommendation, but pointing out the facts of it. A capital appraisal is going on, which is led by the Crofters Commission. Roseanna Cunningham raised the issue of support for the crofting brand. The Crofters  Commission is, as ever, in advance of the market, because it is looking at how to launch the crofters mark—it hopes to do so in October and I hope to be part of that. Roseanna Cunningham also suggested that crofting was very much aligned to the cittaslow movement. I am grateful to Dr Alasdair Allan, who is my guru on all things Gaelic, for pointing out that the cittaslow movement must be described in Gaelic as baile slaodach—the slow town movement. I am sure that Norman Leask will provide a Shetlandic version of that. The point is that that movement fits perfectly with the view of what local food is about. It is undoubtedly positive. I turn finally to governance. Peter Peacock made an important contribution to the debate. He is utterly right that the problem will lie in focusing the report's radical and important recommendations in legislation. The points that he made are the points that I am already considering. There are inconsistencies in taking forward the case law basis of crofting law and seeing how it works with a localised movement. The intention is all. If we can think imaginatively about how to do that, I am sure that the work can be put in to deliver the intention of the report. There are many influential books and writings about crofting, but I have always been particularly moved by two of them. One is of course Jim Hunter's, "The Making of the Crofting Community", which is a great work that tells us what lay in the past. About 25 years ago, the poet Alasdair Maclean wrote a book called, "Night Falls on Ardnamurchan: The Twilight of a Crofting Family", in which he looked back at his family's experience in a longing and moving way. I read the book again some months ago and it struck me as a nostalgic but out-of-date—although very poetic—attempt to talk about the west of Scotland and the crofting communities. Crofting has a vibrant future. It can deliver enormous economic, environmental and cultural benefits. It has to be part of the mechanism for delivering the Scotland that we wish to see: the wealthier, fairer, safer, stronger, greener Scotland. Scotland will be like that if we respond positively to the report. I look forward to working with the whole Parliament in taking forward the report and ensuring that crofting has a safe and sustained future, thanks to the work of Mark Shucksmith and his colleagues.

Given the complexity of some of the schemes, it would be impossible to use paper applications. The member is overstating the representations that have been received and the level of complication that is involved. We are helping people. He should calm down a little bit.

It gives me great pleasure to open the first of many debates and discussions that will take place as we begin work to put in place a firm foundation for the future of crofting in Scotland. The Government made a commitment in its programme for government to reform crofting following the work of the committee of inquiry on crofting. That was consistent with our drive to promote a wealthier and fairer Scotland, a safer and stronger Scotland and a greener Scotland. On Monday, I formally received the committee's final report at an event in Stornoway. I took the opportunity then and I do so again to thank all members of the committee and particularly the chairman, Mark Shucksmith, for the public service that they have done. I am sure that the whole Parliament extends its thanks. I also thank everyone who contributed to the production of the report through their participation in the committee's public meetings earlier in the year or through their submissions in response to the call for evidence. On Tuesday morning, I was pleased to read the universally positive coverage of the report. I was particularly struck by a comment from Patrick Krause, the chief executive of the Scottish Crofting Foundation, which was quoted in The Herald. He said: "There is no doubt the authentic voice of Scottish crofters is in this report." That is true. The report is a testament to the consultation that was undertaken when the report was being produced. Since then, I have been struck by the intelligent and positive coverage of the detailed recommendations in the report. For example, in today's Press and Journal ,  the National Trust for Scotland indicates its support for many elements in the report, although it asks questions that should be asked. I have also been impressed by the response from NFU Scotland, which also asked questions. I am sorry that John Farquhar Munro is not in his usual place in the chamber, because he has been positive about the report, although he defends the Crofters Commission in this morning's Press and Journal. I, too, defend the Crofters Commission. However, the report is not about the future of the Crofters Commission; it is about the future of crofting.  The committee of inquiry was established by the previous Administration in September 2006, to consider the future of crofting. Mark Shucksmith was appointed in December 2006 and the other members of the committee were appointed in April 2007. The committee was asked—I pay tribute to the previous Administration for this—to identify "a vision for the future of crofting" and to make recommendations designed to secure specific goals: to sustain and enhance the population; to improve economic vitality; to safeguard landscape and biodiversity; and to sustain cultural diversity. When I became Minister for Environment a year ago, I encouraged the committee to be radical, because radical change is needed to reverse years of decline in crofting. I share the committee's view that there is a clear and present danger to the future of crofting and radical action is required. Radical recommendations are the culmination of the committee's work, which is the most significant investigation into crofting since the report of the Taylor commission in 1954. Indeed, in future, a history of crofting—I will not attempt such a thing—will regard the work of the Napier commission, the Taylor commission and the Shucksmith committee as three pillars in the building of the crofting system. Of course, members of the Shucksmith committee did not have to be shipwrecked twice, as happened to members of the Napier commission, in order to come to their conclusions. The report makes bold recommendations on the land and environment, the rural economy, housing, governance, crofting regulation and enforcement, and the crucial issue of attracting new entrants into crofting. On land and environment, the report makes recommendations on the single farm payment, the less favoured area support scheme, the Scotland rural development programme and the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme. On the rural economy, it makes recommendations on development investment, on the relationship between the work of Highlands and Islands Enterprise and local authorities, and on in-migration, return migration and population retention. On housing, it makes proposals for the croft house grant scheme and on the provision of housing for non-crofters. On governance arrangements, it recommends winding up the Crofters Commission and separating the functions that the commission currently undertakes. Regulation and enforcement would be discharged by a new structure.  Development would become the responsibility of a crofting and community development body, possibly within HIE. The report recommends that responsibility for the register of crofts be taken over by Registers of Scotland and that grazings committees be modernised and given an expanded role. On regulation and enforcement, the report recommends that the rights that were laid down in the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886, in relation to security of tenure, succession, fair rents and the value of improvements, be enjoyed only "by those resident on or near their croft and using the land beneficially." It is strange that such a recommendation might be regarded as controversial, because it is axiomatic that the benefits of crofting should accrue to crofters themselves. The report recommends that croft houses be tied to occupancy through a real burden, which would take effect when the croft was next assigned or purchased and would run for ever. Decrofting the house site or purchasing the landlord's interest would not extinguish the burden. The report argues that the combination of those recommendations and other proposals on regulation would create more opportunities for young people and attract new entrants to crofting. The committee's vision of a growing, prosperous, inclusive and sustainable crofting community is one that I whole-heartedly share. Crofting delivers social, economic and environmental benefits and is part of the cultural landscape of the Highlands and Islands, which is famous throughout the world. It should be advanced to secure more of those public benefits, not simply to preserve tradition, although that is good in itself. No one can understate its role. Crofting should be preserved because crofting per se is worth pursuing in the modern age. The principles of localism and communality are central to the report's recommendations and, like the committee of inquiry, I believe that they are at the heart of crofting. The Government believes strongly in empowering communities to take control of their own destinies and in enabling people to make the plans and take the decisions that affect them and their communities. Through direct participation in those processes and decisions, individuals can see the benefits of that approach and communities can generate new life. Crofters are not bereft of "reserves of knowledge, experience and leadership", as the Taylor committee suggested 54 years ago. The Taylor committee suggested then that  "initiative must come from without". Now, it can come from within. The greatest chance for success will come if crofters feel that they have ownership and control of their future. On Monday, I saw a wonderful example of that in the Lewis township of Coll, where a new grazings committee has come together and is working within the community to bring new life to it. Crofting needs to serve Scotland well in the 21 st century, and the report can help that to happen. I turn to the recommendations and the Government's response to them. I shall consider the report carefully over the summer and announce a detailed response at the end of the summer. The recommended changes to the governance arrangements for crofting need a great deal of consideration. As in any such report—particularly a radical one—the devil will be in the detail, but I hope that the whole Parliament will find ways of participating in that discussion and debate, the outcome of which I expect to be legislation although, obviously, I cannot confirm that today. For example, we need to ensure that any new governance structure facilitates local input but does not create a bureaucracy that is at odds with our agenda of simplifying the public body landscape. I accept strongly that Registers of Scotland, which has expertise in the registration of property, should take over responsibility for the register of crofts, although I recognise that there is considerable work to be done before that can happen. I need to consider how to take it forward and finance it. I accept recommendation 3.15.9, which is that "The Registration of Leases (Scotland) Act 1857 should be amended to make a crofting lease registrable and hence eligible for standard securities." That is one of a range of recommendations that will be easy to accept. Accepting that recommendation will make it easier for crofters to access commercially available loans so that they may build or improve their homes without having to decroft. I keep open the option of implementing the recommendation on what the report refers to as real burdens that would require occupancy of croft houses. On Monday, I made it clear that the Government may introduce retrospective legislation if it recommends to the Parliament that that proposal be adopted. That would be necessary to reduce the risk of a rush to decroft and avoid the provisions of any future legislation. I suspect that all the parties and the individual members present, some of whom are highly knowledgeable about crofting, will conclude that reform of crofting cannot be undertaken instantly. Today, we are at the end of 122 years of complex  legislation, and perhaps the most difficult task will be to simplify that legislation in the way that the committee envisages, which I support. However, we continue to make changes, even while we consider the next steps. Last winter, we consulted on powers under the existing crofting legislation to designate new areas where crofting tenure could apply. The consultation proposed that Arran, Bute, Great Cumbrae Island and Little Cumbrae Island, as well as areas within Moray Council and Highland Council that are not already within the crofting counties—an historical anomaly that many people felt should have been resolved a century ago—be so designated. Responses to the consultation, which closed in March—although we took account of late comments—broadly support the proposal for an alignment with the HIE boundaries. Accordingly, I am minded to designate those areas for crofting tenure, and I expect to move to implement that measure in the coming year. Obviously, I wish to ensure a level playing field for all crofting areas, so I will take forward the future of financial support for them in light of Shucksmith's recommendations. We will now give careful consideration to the report of the committee of inquiry on crofting and decide how best to take forward its recommendations. We will start work on producing our detailed response to the report and look for the earliest opportunity to introduce consequential legislative change. I greatly look forward to hearing members' views today and on future occasions. The inquiry was conducted independently, and I hope that its independence will command the respect that allows us to come together and build consensus on the way forward. One thing above all should motivate us and leave us in no doubt that we must act: crofting is in a perilous state and we have an obligation to ensure that it carries on into future generations. Mark Shucksmith and his colleagues have done a great service in helping us to ensure that it does. The decisions will now have to be taken, and we will have to take responsibility for the actions.

I am sure that the member will be delighted to hear that small farmers and crofters in the Highlands and Islands will have at least as much, and perhaps more, access to funding than other rural businesses. They will be eligible for rural development contracts for regional priorities, rural development contracts for land managers' options, forestry challenge funds, LEADER funding, the food processing, marketing and co-operation scheme, less favoured area support and the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme; that is, seven out of the eight elements of the Scotland rural development programme. Even the eighth element of the programme—the skills development scheme—may support organisations to set up a training initiative to benefit crofters.

I am going to try to be positive about all the opportunities that exist. I am sorry to say that Rhoda Grant appears to take a glass-half-empty view of life. I have discussed these issues at length with the Scottish Crofting Foundation and others, and know that they are aware that the opportunities are  great. The way to take advantage of those opportunities is to encourage people to apply, not to say that funds have been cut when they have not been cut, and to look at the potential and the possibilities of the scheme. If Rhoda Grant were to do that, I am sure that the mood in the Highlands and Islands would be brighter than her own.

This is clearly an important issue for Helen Eadie. She will recall that she and I discussed flooding earlier this year and that she is due to meet me again next Thursday. In March, she asked seven written parliamentary questions on flood risk and coastal planning, and I have previously answered two oral parliamentary questions from her on the subject. Next week, we are due to provide answers to a further 38 written parliamentary questions on the subject. This is an issue that is dear to her heart. More specifically, it is also near to her home. Turning to the substance of the question, Scottish planning policy 7 includes a risk framework that sets out the planning response to developments that are proposed in areas of high flood risk. The Association of British Insurers was a key consultee during its preparation and fully endorsed the risk framework approach.

I admire persistence wherever it is shown. However, persistence should not fly in the face of facts. For example, many of the written parliamentary questions that have been submitted by the member on the subject reflect planning and flooding issues and the language and legislation on planning and flooding that apply south of the border, but not in Scotland. They do not show a sound understanding either of the Scottish position or of the issue. I am sorry to say that. I am also sorry to say that the purpose of the question is exactly what the chamber has just heard—to try to spread alarm and despondency where there should be none. The effect of section 48(6) of the Town and County Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 is that once a reporter has issued a decision on an appeal, that decision is final. Neither he or she, the Scottish ministers, nor anybody else has any further jurisdiction on the matter. That means that it is not possible for the Scottish ministers, the appointed reporter, or the directorate for planning and environmental appeals to comment on the merits of the appeals, other than to say that the reporters' decisions were based on the evidence that was presented at the public local inquiries, and on all written submissions by the parties involved. That is the fact of the matter.

That is a good and pertinent question and it needs to be dealt with in the context of the report of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, of which John Scott is the deputy convener. It should also be dealt with in any consideration of the flooding bill, and be taken into account in the bill itself. I do not think the amount of land in question is as large as some people have claimed. However, the way in which we encourage land managers and landowners—and tenants of land—to ensure that that land is available for sustainable or natural flood defences is a key issue. I look forward to a constructive engagement on that issue with Mr Scott and with the chamber.

That is also a positive approach, which has been mentioned and discussed in committee. In principle, I would welcome that approach. It is important that there is full disclosure, but we must remember that indicative flood maps are indicative and are not, in fact, an indication of the likelihood, or possibility, of actual flooding in any property. There are issues to be considered, but in general I would welcome that approach. I hope that it will be something the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee reflects upon, after which we will see how we can bring it forward in terms of legislation.

The Scottish Government has not had any discussions with local authorities specifically on that issue. With her background, I am sure that Johann Lamont will recognise that the concept of environmental justice is widely embracing and is now largely mainstreamed across a range of policies. A discussion in that context takes place regularly. The concordat that has been agreed between the Government and Scotland's local authorities—in particular our joint endeavour to deliver our national outcomes—will lead to the steady extension of environmental justice to all sections of our society.

I agree with Johann Lamont that environmental injustice and degradation is an urban as well as a rural issue. More people are probably affected in urban areas than in rural  areas, which is why attention must be paid to it as part of the general activity that we undertake under a whole range of matters, including waste, transport, housing improvements—as Johann Lamont mentioned—quality of life improvements, regeneration, green space, flooding, health issues, how decision making takes place in communities, and learning. We are addressing the issues in all those areas. Funding of £2 million was provided in financial year 2007-08 for the environmental justice scheme. We will provide funding totalling £18.8 million over the next three years for the climate challenge fund, which will be directed firmly towards communities. It will support mechanisms that will be put in place to ensure that communities that have a limited capacity to engage will be able to become involved.

The amended EIA directive 85/227/EEC sets out projects to which the directive applies. Projects of the types listed in annex I must always be subject to environmental impact assessment. Projects of the types listed in annex II, as I am sure the member is aware, must be subject to environmental impact assessment whenever they are likely to have significant effects on the environment.

I am sure that Sandra White will appreciate that it is impossible for me to be drawn on individual planning issues and that it would be unwise. In general, I make it clear that it would be unwise for this minister to be so drawn—as it has always been unwise for previous ministers—although it is a pity that Labour members do not seem to recognise that. The reality of the situation is that being a good neighbour in a general sense means that one should be sensitive to the opinions of those with whom one will be situated. Therefore, providing information on environmental impacts would be good and neighbourly practice for any developer  whose development was meeting significant opposition.

I acknowledge Gil Paterson's long-standing interest in the matter and his effective work with the people who are affected. In the context of the EU environmental noise directive, the Scottish Government has had extensive discussions with the UK Government about noise from airports. Under the terms of the directive, the major airports, including Glasgow international airport, are required to produce action plans designed to manage noise issues and effects. The draft action plan for Glasgow airport is due to be published for consultation shortly. The member will note that I also met the UK Noise Association to discuss those and other issues on 25 March 2008.

The member raises a good, interesting but complex issue. There is no evidence that noise at Glasgow airport exceeds the 66dB level, which is regarded as the level that would trigger the need for mitigation measures, such as insulation schemes. That evidence would be needed before any such scheme could be considered. As far as we are aware, no residents live in a contour above the 66dB limit. Some airports are designated under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 to take measures to control aircraft noise—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted airports are the only three in the UK that are so designated. The other airports are not designated. A wide range of circumstances are taken into account, of which noise level is the principal one.  No formal criteria exist for designation—each case must be considered on its merits. The Scottish ministers have the power to designate airports in Scotland. I am willing to discuss the issue with Gil Paterson, within the confines of what I have said, and bearing in mind that Glasgow international airport has put in place measures to reduce noise. The latest set of contour maps for the airport, which were produced in 2007, show that noise levels have fallen compared with 2002 and 1990. Modern quieter aircraft are part of the reason for that.

Des McNulty is right to draw attention to the matter, because noise is a considerable pollutant to which we must pay strong attention. The Government is strongly taking forward work on the effects of noise pollution. We have undertaken noise mapping in advance of the rest of the UK. The Glasgow airport maps are produced independently of the airport operator, so we should have some confidence in them. However, I am happy to meet the member to discuss how monitoring can be stepped up. I presume that he is in constant touch with BAA and individual airlines to ensure that concerns are addressed. The Government expects aircraft and airport operators to achieve a reasonable balance between their legitimate operations and the interests of those who live nearby and who are affected by noise pollution.

Through successfully delivering our greener strategic objective, we will improve Scotland's natural and built environment and our sustainable use and enjoyment of it.

They are considered in the round, closely and thoughtfully. All our actions must be judged on the basis of our policy objectives. We aim to have a greener Scotland, to ensure that we have not just economic growth, but sustainable economic growth and to meet the ambitious targets that we are setting, for example, on CO 2 emissions. I know that Mr Gordon will be a strong supporter of all the Government's actions that are making absolutely certain that we meet those objectives, and we welcome him on board in undertaking that task.

The Scottish Government's overall purpose is "To focus government and public services on creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth." In the 2007 Scottish budget and spending review document, which I seem to recall Karen Whitefield did not vote against, we set out how a greener Scotland will play its part. Work includes focusing spending on reducing our impact on our local and global environment; protecting and enhancing our natural and built environment; making much better use of our substantial renewable energy resource; reducing climate change emissions from transport, housing and business; and improving Scotland's record on waste management and recycling. Through pursuit of those and other complementary policy initiatives, we will improve Scotland's sustainability.

I am sure that the member will not take it amiss if I quote Edith Piaf and say, "Je ne regrette rien." This Government is delivering on every one of the objectives that I included in the spending review. The Government's actions and words go together and we are showing leadership. For eight years, leadership was invisible in the Governments that were supported by Karen Whitefield. It is now highly visible. I find very difficult to understand why anybody can imply that the present First Minister is invisible. Given all those circumstances, I suggest that the sustainability of my answer is considerably greater than the sustainability of the very shaky question that the member asked.

I congratulate John Scott on bringing this debate to the chamber. Indeed, I congratulate every speaker, with two exceptions, for contributing positively and enthusiastically. I did not agree with everything that I heard, and the Government will not support every proposal that was put forward. However, Patrick Harvie was absolutely right to say that it is important in such debates to air ideas, show the depth of experience that exists across the chamber and focus on real and important issues. Alas, the two exceptions were Liberal Democrat speakers, who were the only Liberal Democrats present during the debate. Indeed, at one stage—as I pointed out in a point of order—no Liberal Democrat was present. Would that that had continued. If it had, we would have had a better debate. I note that in the public gallery is my friend, Norman Leask, the former chair of the Crofting Foundation. He lives in Shetland, and we have had long conversations about why people continue to support the Liberal Democrats. I find it amazing, too. To be fair, he makes the strong point that the Liberal Democrats contributed an enormous amount to the Highlands and Islands, particularly in relation to the establishment of the present crofting system. It is sad to see that they have fallen so far, and that the diet of Opposition does not agree with them in any way. We have heard endless sour grapes and not a single positive idea. During the consultation period on "Choosing the right ingredients: The future of food in Scotland", Mr Rumbles did not submit any ideas at all. That is a tragedy—

I will not take an intervention from Mr Rumbles, who was not present during any of the back-bench speeches—I want to put that on record. That was very unfortunate. I will now address the serious points that were made by serious politicians. Biofuels have been a constant and extremely serious issue in the debate. The Gallagher review into the indirect impacts of biofuels will report at the end of June. Food security is the prime issue, and I know that many of the non-governmental  organisations acting in the area have made submissions to that review. Currently, biofuels make up only 2.5 per cent of the mixture of fuels at the pumps in this country. There is a prospect of what are called second generation biofuels, which can be made from the chemical processing of both agricultural and forestry waste. They are currently being researched, and are some 15 to 20 years off. However, it might well be that the prospects for those sustainable biofuels are being adversely affected by the genuine worries that exist about the cultivation of crops for fuel. We should keep our eye on the fact that using waste material to produce biofuels might provide some answers for us. We must be cautious about how we address that issue.

No, I am sorry, but I said that I would not take any interventions from Liberal Democrats in my summing-up speech, and I continue to say that. John Scott made the point that there needs to be flexibility in the Scottish rural development programme. I can guarantee that there will be that flexibility. It is a flexible programme that can react to market changes.

I have some very fresh thoughts on that, because the issue of regulation is something that concerns me and all my colleagues at all times. We have to distinguish between the regulations that come to us largely from the EU and are transposed into Scots law, and the regulations that we make. We want to ensure that we do not add to that regulatory burden and that we continue to simplify. Of course, there will always be regulations. Interestingly, the things that the Liberal Democrat amendment calls for would require regulation. We bear the issue in mind constantly, and I assure Sarah Boyack that we will continue to do so. "Choosing the right ingredients: The future of food in Scotland" represents a genuine consultation on the national food policy. The document seeks information and takes a consensual approach to the issue. It is fascinating that the issue has become even more important since the document was published at the start of the year. The issue is an ever-changing one, but I hope that our final policy will reflect the concerns that we have heard in this chamber.  Page 11 of the document, which is concerned with the actions of the Government, shows that there are too many such actions to list. Those actions are a precursor of a food policy that will not only embrace national and international issues but take account of all the constructive comments that we have heard in this vitally important debate. I again congratulate John Scott on securing this debate, and note the degree of experience that he brings to this issue. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned the cittaslow movement. It is individual actions—people working together in ways that are exemplified in that movement—that will make all the difference. I have visited Perth, and look forward to Linlithgow being one of the cittaslow towns. As long as people are prepared to work together, think together and act together, we will get through the difficulties.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If no member of a party that has an amendment is in the chamber, does the amendment fall?

I note that no representative of the Liberal Democrats is in the chamber.

I am standing in for Richard Lochhead. I am sure that the whole chamber will join me in offering congratulations to Richard and Fiona on the arrival of their son, Fraser, who was born on Monday. [ Applause. ] The Government congratulates John Scott on bringing the motion to the chamber, which we will support at decision time. We will also support the amendments, even the Liberal Democrat amendment, despite the very hard work that Mike Rumbles put into trying to stop members voting for it. We welcome the debate, which is an important debate on an important subject. At the outset, I will quote the great Hamish Henderson, who, in "The Freedom Come All Ye", said: "So come all ye at hame wi' Freedom Never heed whit the hoodies croak for doom  In yer hoose a' the bairns o' Adam Can find breid, barley-bree an painted room". In the Scots mind, the connection is made between freedom and food, and between our domestic concern for food and our international concerns. I will explore that in what I say today. Scots are citizens of the world. We care deeply about what happens elsewhere and it is absolutely right that we should discuss how to respond to the emerging global food crisis—how we should do that at home and what we can contribute internationally. First and foremost, supporting and developing our food production capacity is in our  national interest. It helps to build a sustainable economy; we must put our intellect, entrepreneurial skills and great experience to good use to cultivate better and more environmentally friendly ways of producing food for domestic and international consumption. I am conscious that no one in the chamber has seriously experienced hunger or famine. However, we should never take food for granted. That is why the Scottish Government is developing the nation's first ever strategic food policy to ensure that we have a fully joined-up, consistent and coherent approach to food production and consumption. We set out that vision for food in Scotland in the national food discussion paper, "Choosing the Right Ingredients: The Future for Food in Scotland". As we say in the paper, food should make the nation healthier, wealthier and smarter, with production making communities stronger and consumption respecting the local and global environment. The discussion period on the paper lasted from January until last Friday. The paper got a very strong response and we have a lot of interesting material to consider. It is a pity that Mike Rumbles chose to belittle that in what he said today. There was an amazing level of engagement and we will carry that forward as we develop the policy. We are reflecting carefully on what we have heard—which is what Governments should do—but we are also concerned to take action—

It is distressing to hear Mr Rumbles laugh at the concept of Government action. Of course, he is the member of a party that was in government for eight years and did nothing. Fortunately, we have learned that lesson. We need to look at both domestic and international concerns. As John Scott said, the context has changed since last year. Food security is now firmly on the agenda. If anyone doubts that, the fact that annual food price inflation was 6.6 per cent in January 2008, compared with a rate of 4.1 per cent for all items, should give them cause for concern. In that context, it is important that the Government should help people by ensuring that they retain as much of their own money in their own pockets. We are doing that, for example, by freezing the unfair council tax, reducing prescription charges and doing much else. Of course, the current increase in food prices is due to a range of factors including higher consumption and low stock levels, adverse weather effects, climate change and rising energy costs. However, if people are to respond to shortages, they need to have the resources to meet them. Higher market prices present signals to farmers to increase  production and to consumers to switch to less expensive substitutes and to think about growing more of their own food. I am pleased to say that, on Sunday, I was planting potatoes and onions in my garden. I hope that others are doing the same. Increased wealth and growing populations in developing nations have led to increasing global demand, including for food. Climate change is impacting on crops and will continue to do so. We have to take concrete steps to help those in the poorest countries. There are a number of things that we are doing, but we have to do more to improve trade, help developing countries to increase agricultural production, provide appropriate technology and research, consider the appropriateness of biofuels—there is now a debate on that—and provide the necessary financial support. Above all, we have to work together. Let the whole chamber send out that message today, despite the divisiveness of one member—I hope that his is the last divisive contribution. Let us put our heads together and work out how to solve this problem at home and abroad.

I reiterate something that Stewart Stevenson said at the beginning of his speech. He said: "we were clear all along that ministers and officials had at all times acted properly, objectively and in full accordance with planning legislation, the Scottish ministerial code, and all other requirements." That was our view at the start of the process, it was our view during the process, and it is our view now. Not a single thing we have heard this afternoon contradicts that view. I will come to scrutiny in a moment, because I welcome scrutiny. Alas, however, the committee inquiry was not scrutiny. The problem that we have been faced with this afternoon has been the fatal intermingling of opinion and fact. It has not been an edifying debate. As I will say later, it is a debate that will have damaged Parliament, just as the report damages Parliament. Why? It is because of the way in which facts—there is virtually no disagreement about facts—became opinion, which became innuendo. Johann Lamont made that admission during the debate. She started in her inimitable way by saying that she accepted that the First Minister would not go to pokey because of the report and went on to admit that the report is about opinion. Essentially, the report is about style rather than substance; it is subjective, not objective. That is where we have the problem.

No, I want to make progress, because there are facts that need to be dealt with. Paragraph 149 says that "it has taken 85 days for Scottish Ministers to come to a different conclusion." That is an innuendo. Here are the facts that lie behind it. First, Aberdeenshire Council had been dealing with the application for a considerable time and was well aware of the issues that it raised. The comparison was between Government  decision making and Aberdeenshire Council decision making. Secondly, the council needed only to consider and request its own preferred method for dealing with the application. Thirdly, the Government needed to become familiar with all relevant issues. Fourthly, the Government needed to ensure that the process would be legally competent. Finally—if those four facts are not strong enough—no one should underestimate the impact that the committee's inquiry, the 175 parliamentary questions and the 130 freedom of information requests had on the amount of time that was available.

I will come to Aviemore shortly—although of course I reject what Mr Kerr has said. I am surprised that he wants to revisit the matter, following the comprehensive rebuttal that he got in that interview. I will be happy to rerun it for anybody who wants to see it. Let me deal now with an issue that Mr Rumbles raised—again, it is the difference between fact and opinion. The inference that Mr Rumbles made was that no MSP is able to consult the chief planner, but this very day, Jackie Baillie met the chief planner to discuss a planning issue in her constituency. There is an issue for members to consider—it is about fact versus opinion. Patricia Ferguson said, obviously referring to paragraph 238, that there is some strangeness in the fact that the First Minister had consulted the chief planner, rather than the permanent secretary. The issue is presented in the report as if there is something odd about that. Who else would the First Minister consult? The chief planner has the clearest understanding of the operation of the planning system and, through years of experience, he can advise on the operation of the ministerial code in the context of planning applications. That point is one of innuendo and opinion, not fact. That is where the problem lies.

No, I will not. Scrutiny is not damaging: scrutiny is to be welcomed. However, when scrutiny becomes prejudice and is no longer about fact, but is merely about opinion, it damages Parliament. Alas, that is what we have seen today.  The debate is about something very simple: it is the outward and visible sign of the inward and disabling chaos in Labour. I am sorry that the Tories and the Liberals have been sucked into it, but the reality is that Labour is in a dreadful state, and the committee's report is an attack on the people of Scotland's decision to reject the Labour Party. [ Interruption. ]

The leader of the Labour Party, in one of her many launches—she has been launched more often than most Scottish lifeboats, and there is a connection there too—claimed that she often considered what she called "a Buddhist mantra" when considering what to say. She quoted a short version of the actual quotation, which is: "Before you speak, think—Is it necessary? Is it true? Is it kind? Will it hurt anyone? Will it improve on the silence?" Deputy Presiding Officer, as you probably know, that is not a Buddhist mantra; it is a saying of Sri Sathya Sai Baba, who is the guru of the Hard Rock Cafe. Putting that aside, I ask these questions in conclusion. Was the inquiry kind? No, it was not. I do not just mean to the First Minister; we know that Labour members do not like the First Minister, because he is successful. The inquiry was unkind, to developers—[ Interruption. ]

The First Minister is among my closest friends, because he has led my party and this country—

The First Minister has led my party and this country to unprecedented success. Is the report kind? No, and it is unkind not just to the First Minister or to me; it is unkind to officials, developers, planners and civil servants, and it is unkind to Parliament and the country. Is the report true? No it is not. Those who signed the report fatally confused opinion and fact. Is it necessary? We welcome the opportunity for scrutiny, but that scrutiny was a fishing expedition, which became ultra vires when it looked at the Aviemore planning application. Finally, on the Wendy test, will it hurt anyone? It has already hurt somebody. It has hurt the reputation of Scotland. If this process—this triumph of the partisan over the parliamentary—goes on and is carried to its ultimate end, it will damage jobs and families in Scotland. It is  damaging the Parliament of Scotland. The silence has not been improved on. I recommend another conclusion to the Labour Party. Sri Sathya Sai Baba had another thought. He said that discipline trains us to put up with disappointment. This report is about the disappointment of the Labour Party. It is a travesty. Scotland should now move on.

Will the member take an intervention?

Funding for support continues to be available through the Scotland rural development programme, for example as processing and marketing grants, rural development contracts and payments under the less favoured area support scheme. On promotion, in my recent meetings with deer farmers, the deer management groups and the Deer Commission for Scotland, I have discussed the best way they can jointly promote their common product. I am pleased to say that they have plans to do so, including some that involve this very building.

I share Iain Smith's concern. Indeed, at the meeting that I held on 26 February with a number of Scottish deer farmers—including some from his constituency—we discussed possible routes forward. As we are required to ensure that single farm payments in Scotland do not exceed a national ceiling that is set out in European legislation, it would be difficult to find the additional sums that might be required. However, at the meeting, I asked the deer farmers and my officials to work together to calculate exactly what the cost might be and I agreed to meet the deer farmers for further discussions. The recent European fruit and vegetable reforms created a specific mechanism to enable the funding of new entitlements for the sector, which was previously unsupported. We and the deer farmers recognise that moving from that to ensuring that the resources are available under the restrictions on European funding is difficult, but there is good will on both sides to continue to support the sector and encourage it to grow.

I hope that there will be no diminution of the trust or capabilities of those who are involved. Indeed, I recently held a constructive meeting with members of the Deer Commission to discuss the way forward. It is obviously necessary to have institutions and organisations that are suitable for a country of 5 million people. That is widely accepted throughout Scotland. We need to ensure that, in merging the two organisations, the Deer Commission's many skills and benefits, as well as its customer focus, are transferred into SNH not only intact but in such  a way as to benefit SNH. That is what we are trying to do.

The thematic review of wildlife crime is being carried out by Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary and HM chief inspector of prosecution in Scotland. Because of the terms of the question, I stress that those inspectors are independent, but I understand that their intention is to publish their report on 16 April.

I am sure that members will not mind me bristling a little at the point of view that the review does not go far enough. The Parliament supported it unanimously, so I presume that Mr Tolson supported it too. If he has changed his mind over the past few months, I require some evidence of why that is necessary. It is not a review of environmental law; it is a review of wildlife crime. How can any member know whether its recommendations go far enough when they will not be published until 16 April? I hope that members will find—as I hope that I will find, because I have not yet seen the results of the review—that the hard work of both the chief inspectors has borne fruit and that the review makes strong and radical proposals. If Mr Tolson then wants to make proposals about, for example, a review of environmental law, I will be happy to listen to them.

I had intended to start by saying that the debate has been tremendously useful and consensual, but then I witnessed the previous exchanges. I think that the Government is just  giving up and voting for everything. We will support everybody and just hope that, at the end of the day, everyone will agree. I might commend the two Liberal Democrat speakers on the strongest attempt that I have ever seen to stop others voting for their amendment. Even so, despite their speeches, we will persevere and vote for their amendment. I will vote for the Labour amendment, but I might point out that, in the lexicon of Opposition terms, the last weapon is time. When an Opposition starts arguing that the Government is going too slowly, essentially it agrees with everything the Government is doing. The reality is that we are going fast and we intend to go faster if we can. It is not as if Richard Lochhead is sitting idly looking at the sea and wondering what to do. His record speaks for itself. Over the past 10 months, he has been involved in a range of trail-blazing measures within and outwith Scotland: the conservation credits scheme, which was a first; the Lamlash Bay scheme, which was a first; the work on ship-to-ship oil transfers; and the strong representations—which I am glad Robin Harper, having failed to mention them in his opening speech, acknowledged in his summing up—he is making on the issue of bottle-nosed dolphins in the Moray Firth. Those are in addition to all the other actions in which Richard Lochhead has been involved at home and abroad. A great deal of work is going on. I am pleased to say that the sustainable seas task force has already held a series of workshops to investigate the detail—the frightening detail, as Mr Peacock rightly said—of the planning, conservation and streamlined licensing issues, which include the creation of a Scottish marine management organisation and the co-ordination of science, research and data storage. The task force is taking forward the recommendations of the report on the marine environment that was published by the Environment and Rural Development Committee in the previous parliamentary session as well as the work of the advisory group on the marine and coastal strategy—AGMACS—which we have heard so much about. Those matters are being, and will be, driven forward. At the end of the process, we will have the most robust consultation paper and we will then move into the most robust piece of legislation. We will keep the process moving and—this is why we support the Labour amendment—we will accelerate it as much as we can in so far as doing so is consistent with having legislation that will last and do the job. That is the balance that must be struck. We do not want rushed legislation—or bad legislation; we want legislation that will stand the test of time. Therefore, we will accept the Labour  amendment and, of course, the Liberal Democrat amendment and the Green amendment. I was struck by the number of times members mentioned the need to balance the environmental and the economic opportunities. Peter Peacock talked about new opportunities emerging in that way. It is important to realise that the environmental improvements that we need, and that are taking place, lead to economic improvements. For example, cleaner waters are already leading to our shellfish industry being poised for enormous growth, which it can achieve because the circumstances are right. Scottish fishermen working in the most sustainable way possible means that the long-term economic future of fishing communities is being guaranteed by the Government. I will strike only one critical note, regarding Helen Eadie's speech. I apologise to her for the confused meeting that we had in my office—although it is not always possible to be entirely clear in meetings with Mrs Eadie—but this debate is not about coastal flooding. I may have brought the wrong papers to a meeting; Mrs Eadie brought the wrong speech. The coastal flooding debate takes place in relation to the flood prevention bill, and I am happy to have that discussion with her. I am positive about the Solway Firth. I met the Solway Firth partnership—a group that is well known to the member from Dumfries—on Monday—[ Interruption. ]

I am familiar with the desire for a marine national park within the Solway. We need to discuss the way in which the community can express its support—or at least have the chance to do so—as the community in Harris is now beginning to express its support. When we are in a position to take a marine national park forward—after the marine bill has been introduced—I will encourage, as should the member for Dumfries, the community on the Solway to push that issue forward. I come now to the nub of the matter. There are three strong reasons for supporting a new marine bill, the motion and all the amendments. The first is that the Scottish marine resource is priceless: it is one of the greatest and most important marine resources in the world and we need robust legislation to protect and enhance it in the 21 st century. The second reason is that the legislation that we currently possess is vastly overcomplex—the cabinet secretary mentioned the 85 acts and laws that apply. The chart that I am holding up is meant to explain the links between international  agreements, EU commitments and UK legislation on marine protected areas. There are nine boxes in it, and nine different organisations and pieces of legislation with responsibility for that alone. Special areas of conservation and special protection areas in Scottish waters require four boxes to explain the organisations that are involved. The marine legislation is essential to make sense of all that, and to provide efficient government and efficient intervention. The third reason is the 200-nautical-mile limit. It has been helpful to hear the strong pleas not just for the Scottish Government to co-operate with the UK Government and the Northern Ireland Government, but for those Governments to co-operate with the Scottish Government. That point needs to be borne in mind and reported outwith the chamber. It takes two to tango and we are ready to tango. We are—if I may mix metaphors rather outrageously—in our wetsuits, ready to take part in this dance. That might not be an attractive proposition for a Thursday afternoon, but I am trying to be as accurate as possible. It is essential that the other Governments come to the issue with serious intent and a willingness to debate, discuss and compromise. If they do not, all the good will in this chamber and from this Government—we guarantee good will—will count for nothing. I hope that members in the chamber will, with one voice, say that we wish the bill to be effective and to solve the problems that we have laid out. This Government will take serious cognisance of that. We are willing to co-operate in every way possible with the other Administrations to make it work. I hope that they will pay heed to the unanimous view of the chamber and come to the table willing to co-operate. I commend the motion and all the amendments to the chamber. We may take an historic step this afternoon towards achieving the marine legislation that we need, if members respond to the demands of the people of Scotland.

Beam me up.

Will the member take an intervention?

I draw attention to the fact that Professor Kay makes exactly that point. However, he also says that although a board of 25 might well have been appropriate at the establishment of the national parks, when the priority was to set targets and to determine how things would happen, it might not be appropriate in future. That is an important distinction.

That is not true.

I deny categorically that that is true. I wish to keep, and we will keep, the national park authorities as public bodies. The sole reason why I cannot accept the amendment is that it would tie the hands of the review in an unacceptable way. Mr Hume knows that, because I have discussed it with him three times. The points are covered by the motion and the other amendments, so if Mr Hume withdraws his amendment, we can agree unanimously. If anyone is dancing on the head of a pin, it is Mr Rumbles rather than me who is doing so, which I must say is an equally unlikely prospect.

It would tie the hands of the review.

It would.

rose—

I would be grateful for the opportunity to make a brief point. I have made it clear again and again that I do not regard the option of rolling the parks into SNH as appropriate for local input. Jackie Baillie also makes a strong point about socioeconomic development. However, Professor Kay's recommendation was not to roll the parks into SNH. His recommendations are listed on page 37 of his report, and recommendation 3 simply says: "A root and branch review of the NDPB status of the National Parks status should be undertaken as soon as possible and alternative forms of governance considered." We should consider alternative forms of governance, but the one on which Jackie Baillie is spending most time is not one that I favour.

Before the member becomes totally carried away, I will make clear something that I clarified on Saturday when I was consulted about The Scotsman story. The rolling up of the two park authorities into SNH is incompatible with the local democracy that I want at the forefront. I have been happy to say that to any member who raised the issue with me this week and I say it again now, on the record, so that people understand it.

I would be happy to keep saying it to Jackie Baillie forever.

I am pleased that Jim Hume is quoting Professor Kay, and I will set his mind at rest on the issue of two parks. I may not agree with Professor Kay on everything, but the member will want to agree with what it says at the bottom of page 28 of his report: "There should be no arguments or grounds supporting such fears"— the fears being about the merging or loss of identity of the two separate parks. I confirm that on the record.

I am sure that the member is aware that I do not write The Scotsman . I am the person who commissioned the report. The member is right to draw attention to the much wider issues that it covers. In talking about national parks, it refers to the important issue of the size of the boards. In fact, the report has many positive things to contribute, which we should consider.

Today's debate provides me with an opportunity to set out the Government's thinking on the future of our national parks. At the outset, I want to say with enthusiasm how exceptionally important our national parks are to Scotland. Indeed, their iconic landscapes put Scotland on the international stage. I also pay tribute to Sarah Boyack, who, as Minister for Transport and the Environment, steered through the legislation. I believe that the National Parks (Scotland) Bill was her first bill as a minister. It stands as testimony to her. There is enthusiasm across the chamber for the national parks, and we need to build on that. The parks demonstrate sustainable solutions for rural development and environmental protection, and contribute to the Government's greener Scotland and other objectives. There are many examples of how they do that, which, no doubt, will be raised in the debate. In the five years since the parks were established, they have made good progress. The first-ever national park plans are in place and are being implemented. Many stakeholders are involved under the leadership of the national park authorities. Mike Cantley and Dave Green, the conveners of the national parks, are in the gallery with some of their colleagues. I am sure that everyone who is involved in the parks realises that the time is right for the review that is due to take place. For example, we are committed to simplifying the public sector landscape. It is time for us to ask ourselves some questions and to seek answers. I will address three issues: the strategic review; the boundary review; and future national park designation. The strategic review of national park functions, which will start in May, will cover both the Cairngorms and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national parks. At the moment, each park is an executive non-departmental public body in the shape of a national park authority. We want to look at the arrangements and see what the alternatives are. We also want to learn from experience elsewhere. We recognise that national parks are not the same in every country, but that lessons can be learned nonetheless. The review will be in two parts. The first stage will address key questions on the organisation of  the bodies that run the parks and consider what sort of body should undertake national park functions. I expect it to look at a number of organisational options, including—centrally—the retention of the national park authorities as separate NDPB bodies. In talking of the review, I want to stress one point only: the primacy of the local democratic element. That element has served the parks well and it needs to come to the fore—indeed, if anything, it needs to be strengthened. The first stage review will consider employer arrangements—the sort of issues that are being considered across the public sector—and seek views across a wide spectrum. It will be steered by a group on which the existing national park authorities will be represented. Consultation will also take place with the many park stakeholders. The first stage review will present the pros and cons of different models for running the national parks. I give members the commitment not only that we will publish the review findings, but that we hope to debate them. We will also consult on them.

I am unlikely to merge the parks physically—that would require more than I am capable of.

Jackie Baillie seems to believe that I could achieve even that, but I think that that is unlikely. On the separation of the parks, given that I have spoken of the primacy of the local community, I do not imagine that arrangements are being considered to merge the organisational activity for the parks. The second stage of the review, which will start in the autumn, will deal with more detailed operational matters, such as planning powers and the role in housing. I hope that all members realise that the review will be an opportunity to think thoughts and that it has not been pre-empted. I make the assurance absolutely that it certainly is not modelled on any report that members may have seen being discussed in the newspapers at the weekend. The review is a genuine opportunity, although I pay tribute to Neil Kay for thinking thoughts, as that is what academics do and he does it very well. I turn to boundaries, specifically the southern boundary of the Cairngorms national park. Members are familiar with the issue. In the previous session of Parliament, John Swinney introduced the Cairngorms National Park  Boundary Bill—I was not here, but I read about it in the newspapers. The bill would have extended the park to include Blair Atholl and parts of highland and eastern Perthshire. It would also have made changes to the provisions on the local authority nominees on the park board. The Environment and Rural Development Committee heard evidence and agreed that there were persuasive arguments. It also noted that the communities of highland and eastern Perthshire felt that inclusion in the park would bring social and economic benefits to the area. The committee concluded that a strong case had been made. Although the previous Administration did not support the bill, Sarah Boyack made it clear that it would be for ministers at the time to decide how the national park review would address the boundary issue. As there is clear evidence that the southern boundary of the park needs to be changed, I intend to implement that change. Therefore, today, I am appointing Scottish Natural Heritage to prepare a report on the new boundary that Mr Swinney proposed. We will make the change after due process has been completed. Although there is a clear-cut body of evidence for proceeding with that boundary change, the same is not true of other proposed changes in the two national parks. I therefore intend that the national parks review will address the case for boundary changes elsewhere as part of the second phase of the review. If the review concludes that other proposals for boundary change have sufficient substance and are supported by the community—I make that point strongly—they could be referred at a later stage for formal evaluation.

All members will accept that the process in the legislation for making changes is slightly cumbersome. If SNH appoints a reporter now, I hope that the process for the boundary change can be aligned with the review process. Therefore, my expectation is that the changes will come at about the turn of the year or early next year. The boundary change process will be aligned with the review, so that if other changes are to be made, we will not be acting in a piecemeal fashion. However, we have certainly accepted the boundary change—it will happen and, I hope, within that timescale. The national park review that I have announced will be strategic and fundamental, in that it will consider the organisation arrangements for national park functions. Therefore, it is entirely appropriate that the review should also consider  possible criteria for future national park designation. In doing so, the review will need to build on the foundations of the original legislation. The National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 lays down three conditions. First, the area should be "of outstanding national importance because of its natural heritage or the combination of its natural and cultural heritage". Secondly, the area should have "a distinctive character and a coherent identity". The third condition is that the designation "would meet the special needs of the area" and ensure "that the National Park aims are ... achieved ... in a co-ordinated way." That work will be undertaken in the second stage of the review, once we have addressed the question of how national park functions should be delivered. There is also the question of coastal or marine national parks, although we have made it clear that we do not intend to take a position on their possible role in advance of the enactment of the proposed marine legislation. For the third time, I stress that communities must be seen as central to the national park process. I am a strong supporter of community-led initiatives. It makes sense for the Government to consider national park designation where communities are supportive. Recently, I was approached by the community trust in North Harris, which believes that national park designation would benefit that island area. I believe that the North Harris Trust will announce today that it intends to consult the wider electorate in the area for its views on seeking national park designation and, if possible, to do more work on that. I strongly support that initiative. I have made it clear in a meeting with representatives of the North Harris Trust that I cannot give a commitment to any group that such a process will necessarily lead to a new designation. There are, of course, funding issues to be considered. My duty would be to weigh up the case that is made by the community, alongside the statutory considerations. In addition, we have a tight spending review. However, if the community trust moves forward in that way, by consulting the community, it will be a model for others to follow, in which community initiative drives forward the process of possible designation. I have given only an outline of the review—I am sure that my friend Mr Lochhead will go into much more detail when he responds to the debate—but I hope that it indicates not only our openness of mind on future structures, but our strong commitment to the two areas that are designated and to the communities there. I am happy to note  that both the Labour and Tory amendments take account of that and are encouraging about taking the review forward. I am sorry, but I cannot accept the Liberal Democrat amendment because it would very much tie the hands of the review. Mr Rumbles asks, from a seated position, in what way it would do that. I will give a specific response. As members know—particularly those who represent the area that is covered by the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park—there is an issue around the ability of the parks as non-departmental public bodies to dispose of assets and to reinvest those resources in the running of the park. The present dispensation of the park does not allow that, so it is important that the review considers ways in which that might change. Tying the review to the exact existing model, as the Liberal Democrat amendment would do, would create considerable difficulty. I would have been happy to accept a Liberal amendment in which the wording had been amended, and I am sorry that that Mr Hume did not accept that, despite discussion. I hope that members can coalesce around three clear principles: first, that the review will be positive and forward looking, and will attempt to build on the undoubted great success of the national parks; secondly, that the review will consider the possibility of including other areas and developing the functions of the national parks; and thirdly, that where communities are keen to be involved in a national park movement, they have an opportunity at least to tell the people of Scotland that they have that interest. In those senses, therefore, I am happy to commend the motion to the chamber and I hope that it will be a positive step forward, which will enhance what has already happened in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the forthcoming strategic review of Scotland's two national parks; welcomes the opportunities that the national parks give to Scotland's citizens and visitors, and in particular commends their contribution to the greener Scotland agenda.

On the whole, the debate has been positive. Several important comments have been made that set the context. I agree with Karen Gillon and other members that the debate is not about north or south; some of the most interesting and important points in the report are about Dumfriesshire and the work that the OECD team did in considering the issues in the south of Scotland, but other points relate to the north. Even more wisely, Dr Alasdair Allan—who is a well-trained person, because he once worked as my assistant—made the most important point of all. We cannot take a homogeneous approach to rural Scotland, just as we cannot take such an approach to urban Scotland. His point that it is untrue to talk about urban Scotland as one block doing well or being rich applies similarly to rural Scotland. Parts of rural Scotland are doing well, but parts are not doing so well. The key point in the OECD report is that the policy has broadly worked, in that it has led to progress in rural Scotland. Last night, I had dinner with one of the OECD team. I was interested to learn from him that, when he is asked by rural experts throughout the world where interesting things are happening, Scotland is one of the countries that he gives in evidence. Interesting innovations are taking place in Scotland. I pay tribute to the previous Administration and to Administrations before that, because the development of the ideas has taken time. The obligation on the Government is to continue to make progress and to bring new ideas to the table if we can, informed by the OECD report. That is a challenge, but it might be easier if we got a bit more credit for the work that we are doing. My friend Richard Lochhead's motion pays tribute to the previous Administration, as I have just done; alas, I did not hear Labour or Liberal  Democrat members say a single word about items being carried forward and built on, which is a pity. I pay tribute to the OECD using the words of Robert Burns. The report has helped us by giving us the power that Burns mentioned when he wrote: "O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us  To see oursels as others see us!  It wad frae monie a blunder free us An' foolish notion". We have heard some blunders and foolish notions during the debate. I will come to the great chieftain of the foolish notion, Mike Rumbles—[ Interruption ]—there he is, and I will come to him shortly. Labour members made good speeches, so I regret that they made points that cannot go unchallenged, the most important of which were about centralisation. The OECD report talks about decentralisation, but Sarah Boyack wants the Government to decide how many home helps there are in Haddington and Karen Gillon wants us to decide how many buses run to Biggar. The outcome agreements will monitor the situation, but the days of micromanagement are over. I regret that there was scaremongering about other issues. Members who talked about the Borders railway were disgraceful. The difference between this Government and the previous Government is that the previous Government did not make the Borders railway happen, but we are making it happen. It is wrong to suggest otherwise. Scaremongering in the chamber does rural Scotland no good. The OECD report refers to the positive, can-do attitude that we need. We do not need the negative, carping attitude that we heard from members of Opposition parties, with the exception of John Scott and Nanette Milne, who asked us to pay attention to issues that are raised in the report. We will pay attention to such issues. I will respond to two more issues about which members were scaremongering. The moneys for the LEADER programme are being increased, not decreased—the facts are there. What perhaps annoyed me most was the scaremongering on rural school closures. Throughout my career I have fought for rural schools, for a personal reason—I am sure that members know that my wife is a primary head teacher and has been involved in a rural school closure—and because I acknowledge the virtue of rural schools. To hear from the former Minister for Education and Young People, who did not turn down a single closure proposal, that suddenly we are to have a presumption against closure—

I repeat what I said. There should be a presumption against closures and the Executive is considering the matter. I am glad that members have changed their minds on rural school closures, but they should not preach to me about the issue. I turn to the other side of the Opposition group—Mr Rumbles. It is a relief to see that Mr Rumbles has lasted the whole debate without walking out. That is delightful, although I would not have regretted it if he had walked out. Also, unlike most Liberal Democrats, he has not resigned in the past hour and a half. However, he has moved into a parallel universe. On planet Lib Dem, the SNP has been in power for the past three generations and has failed to do anything about anything, so Mr Rumbles must tell the SNP what it should do. The reality is that the housing crisis in rural Scotland grew out of all proportion under a Labour-Lib Dem Administration. The Government is moving to do things about that. I give two examples. First, we are doing immensely important work through the rural housing task force. However, what we heard about the croft house grants scheme was entirely wrong. The fund was underspent; the figures for it for this year are net of receipts, which has not happened before; and the Shucksmith committee of inquiry on crofting is examining croft house grants and how we can develop the fund's use. Mike Rumbles lodged an amendment that is factually incorrect, which was irresponsible. Secondly, there was an attack on my friend Mr Lochhead about the figures for rural development that have been given. I quote from a letter that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee received—perhaps Mr Rumbles walked out before the committee considered it—which says, in relation to spending on rural development: "resources at the disposal of the Scottish Government rise from £174.3m this year to £202.4/£210.4/£212.4m over the Spending Review. This is a real terms increase of 12.6%". I hope that Mr Rumbles will do the right thing and apologise for what he said.

He might well walk out. Perhaps that is how Lib Dems apologise. The challenge for rural Scotland is to continue to develop our policies and to make a success of them. This Government is committed to doing that and will go on doing that. I would like to think that the other parties in the Parliament will join in that activity and ensure that rural Scotland succeeds.  Some speeches helped in that regard, but some were negative and carping. Rural Scotland will not flourish if all it gets is party-political bickering; it will, however, flourish if the right policies can be applied. Members should support our motion, which praises our predecessors, and the Conservative amendment, which encourages us to try harder. The other amendments are, unfortunately, mere carping—and mere carping is not enough.

That is not true.

It is not true.

Will the member give way?

Oil and gas exploration and exploitation are critically important to the Scottish economy but so, of course, is our environment. In considering whether such activities should be permitted in the Moray Firth special area of conservation, the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform, as the relevant competent authority, must comply with the requirements of the European Union habitats directive and the Offshore Petroleum Activities (Conservation of Habitats) Regulations 2001, as amended. An appropriate assessment of block 17/3 in the Moray Firth was published for consultation by the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform on 21 December 2007. All the other blocks in the Moray Firth have been withdrawn from the 25 th offshore licensing round, pending the outcome of the consultation on block 17/3, which goes on until 14 March. As Scottish Natural Heritage has not yet finalised its comments on the implications for the Moray Firth special area of conservation, it would be premature for me to comment on the specific  proposal before I have had the opportunity to consider SNH's advice.

Our science will not be seriously flawed and our attitude will be determined by the work that is being undertaken by Scottish Natural Heritage. I repeat what I have just told the member. SNH is finalising its comments. The consultation round does not finish until 14 March. When I have seen SNH's advice, I am certain that I will do my usual robust thing.

The right approach is to listen to the advice of SNH, to submit that before the end of the licensing round and to recognise the sensitivity of the issue. Yesterday and today, the regional advisory councils have been meeting in this very building to discuss maritime policy throughout the EU and to consider maritime protection areas. We should all be concerned about how we balance economic interests with environmental interests. The right way to make progress is to listen to the bodies that are charged with doing that before we come to our conclusions, and I am quite sure that that is precisely what this Government will do.

In the Scotland rural development programme, £400 million has been allocated to agri-environment measures. About £170 million will be used to honour all existing agri-environment agreements and £230 million will be available for new commitments. That represents a substantial increase compared with the sum of £110 million that was allocated for new agri-environment commitments under the previous SRDP.

We will seek parliamentary approval in the next few months. There is nothing contentious in the programme. The member is right to welcome it enthusiastically, as it will provide a major opportunity for land owners, land managers and others in Scotland. We are holding 21 implementation seminars throughout Scotland and information is available about the means by which people can apply for the schemes, which are many and various, with more than 120 options on the present menu.

The member makes some good and interesting points. The key issues of ensuring access and ensuring that agri-environment schemes carry on is addressed in the programme, and could have been addressed in more focus by the previous Administration, which drew up the schemes. However, we take the point. As a Government,  we are exceptionally keen that the ultimate decision making should be devolved to areas that can be involved in the schemes. We want to see local input. I encourage the member to show something of his usual sunny disposition and, rather than trying to pick holes in the schemes, to welcome whole-heartedly the opportunities that will exist, some of which were devised by his party.

The Scottish Government, with its partners in agencies, nature conservation bodies, land management, local government and other public and private sector organisations, is leading a range of actions to protect biodiversity across Scotland, including the west of Scotland. We recently published a progress report on our biodiversity strategy, which is available from the Scottish Parliament information centre, and we had a detailed and positive debate in the chamber on biodiversity in taking forward our priorities.

This Government recognises that it is exceptionally important that communities are involved in decision making about green spaces. We have in place a range of measures that allow that involvement to happen and we are always sympathetic to discussing more such measures. I point the member to the good work done by the Forestry Commission Scotland in the woods in and around towns project on providing spaces that are the green lungs of cities and towns. Where there is a threat to green space, there are statutory obligations in relation to consultation in taking those issues forward. The member can be absolutely sure that the last  thing that this Government wants to see is a reduction in the opportunity for people to access green space and the countryside, which is one of our biodiversity indicators.

I congratulate John Scott on securing this interesting debate. I understand that today's lunch time session was productive and informative. The debate has been well informed. When I learned that I would have to respond to it, I thought that I had no experience of sea angling. Then I remembered that in recent years I have fished from the shore of Loch Riddon and from a boat in Argyll, with my son, catching mackerel at times when many mackerel come into the lochs, so I have on occasion enjoyed the pleasure that Peter Peacock described—the relaxation, the fascination and the involvement in the world around us. I stress that I regard recreational sea anglers not just as part of the community of fishermen in Scotland—fishermen and fisherwomen, I should say—but as part of the effort to conserve the best of the Scottish environment. When reading material provided for us by the Scottish Sea Anglers Conservation Network, I was struck by the desire to define some species as "recreational species". Catching a fish and then putting it back is clearly a conservation action—even if I can scarcely believe that a skate the size of the one illustrated in the publication I have in front of me can be caught and returned eight times. The debate has produced some interesting mental images, one of which was the image of John Farquhar Munro casting from the deck of a CalMac ferry to catch a salmon—a ferry that is now, of course, better and more fairly subsidised thanks to this Government.

Mr McGrigor intervenes from a sedentary position, and another mental image from the debate is that of Mr McGrigor catching 100 fish in one go. Little wonder none was left when he came back; he had fished that part of the sea completely. This Government does not reject the idea of a strategy for recreational sea angling. However, we  are saying—I think fairly—that we need objective data to guide the development of policy. That is why we have commissioned research into the economic impact of recreational sea angling. The research will include surveys of the community that takes part in recreational sea angling. It will be steered by representatives of that community as well as by VisitScotland, by other tourism organisations and by sea fisheries officials. In the context of that research and the developing marine bill, I hope that we will come up with some further ideas. I see no reason why we should not have a debate on recreational angling at some future stage. I cannot of course bind the Minister for Parliamentary Business, but having such a debate seems a reasonable aspiration. My job as the Minister for Environment, and the job of my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment—who takes a particular responsibility for fisheries—is to balance the needs of a whole range of individuals and organisations. We have to find a balance, on this issue as on many others. We have to balance the needs of commercial sea fishermen, recreational sea anglers, conservation bodies and a range of other interests. As we make progress, we will have to acknowledge not only how much sea anglers want to develop their sport—which we welcome—but the other pressures, and find some way of balancing them. I note Elaine Murray's point about the marine national park, and strong representations have been made to me from the Solway area. However, robust marine legislation will have to be put in place, and that will have to take priority at this stage. The marine legislation is being steered forward, with the involvement of recreational sea anglers, and I will say something about that in a moment. The research that has been commissioned will consider the variations between different areas in the species that are targeted. We should have a comprehensive picture by early 2009. That will drive the development of policy and will inform the marine bill. Recreational sea angling is not entirely about angling. There is a niche tourism market, which will contribute to our ambition of growing tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. I am very impressed by the publication that I have in my hand as a visual aid. "Fish in Scotland" contains a fascinating section on sea angling. It is produced by VisitScotland and is designed to attract people to all aspects of angling in Scotland. It is also heavy with advertising; the sector clearly has a substantial economic input. I also have a brochure that supports a website dedicated to the promotion of all kinds of fishing opportunities for visitors.  VisitScotland and others have established the anglers welcome scheme, which Kenny Gibson mentioned. Participants in the scheme display a logo to show that they are willing and able to provide visitors who are interested in angling with additional facilities, such as storage boxes, a daily weather forecast, freezers, facilities for gutting and preparing fish, and facilities for washing fishing tackle. Like Mr Peacock, I am more than willing to return fish to the sea, but I am also more than willing to eat them myself. Scotland offers great opportunities for people to do that. Many of the pictures I have in front of me show that the eating can be very good. VisitScotland is also on the angling tourism development group, which it part-funds. The group has been instrumental in developing the FishScotland website. The focus of the emerging inshore fisheries groups is first and foremost the management of the commercial fishing sector. However, all relevant stakeholders, including recreational sea angling interests, can become involved in that work. Recreational sea anglers should have the opportunity to contribute to the work of the groups. If that is not happening in some places, I am sure that members will make representations to assist it to happen. We look forward to the various developments that will help us, including the shark action plan, which was mentioned in the debate. We agree that all sea anglers and bodies with an interest in the matter should work together to provide tourism opportunities, to help conserve stocks and to encourage access to the outdoors. Members will know—I know that Mr Peacock knows—that our biodiversity indicators include an indicator on access to the countryside, of which access to the seashore is part. The Scottish Sea Anglers Conservation Network has joined the sustainable seas task force, which was established by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. The task force is making an input into the proposals for the Scottish Government's marine bill. The objective of the bill, at least in part, is the sustainable management of Scotland's coast and seas and the balancing of competing interests for the use and protection of the seas. I return to what I said at the outset of my speech. Although there are competing interests, we all share one interest, which is the sustainable management of Scotland's coasts and seas. That will provide a range of opportunities. I am happy to endorse the activity that is the subject of the debate and to welcome the presence in the gallery of those who take part in it. The Government recognises that it should do what it can to help support and encourage recreational sea angling. I  am grateful to Mr Scott for the opportunity that his debate has offered me to say that.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

As members are no doubt aware, during the passage of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, the Environment and Rural Development Committee carefully examined snaring. The committee concluded that although there was room for improvement, the need remained for predator control in the countryside and the other options that were available to land managers were not necessarily better for animal welfare. Nonetheless, at stage 3, the then minister, Allan Wilson, announced a full public consultation on snaring. A clear majority of the 243 responses that were received by February 2007 were in favour of a complete ban, although a breakdown of views shows that individuals were mostly in favour of a ban whereas organisations—particularly countryside organisations—remained supportive of snaring in some form. Since then, both sides of the argument have run several campaigns. I have no doubt that it is an extreme case but, in the past few weeks, my office has received more than 4,850 e-mails and cards from people who seek a ban. A very much smaller number of messages have supported the continuation of snaring. In recent months, I have been heavily engaged with the subject. I have discussed snaring with representatives of many organisations and been on several fact-finding visits. I greatly respect and empathise with those who campaign for a complete ban on snaring. We should—justly—be proud that Scotland has some of the strongest wildlife protection legislation in the world. It is important that we continue to maintain the highest standards and that everything that is done in the countryside—including everything that is done to control pests and predators—is consistent with those high standards. However, no responsible politician can ignore the fact that some argue equally passionately that snaring is a regrettable but essential tool for high-quality land management in Scotland. Such people also have a keen interest in and concern for wildlife, and their view that snaring plays a key role in maintaining the iconic Scottish landscape of heather-clad hillsides that are alive with a rich diversity of species cannot be set aside lightly.  Those people base their argument on the three pillars of shooting, biodiversity and agricultural imperatives. First, they contend that effective predator control is essential to maintain the shooting for which Scotland is world famous—whether upland grouse moors or lowland pheasant shoots. Shooting also provides considerable economic benefit to rural areas, where jobs and income can be scarce. For example, a 2006 study calculated that shooting is worth £240 million each year to the Scottish economy. It generates approximately 1.75 million visitor nights, most of which take place during the autumn and winter months when other visitors are thin on the ground. The shooting sector pays 58,000 workers, which is the equivalent of 11,000 full-time jobs. The sport also provides the equivalent of 2,000 full-time conservation jobs and spends £43 million a year on improving habitat and wildlife management. Secondly, those who are in favour of snaring assert that control of predators, and foxes in particular, is a key factor in maintaining and enhancing biodiversity. A Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust field experiment showed that predator control increased the breeding stock of the wild grey partridge by 42 per cent. Without such control, stocks declined in most years. Among others, national park staff at Loch Lomond and the Cairngorms have made it clear that if snaring were not available to them as a means of predator control, they fear that they would be unable to meet their statutory objectives on maintaining biodiversity. Shooting and biodiversity are linked. It is no accident that managed moorland contains many more species of ground-nesting birds such as lapwing, golden plover and curlew than does unmanaged land. The key factor is that predators such as foxes are controlled. That is essential for innovations such as the new Langholm moor project, among whose partners are Scottish Natural Heritage, RSPB Scotland and the Buccleuch Estates. Of course, we must accept that farmers throughout Scotland depend heavily on efficient predator control to protect their animals. Lambs are the best-known target, but other free-range stock, such as poultry and pigs, is also at risk. Many farmers and crofters occasionally need to protect crops from the extensive damage that rabbits can do, and snaring is a tool in that protection. However, we must all accept that alternatives to snaring exist. Shooting disposes of more than 70 per cent of the foxes that are killed each year, but clean and efficient shooting that does not leave wounded animals is very dependent on the shooter's skill and the lie of the land. It is not suitable in every area or case. Other predator  control methods such as trapping in cages, hunting with hounds, poisoning and gassing, are illegal, ineffective or dangerous to the operator and often to a wider range of wildlife. The welfare implications of snaring are a matter of debate and concern. It is to be regretted that no scientific study on the welfare issues associated with snaring has ever been carried out, but it is clear that badly set snares and snares that are set close to urban environments or in the wrong place and are not regularly checked have the potential to injure wildlife and domestic animals, which they sometimes do. I have no doubt that it is those sorts of snares that are regularly—and rightly—brought to the attention of bodies such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Those who set such snares are wildlife criminals. That said, scientists who wish to catch animals for radio-tagging experiments use snares without causing any apparent harm. Members will wish to note that the British Veterinary Association's ethics and welfare group recently stated: "in some circumstances snaring might be the least inhumane method where control is necessary". That conclusion was also reached in 2005 by the independent working group on snares. The key issue that I have had to consider in weighing all the evidence is whether the protection of our unique biodiversity, the management of our successful shooting industries and the safeguarding of our key agricultural production could be undertaken without the option of using snares. That is, I have had to consider whether those things could be undertaken in a more humane and appropriate way, taking into account cost effectiveness and actual results on the ground. If they could, snaring might well be able to be dispensed with; if they could not, snaring would—regrettably—have to remain within the range of tools that are necessary for good land management in Scotland. At the end of a lengthy discussion and reflection process, I have reached the conclusion that snaring is still necessary in some circumstances. However, it is also clear to me that we can and must do better in eliminating bad practice. Bad practice—sometimes criminally bad practice—is responsible for some of the dreadful cases that animal rights organisations have brought forward. Members of the public are rightly concerned about what happens to the wildlife that is part of our heritage, and they need to be absolutely confident that where snaring is necessary, there is no room for any doubt about what is allowed; that the practice is undertaken by competent and responsible individuals; that we have outlawed any practices that do not match up to welfare  standards; and that we are vigorously enforcing the law. Accordingly, I intend to introduce a package of regulations and primary legislation where necessary that will aim to make fundamental changes to the practice of snaring in Scotland. My officials and I have discussed the changes with industry representatives—landowners, managers, gamekeepers and representatives of sporting interests—and I hope that they will command widespread support. I would like to have the co-operation of welfare organisations and other organisations such as Advocates for Animals and the League Against Cruel Sports, but unfortunately those organisations told me as recently as last Friday that they are not prepared to countenance any alternative to a total ban. [ Applause. ] I regret that approach, but assure them that the door remains open to them and to those members who have just applauded if they are willing to work with the Government to introduce the best possible practice. The package that we intend to introduce will make a significant difference to animal welfare. We will require the compulsory fitting of crimped safety stops to prevent nooses from closing too far and inflicting damage. That should, arguably, have been done long ago, and it has, on its own, the potential to bring about a huge improvement in the welfare of animals that are restrained by snares. We will also require the compulsory fitting of identification tags on snares, which will allow the authorities to identify their owners, but will not allow identification by casual passers-by. We will specify that the action of a snare must be checked before it is set, and we will make it clear that any snare that is not staked in place must be fixed with an anchor that cannot be dragged away. We will prohibit the setting of snares on posts, over watercourses, on planks and on fences, as such setting can cause unnecessary suffering, and we will specify that areas in which snaring is taking place should be clearly marked with signs. I believe that such measures can be introduced by means of regulations under section 11 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. When the opportunity arises to introduce primary legislation, we will also consider how we might create a new offence of tampering with a lawfully set snare. Such an offence is required for good governance and because tampering with snares even for the best of reasons can sometimes—perhaps unwittingly—make their effects more deadly and cruel. We will also give legal status to a new land management industry accreditation scheme. The aim will be that, within a fixed period, everyone who sets snares will require to have received training in best practice and the law. Eventually, no one without such training will be allowed to set a snare.  We will also put in place arrangements to assist with technical developments in the use of snares, and those developments will be reported back to ministers with the aim of incorporating them into best practice. By implementing this package of measures, Scotland will have established the best possible practice in ensuring animal welfare while allowing effective land management and all the economic and conservation benefits that accrue from it to continue. We will also send to those wildlife cowboys and criminals who use snares illegally and indiscriminately a clear signal that they will be vigorously pursued and punished. This statement charts a new way forward. I hope that it will command the support of the whole chamber.

That, unfortunately, has the nature of a question that was asked before the member heard the statement. It is absolutely clear what we are proposing. We are proposing a set of changes that are not only clear, but will be effective. We hope that they will command the respect and the attention of those who work in the countryside. I very much respect—I regret that the same attitude is not being shown towards me from the Labour benches—the position that is taken by  those who oppose the use of snares. However, after much consideration, I think that this is the best way forward. If Labour members had wanted to ban the use of snares, they had eight long years in administration in which to do so—but they did not. They did not do so because, as the Opposition spokesperson has indicated, it is a hard decision that requires much consideration. The package of measures that we propose will be effective, will improve and assist biodiversity, will protect jobs and will improve animal welfare. In my book, those are three things that should be welcomed by every member in the chamber, not resisted in the petty, point-scoring way that we have just heard.

I will answer the member's questions briefly. First, best practice in snaring will ensure that the number of animals from non-target species that are snared is kept to a minimum. The  independent working group on snaring that was established in England, which reported in 2005, noted that 100 times more badgers were killed on the roads than by snares. There are huge dangers to animals apart from snaring, but our proposals will reduce very dramatically the number of animals from non-target species that are snared, as good practice does. Secondly, we want to work with the industry and everyone else involved, including the animal welfare organisations—if they will work with us—to get best practice. Yet again I invite all organisations to work with us; we will set up the arrangements for that to happen. Thirdly, my position on the legal opinion that was mentioned is exactly the same as that of the previous Administration. The present arrangements are legal, and the arrangements that we propose will also be legal.

I welcome and am grateful for the member's support. I will answer his questions directly. The codes of practice of the British Association for Shooting and Conservation are all very well, and some of them are helpful, but our proposals will bring together a range of measures in one set of regulations. There is a difference between regulations and codes. The regulations will be binding and will be legally enforceable. They are also more varied than the existing codes. For example, compulsory fitting of ID tags has been a controversial issue, as there is fear that it might be misused. With dialogue, we will be able to persuade the industry to support the measure.  I am considering a range of accredited training. I want to ensure that we have the best training courses possible and that we move as quickly as is feasible to a situation in which no one who is involved in setting a snare has not been through a rigorous training course that deals not only with best practice but also with the law, so that there is no dubiety. I will examine all courses and ensure that the best of them are available in Scotland.

One of the big problems in certain areas of activity and work in the countryside is that many people believe that they have the competence to do things when plainly they do not. I was horrified to see that, in a recent case in the Borders, someone who described themselves as a gamekeeper had no qualifications or experience. I want those who undertake a variety of actions in the countryside to know what they are doing and have the skills to do it. That means professionalisation—for example, helping gamekeepers to become more professional. I know that they are keen on that, because I have discussed the issue with gamekeepers on a number of occasions. I want to ensure that, as a result of the courses that we are able to provide, no one will be able in a court of law to describe themselves as a gamekeeper without being able to prove that they are competent in that task.

I want to be as reasonable as I can be in responding to Irene Oldfather. It is sometimes difficult, but I will do my very best. It is almost impossible, actually, rather than difficult. Irene Oldfather's point about European member states is a chimera. The people who argue that ours is one of the few countries that still permits snaring do not look at the wider issue of traps and snares as used in other European countries and realise that traps and snares are specific to landscape and habitat. It is clear that there will be different regulations in different countries. The important unifying point is whether the law takes animal welfare into consideration as strongly as it can. I depart from those whom I respect greatly in the animal lobby when they say that anybody who holds a different view cannot believe in animal welfare. The arguments that I make today are designed to improve that situation. There should be respect for that and for those who argue for it with me. As regards the consultation, I received postcards and 5,000 e-mails that blocked up my inbox in such a way that unblocking it required professional attention. Despite listening to—[ Interruption. ] Ms Oldfather is not listening; she is shouting. Had I done the easy thing, I would have lain down under an enormous campaign. I have listened to everybody and I hope that this afternoon I have presented a set of proposals that are designed to meet the objections from all sides. [ Interruption. ] As usual, Opposition members are shouting "No!" They are the no-sayers of Scottish politics and the no-sayers of the Scottish countryside. I wish they would listen to the arguments for jobs and the economy in Scotland. And I wish they would listen to the arguments for biodiversity. If they did, their attitude would be more reasonable and command greater respect in Scotland.

There is absolutely no doubt that unstopped snares should not be used. Given that the previous Government had a chance to do something about them, I am surprised that it never  made such a proposal. I am glad that we are doing something about them at last. ID tags are more controversial. Certain people in the countryside fear that they could be misused, but it is important that we ensure that those who have set snares are identifiable. It is also important that there are notices to say that snaring is taking place, so that people are alerted to it. Those two measures, allowing only snares with safety stops and the other measures will make a considerable difference to animal welfare and ensuring that snares do the job that they are meant to do.

I very much hope that they will. The independent working group on snares noted that this activity has a variety of animal welfare impacts ranging from the very mild to the very severe and, as I said in my statement, the lack of good scientific research on this matter inhibits the debate. It is a matter of regret that Ms Oldfather is still shaking her head—no one can deny that a lack of scientific evidence will inhibit any debate. In such circumstances, we have to move as quickly as we can to the best possible situation. I believe that this complex package of measures—they are the very best ones I could have picked and they have been set out in an easily understandable form—will produce major improvements. As I have said, we will educate people on these matters. I am grateful for Mr Stewart's reasonable approach. Of course, I have had to—[ Interruption. ] It is a great pity that one cannot have a rational debate in this chamber without interruption—and, as ever, Ms Brankin is the obstacle. If Mr Stewart continued to demonstrate his belief in an absolute ban in a way that illustrated the various problems and if further scientific evidence came forward, any rational person would return to the issue. However, I believe that these proposals represent an important step forward.

It is very much our intention to ensure that identities are kept safe and private, and we will take all reasonable steps to do so. Mr Scott asked about working with the industry and others—including, I hope, animal welfare bodies. With them, we will closely consider this issue to ensure that that situation is maintained.

Among other things, I intend to draw today's statement to the attention of those who are undertaking the present thematic review of wildlife crime and to build into the review the requirements that will exist, to ensure that our proposed changes are effective and effectively implemented. I am also very happy to discuss with the industry and, indeed, the member any other means of overseeing these proposals to ensure that we can quantify them. One problem with introducing a total ban that has been suggested and that goes against the grain of the member's comments is that such a move would drive snaring further into illegality and further underground, which would make the situation worse rather than better. I worry about that.

As I have indicated, I will draw this statement to the attention of the team that is undertaking the thematic review. I will also draw its attention to Christine Grahame's question, to ensure that the intention is to make resources adequate to the task.

Claire Baker makes an important point. There was nothing in my statement that said that snaring is compulsory. Land managers who choose not to use snaring will choose not to use snaring. I am happy to listen to the member's suggestion on the exchanging of information on non-lethal practices, which many land managers would welcome, but I cannot take the further step of saying that no land manager should be allowed to use snaring. Land managers who use non-lethal methods, which are often more intensive and more expensive than snaring, have my support.

As the member knows, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency provides information on flood risk through its indicative maps and advice on specific planning applications, but it is for those making the decision to take account of that advice and to consider it alongside all other relevant matters when determining whether planning permission should be granted.

My robustness is tested in a variety of ways, including by the fact that this is the third time that I have answered the same question from Helen Eadie. I have also had a meeting with her on the subject. I am happy to meet her again and to continue being robust on the matter. I know that she has a strong interest in it, not least because she lives very close to the proposed development. I am happy to discuss the issue with her but, at the end of the day, it is for councils—that included the previous Labour administration in Fife—to make decisions. I will go on being robust in my discussions with the member and I hope that eventually we will reach the end of our dialogue.

I am happy to provide that information to the member. There were a substantial number of such developments, as  there always are. Scottish planning policy 7, which deals with planning and flooding, provides a framework for assessing coastal flood risk, so that planning authorities can include appropriate policies in their development plans. [ Interruption. ] Members seem to find the concept of planning against flooding amusing. No one who is faced with flooding finds it amusing. It is important that all the relevant parts of the debate are involved, so that the right decisions are made. If that had been the case previously, we would not have some of the difficulties that we have inherited from previous Administrations.

The debate has been consensual, positive and well informed. Those in the forestry sector who are listening to or watching the proceedings will be heartened by that. Members seem to have taken advantage not just of the briefing materials that have been distributed at various stages, but of their own genuine knowledge of and research into the sector and its importance. We must acknowledge the wide range of players who will be interested in the discussion that we have had today. Those include the Forestry Commission Scotland and Forest Enterprise, in the public sector; the private sector, to which I will return in a moment; and the community sector. I pay tribute to the community sector and acknowledge as a live issue Karen Gillon's point about community purchase and the valuations that are used in such purchase. I am working hard with Forestry Commission colleagues to provide the answer that both she and I want within the state accounting rules. We will do our best to provide that answer. The environment and wildlife non-governmental organisations are also key players in the sector, and the users of timber—in the processing, building and energy industries—are important. Finally, we should always remember the public interest. The public are deeply involved in the forestry sector for tourism, recreation and health. They are also involved as the consumers of timber products. So, everybody in Scotland has an involvement in forestry. I know that the messages that the debate sends out will be listened to. Calum MacDonald, the non-executive forestry commissioner for Scotland and the chair of the Forestry Commission's national committee for Scotland is in the public gallery—I am sure that we all welcome his presence here and the fact that he has listened to the debate. Bob MacIntosh, the director of the Forestry Commission Scotland, will also have listened to the debate, as will many forestry workers throughout Scotland who are keen to hear not just  what we know, but what we are going to do—both the Government and the Parliament—to encourage their work. I am slightly critical—which is very unlike me—of one speech this morning. I think that Jamie McGrigor should get out more into our forests and woodlands. If he did that, he would understand that there is an active partnership between the private and public sectors and that there is no attempt to give an unfair advantage to either side. I felt slightly resentful at his implication that there would not be fair and equitable treatment of all those who apply for the SRDP funding. The idea of that funding is to generate new activity in every part of Scotland and by every player. Again and again, we have stressed the need for people to be active in promoting the scheme, including members of the Scottish Parliament. They should not be implying that there will be unfairness, but should be trying to ensure that as many people as possible take part in the scheme.

I am a great fan of revisionist history and I accept that revisionist history of what was said. I am deeply appreciative of John Farquhar Munro's speech, in which he reminded us how forestry has been central to the Scottish rural economy, certainly in the 20 th century. Robin Harper mentioned the situation before 1919—indeed, he implied that he could remember back to the 16 th century, at which I am deeply impressed—and I take his key point about the need for sustainability. We should be mindful of his example of those who use wood but also plant trees. Let me address some of the detailed points. On the important issue of flooding, forestry has a key role to play, as it has in all land-use activities and indeed in many climate change activities. Climate change is not the core driver for the forestry sector but it is a driver, so I am happy to take on board Robin Harper's point by acknowledging that forestry not only can but must start to play a role. In addition, I was pleased to be involved in discussions this week about moving ahead quickly with demonstration projects so that we can start to do things. Transportation was another key point. I must express some disappointment that it has been difficult to involve the rail sector in forestry, but there are reasons for that, especially for particular projects in Galloway. However, not enough has happened.

No, I must make progress. On the shipping sector, the contribution that John Farquhar Munro called for is being made. The Forestry Commission in Scotland currently supports the timberlink shipping service, which removes lorries from roads on the west coast by enabling the timber to be sent by sea. The subsidy for that is just under £1 million a year. There has been some slow build-up of similar services in other parts of Scotland. I am keen for timber lorries to be taken off the roads if at all possible. The strategic timber transport fund has been highly successful in doing that but it was due to close in December 2008. I am sorry that members suggested that an announcement was yet to be made on the fund's renewal—clearly, they have not been keeping enough of an eye on the timber press—as I announced in December that the life of the fund would be extended. Financial support for the fund will continue until 2011, with a total budget of £15 million over the next three years. I am grateful to all those who have been involved in projects such as the one at Eskdalemuir, which Elaine Murray and a number of others mentioned. Community involvement in such projects is vital, because they are of high significance to all of us who use the roads in one way or another, including—as was the case in Eskdalemuir—those who walk on the roads. I conclude by drawing attention to some key messages on important issues for forestry that need to be communicated following today's debate. First, Scotland's wood-using sector is a major long-term success story—

Sorry, I really must finish. As all Governments—even a Government as good as this one—are transitory, every Government must make a long-term commitment to the wood sector. Although the current Government will not be that transitory—if yesterday is anything to go by, we have a long-term Government—it will eventually change at some time. The sector supports 40,000 jobs in all and provides £760 million of value added to the economy and those figures can grow. We must remember that imported timber will continue to be needed in Scotland. Some timber that has particular advantages cannot be grown here and must be sourced from elsewhere. However, we need to up our penetration of the Scottish market. We accept that bioenergy presents a major opportunity, that our small but important hardwood  sector can increase and that forest-based tourism makes a significant economic contribution. We also accept that sustainable timber construction—a point that was raised by Karen Gillon among others—can contribute to affordable homes, climate change mitigation and sequestration. Indeed, I am keen that we continue our work on housing by making land available—and possibly by being a player in the way that John Farquhar Munro suggested—and on using wood in building design. Again, I was pleased—although I am sorry that members did not seem to be aware of this—to launch a book on timber construction last month at Napier University's centre for timber engineering. This has been a good debate. I have been impressed by virtually every speech—as have, I am sure, the forestry sector representatives who have been listening—and I am pleased to be consensual in accepting the Labour and Tory amendments. I am not yet certain whether I can accept the Liberal Democrat amendment because, although it would perhaps do no great harm, its ambition for future biomass projects is less great than ours and it takes no account of the conclusions of the wood fuel task force. However, I will think about the matter further during the course of the day and—as I am always consensual—if I can help in any way to bring about a resolution, I will do so. I thank members for the debate and look forward to another debate on the issue in future times.

rose—

The member knows—because I invited him to be there, although he could not be present—that I visited Lairg last summer to talk about ways in which the whole rural delivery service is changing job patterns. However, I remain concerned and I shall be back in Lairg this summer, when I will invite Mr Stone to join me again.

Let me reassure John Farquhar Munro that the commission is keen to enter into discussions with any social landlord who wishes to build houses on any suitable part of the forest estate, particularly if the construction uses wood and includes a combined heat and power plant using wood biomass. That is the way forward, and the commission is desperately keen to ensure that it is part of it.

I am happy to meet Cathie Craigie to discuss that long-standing problem. I understand that the Forestry Commission holds the same position as I do: if we can help to solve it, we will try to do so.

I am fascinated by the reference to value for money. I visited the village of Dalavich on a wet and dreich day last November to launch a Forestry Commission publication. I found that the community there was live and vital and that many people there are still working in some aspect of forestry. The diversification has been vital and has been about the state and the private sector working together.

The member raises the interesting and always important issue of local involvement. Does he accept that the investment from the strategic timber transport fund in Eskdalemuir has been done with the co-operation of the local community and that it is producing a synergy between the community and the forestry sector that can only be beneficial, given the advantages that it will give to the village?

Although it is probably right that tensions will always exist between the private and public sectors, on Tuesday I was pleased to attend an all-day meeting of the board of the Forestry Commission Scotland and to find a representative of the private sector there, helping with the discussion on the next corporate plan. That is the type of co-operation that is taking place and I am sure that the member will acknowledge it.

I am very pleased to introduce this debate. This week is, of course, environment week—as we know from the events and receptions that are taking place around the Parliament building. As they walked to the chamber, most members will have seen a variety of posters and stands, one of which draws attention to the environment being a place of economic activity. Today's debate is about the economic benefits of one very important part of our environment in Scotland—forestry in both the public and private sectors. In December, when I introduced the debate on forestry, access and health, I made a commitment to return to the chamber to debate the economic impact of the commercial forestry sector. I am glad to do so today. Since becoming Minister for Environment last May, I have had the privilege of visiting quite a number of Scotland's forests and a number of the timber-processing and wood-using companies. I have been impressed throughout by the levels of innovation, investment and technology that are employed to transform a fairly simply thing—a small tree that starts out as virtually nothing—into a very large thing indeed, which can then become a variety of valuable and useful products. What impresses me most about the forestry sector in Scotland is the long-term nature of its work. Forestry is not for the faint-hearted; it is for those who are prepared to take time to put effort into long-term investment and long-term success. I will at no time claim that this Government has all the answers for the forestry sector. We are committed to working with a wide variety of organisations and individuals and to acknowledging the work that has been done before—by those of no political persuasion and by those Governments that have regarded forestry as an important part of Scotland's future, particularly since 1919 and the establishment of the Forestry Commission. Despite fierce global competition, the forestry industry in Scotland is a success story. Our processors have managed to remain profitable through a period of historically low timber prices. That has been due to continuous investment in new equipment and to improved operating  processes. Over the past two years alone, new wood-using developments, either commissioned or committed, have amounted to £250 million. They include new sawmills at Lockerbie, Dumfries, Fort William and Kincardine, as well as major biomass energy projects at Lockerbie, Irvine and Invergordon. Two weeks ago, I visited an impressive sawmill facility in Falkirk, which will relocate next year to state-of-the-art premises in Fife. That represents continued investment in the future profitability of forestry. The emergence of the bio-energy sector represents another huge opportunity for Scottish forests and woodlands. The Scottish biomass support scheme is well subscribed and some £17 million of new projects will come on stream this year, assisted by £7.5 million from the scheme. I was pleased recently to receive the report of the wood fuel task force, which I set up last year. The report includes useful recommendations for massively increasing the supply of material into a rapidly developing sector. We are keen that bio-energy should develop at a pace and scale that suits our fibre resource. Those and other positive investments not only represent timber use, but provide well-paid and worthwhile employment, often in parts of rural Scotland that are short of such employment. The forestry industry in Scotland supports 12,000 direct jobs and 14,000 indirect jobs—26,000 jobs in total—and recent investments can only add to the number. There is also a thriving and growing hardwood sector, which operates in niche markets and produces uniquely Scottish products, often in rural areas. I was particularly impressed when I visited the Borders Forest Trust on a wet day last autumn to see how its work produces not only jobs but items of utility and beauty. There is potential to develop all those parts of the industry. I hope that the debate encourages such development, which will generate economic benefits throughout the country. In 1970, just fewer than 750,000m 3 of timber was produced in Scotland, mostly from the national forest estate. So successful has the industry been that in 2007 our forests produced 6.6 million cubic metres of timber, more than half of which came from the private sector. It is important to acknowledge that partnership between the private and state sectors, which is appreciated by both sides, is producing economic growth. Our Scottish forestry strategy indicates that we will increase output to about 8.5 million cubic metres per year during the next decade. That cannot happen without forethought, planning and planting. The dip in planting since 1970 will soon produce a shortfall. I am supportive of the aspiration to plant around 9,000 to 10,000  hectares of new forests and woodlands each year. I am keen to drive forward planting, so that in time we meet the previous Government's aspiration, which we share, to have 25 per cent of Scotland's land afforested during this century. That will provide a long-term supply of wood to the sectors that I talked about. The aspiration represents significant additional woodland, much of which will be native and broadleaved woodland. We must also continue to invest in the right products to sell in the competitive forest industry worldwide. It might seem strange to say that timber production is only part of a forest's success, but other things count in the success of forests. Forests support a vibrant tourism and recreation sector and add to the richness and biodiversity of our rural landscape. Forest-related activity, particularly in tourism, provided no less than £260 million in gross value added to the Scottish economy last year. Some 14,000 people are directly or indirectly employed as a result of such tourism activity. For example, the creation of a network of mountain bike trails by Forestry Commission Scotland has earned Scotland the title of adventure capital of Europe. Not all forest tourism involves such strenuous activity. The growth of ecotourism and wildlife watching is starting to deliver economic benefits. The sea eagles of Mull, at Loch Frisa, are a firmly established tourist magnet, which pulls in thousands of wildlife enthusiasts. The Forestry Commission's Kyle Rhea otter haven on Skye is another example.

I am happy to look sympathetically at all investments that enhance Scotland's reputation in the world, and I will be happy to talk to Mr Purvis about the proposal and to visit the site, to see how we can help further. As he rightly pointed out, such investment has produced massive dividends. That is the key issue of the debate. State investment in the forestry sector is only part of the overall investment, but it unlocks huge benefit for the whole of Scotland. I am well aware of concerns in the forestry sector about the hiatus that has followed the closure of the Scottish forestry grants scheme in April 2006 and I am keen that rural development contracts should be opened up as soon as  possible. I welcome the European Union's imminent approval of the full Scottish rural development programme. Some £269 million will be allocated for forestry measures over the life of the programme. That represents more than £38 million of new investment in forestry every year, which is a historically high level of support and is provided in recognition of what forestry can deliver for Scotland. I am confident that the private sector will respond positively to the new rural development contracts and I have asked Forest Enterprise Scotland to develop, in parallel, a planting programme. As I said, the state and private sectors are working together, learning from each other and moving forward. It would be wrong of me to conclude without mentioning the community woodland sector. The Government is keen on local participation. Woodland that is managed through local involvement helps to generate local activity, particularly economic activity. I have visited a number of projects during the past nine months, including Aline community woodland on Lewis—a surprising wood to come across on the road from Tarbert to Stornoway. The project is generating jobs and activity. Training has been provided for five local residents, who are now employed by the group. Forestry Commission Scotland works in partnership with more than 100 community woodland groups on the national forest estate and supports community woodland umbrella bodies. Scotland's forests and woodlands, which cover 8 or 9 per cent of land mass—a proportion that we are keen to grow—deliver economic benefits, through employment in rural areas and the development of a profitable and expanding processing sector, and by making a major contribution to local industries, including the tourism industry. They also provide a backdrop to what this country is and what it can be. They provide a backdrop to our landscape, a haven for our rich biodiversity and a special place for people to find and to visit. I am pleased to move, That the Parliament, mindful of the Scottish Government's purpose to achieve sustainable economic growth, acknowledges the contribution that forests and woodlands make through timber, tourism and direct and indirect employment, and recognises the need to support the continued development and expansion of the commercial Scottish forestry sector and the competitive and developing industries which it underpins.

I shall do my best, Presiding Officer, to ensure that you live an ideal world. This has been a good and positive debate. Ministers usually say that when they sum up a debate but, often, when they do so, they must ignore one or two speeches that have not lived up to expectations. Today, every time a member rose, I wondered whether that speech would be the one I would have to ignore, but none deserved to be ignored. Every member has spoken with commitment, very often with passion, and certainly with knowledge. The Official Report of this debate will show just how positive it has been. As Karen Gillon said, many speakers have put forward positive ideas. I am happy to say that I will read the Official Report of the debate and reflect on those points. Like Peter Peacock, I hope that we will be able to return to this subject for a longer debate—perhaps a subject debate that will deal with one or two of the key issues within biodiversity. The 2010 target is extremely important and extremely challenging. I know from my conversations with the relevant ministers in the other Administrations in these islands that they feel exactly the same. We have every intention of working as hard as we can towards the target. Let us focus on some of the specific targets. The previous Administration set a target of having 80 per cent of designated features in a favourable condition by March 2008. We anticipate being able to meet that target—indeed, we hope to slightly surpass it. In any case, we will certainly be in that region and I do not think that two or three per cent either way matters. The target of having 95 per cent of designated features in a favourable condition by 2010 was accepted at the time as very ambitious. As climate change speeds up, it becomes more and more ambitious. I hope that, as we debate this matter in the coming years, we realise that everything is being done to reach that target but that there are some natural barriers that we will have to overcome in order to do so. That is why the interrelationship between various pieces of forthcoming legislation will be important, as Karen Gillon said. The marine bill, the flooding bill and the climate change bill will be key tools that we can use to achieve our biodiversity indicators as well do a range of other things. Karen Gillon mentioned the SRDP scheme. I am sure that, like me, she will have warmly welcomed the fact that the scheme was considered and passed by the European Commission yesterday. We now await formal written approval from the Commission, which we hope to have within two or  three weeks. The programme will open as soon as practicable thereafter—certainly in the spring. That is a big step forward and I pay tribute to the officials involved and to Richard Lochhead, who has lost some sleep over the issue in recent months. As the member knows, yesterday's decision means that less-favoured areas support scheme payments can now proceed. There are important things in the SRDP that we can use to help us. Agri-environment support is an important aspect, but we should reflect on the key issues in that programme: business viability, the enhancement of biodiversity and landscape, the improvement of water quality, the tackling of climate change and support for thriving local communities.

I will promote that case as vigorously as I can once the process of assessing the full detail of the case has concluded. I am keen for the peatlands to be recognised, not least because, as the member knows, damage to them would lead to considerable consequences in terms of the release of carbon, which we simply cannot afford to allow. The Scottish rural development programme needs to be pushed forward. I am now confident that people can begin to consider what they can apply for and what they can be involved in—considerable material to help them is available. As the months go on, much of the programme will contribute to the meeting of our aims. I hope that members will encourage people throughout the country to be involved in applications on the basis of the things I have mentioned—particularly the enhancement of biodiversity and landscape, which is crucial. I will focus for a moment on eco-schools. I am very impressed, as is every member, by the eco-school movement. It is the most successful eco-school movement in the world. Active work is now being done to move some form of the programme into secondary schools and I, along with my colleagues who speak on education, will encourage that as much as possible. There are other initiatives that help schools, such as the salmon in schools project that Karen Gillon mentioned. I declare a slight interest here—my wife was bitterly disappointed that her school could not take part this year because the programme was oversubscribed. I am sure that by putting that on the record I shall encourage them to apply for a  future year. The serious point concerns young people's enthusiasm to take part in schemes that distribute knowledge about biodiversity. Knowledge and public participation are two of the key issues in the biodiversity indicators. John Scott urged me not to be complacent. That is not something I tend to be, and from reading the report and discussing it with those who work in the field, I know that there are many things to be concerned about. The biggest challenge that we face, however, is a people challenge: motivating the Scottish people to recognise the real challenge that the issue presents to them and ensuring that they are involved. That is why I warmly welcome and strongly encourage the inclusion of some new indicators: attitudes to biodiversity, the extent and composition of green space, visits to the outdoors, the involvement in biodiversity conservation and the membership of biodiversity organisations. We have set ourselves the objective of involving people in the biodiversity debate.

I will move on to that very briefly, because I want to finish on one or two very important issues—particularly the interrelationships that Peter Peacock mentioned. I am passionately committed to the elimination of wildlife crime in all its forms—not simply the well-publicised crime that we have heard about, but a range of other types of wildlife crime such as poaching, which is at times undertaken in an industrial way. We will work very hard to ensure that wildlife crime is eliminated. I look forward to the report from Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary, which is also a report from the inspector of prosecution—we are considering all parts of wildlife crime. Bill Wilson talked about the machair project, as did Peter Peacock. There is a complex relationship between all parts of our ecosystem. Sometimes, things are done and we do not realise the consequences, and we reap disastrous results. Last summer, I was deeply involved in the very interesting issue of tick infestation. We are now going through a massive increase in tick infestation, which is resulting in an increase in tick-borne diseases and consequences for animal and bird health, particularly for grouse moor health—[ Interruption. ] Judging by the sound of that mobile phone, somebody clearly wishes to tell Mr Scott about tick infestation and to keep him up to date on it.  We have to work with a range of organisations to deal with the problem. For example, one of the reasons tick infestation is so bad is the reduction in hill sheep, which has caused a considerable problem. Another reason is the global warming that is taking place. The result is a massive increase in the number of ticks per square metre. We will find a way to do something about it, but it is not simple, and it will require attention to a range of issues—[ Interruption. ]

The debate has been an encouraging indication of the best of the Scottish Parliament when members in all parts of the chamber—I include Robin Harper, who asked a very important question, which I will consider, about naming and shaming local authorities; it is time they delivered those plans, and I hope that they are listening—come together to pay attention to the key issues of our time. I am disappointed that there were so few members in the chamber at the start of the debate. I hope that the others will take part in future debates, because there is no doubt that the issues of biodiversity are the key issues of our time. We have inherited a country that is rich in plant life and wildlife—although, as Peter Peacock said, it is sometimes artificially rich and too ordered—and we must not pass on to future generations a planet and a country whose biodiversity has been ruined by our actions or our lack of action. I commend the motion and the amendments to the Parliament. I look forward to continued co-operative working in the Parliament so that we can meet and overcome the challenges that face us.

I did mean that phrase. Strong evidence suggests that the change in climate that we are now talking about has been taking place for at least 40 years. That can be seen, for  example, in the rise of rivers at peak flows. I would be happy to provide more evidence to the member should he find that helpful.

I am glad that the member mentioned BEETLE, which is the best landscape and wildlife information system. I had the pleasure of being involved with launching it at the land use planning and climate change seminar. Does the member agree that we now need to encourage the use of such software, joined-up thinking and joined-up habitats right across the planning structure in Scotland?

I have said that I intend to support Jim Hume's amendment, but I want to put something on the record. Attempts have been made to invite many of the organisations that the member mentioned to take part in discussions, but there has been a falling away at times. However, I am happy to ensure that we encourage those organisations to take part in discussions again. I shall ensure that my officials do so, but we must recognise that they may sometimes be reluctant to take part in other organisations' activities, because they have a living to earn.

I am sure that we will hear much science and some confusing terms this afternoon. Biodiversity is not a simple matter, so I thought that it might be best at the start to step back from looking too closely at the variety of life around us and to feel the sense of inspiration that our natural world should create in us. At the end of a poem called "Growing, Flying, Happening", the poet Alastair Reid—who is very much planted in the soil of Galloway, although he has lived all over the world—says that our "Eyes open on growing, flying, happening, and go on opening. Manifold, the world dawns on unrecognizing, realizing eyes. Amazement is the thing." We are talking today about amazement at the rich diversity of life around us and at what exists, and about the determination that it should continue to exist in times that press hard on it. I am delighted to open the debate on the progress report on implementation of the Scottish biodiversity strategy. The previous Scottish Executive published the strategy—"Scotland's Biodiversity: It's in Your Hands"—in 2004. It set out a 25-year framework for biodiversity action in Scotland. Just as my colleague Mr Lochhead did in respect of waste policy, I pay tribute to those who came before us. The Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 and the biodiversity strategy laid the groundwork for this Government to continue to work in partnership with all the members of the Scottish biodiversity forum and the much wider audience of the Scottish people to protect nature and wildlife in Scotland. The biodiversity strategy fits well with our five strategic objectives. What have we to report today? We show that, under the previous Administration and this Administration, Scotland has made a good start in implementing the strategy, which is much needed. We have made progress on five key areas. On species and habitats, the report describes the strengthening of nature conservation legislation, activities to conserve salmon and red squirrels and the damage that invasive non-native species could cause to Scotland's environment.

I am not sure whether I can meet the final request. I was planning to say that, whenever I think of Roseanna Cunningham, I think of course of the Scottish wildcat, in the most positive way. Fortunately, I am to launch a wildcat project next month, which will be involved in reintroducing the wildcat in some areas where it has died away and ensuring that the wildcat continues to exist in Scotland, as the result of a development in genetics that means that the wildcat can retain a reasonably pure bloodline. I am conscious of the subject and I welcome the intervention. I will mention that when I next speak about biodiversity. We have made progress on the issue of people and biodiversity. Biodiversity is often about people: it is about the social and health benefits of volunteering, conservation, the environmental benefits of regeneration, and it is about the value of wildlife watching and enjoying nature without harming it. We have made progress on landscapes and ecosystems. The report describes work that has been done to protect Scotland's seas, developments on land in the national parks, planning reform and work to connect forests in Edinburgh and the Lothians to benefit wildlife. I will return to connectivity at the conclusion of my speech. The report also describes the progress that has been made on integration and co-ordination and the work that has been done on knowledge. One example of that is the splendid newly published book "The Birds of Scotland", a motion on which, in the name of Peter Peacock, appears in the Business Bulletin. "The Birds of Scotland", which is published by the Scottish Ornithologists Club, is the definitive work on the subject and makes knowledge available to all of us. Progress is being made—we were able to list that progress in the biodiversity indicators that we published last autumn. However, progress is not universal or uniform. Five of the indicators—nearly a quarter of the total—show improvement, but another five show no change. Nine of the indicators are baseline assessments for which no trend has yet been established; we will look at those. However, three of the indicators—for seabird populations, plant diversity and invasive non-native species—show deterioration. We take those issues very seriously. The purpose of indicators is to guide us to the actions that still need to be taken and to divert our effort from areas in which we are succeeding to those in  which we are not. That will continue to be our approach. We will look at the range of indicators, which will show us how we are doing overall. The number and range of butterflies and moths are good indicators of habitat diversity, fragmentation and the impact of climate change. We can learn a great deal from examining those indicators. I must mention climate change, because work on that is being done on the pressure of climate change on our biodiversity. Last week I launched a report for Forest Research, the research agency of the Forestry Commission, which showed that the impact of climate change on forestry will be great and will change how and where trees are grown. There will be changes in every part of our natural heritage. Our job is to try to hold back those changes through the proposed climate change bill and by reducing emissions. However, we will also have to adapt Scotland and some of our landscapes to changes that are already taking place, because climate change has been with us not just for the past year or 10 years, but for 40 years. I conclude by saying something about the future. New approaches are influencing our work and we will increasingly look to key delivery bodies that are responsible to Scottish ministers for biodiversity planning. We will also look to the private sector.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I welcome the amendment in the name of Jim Hume and confirm that we are happy to support it. I am happy to say that we will also support the Labour amendment, because we are conscious of the 2010 targets. Although they are challenging for every Government in Europe, we are endeavouring to meet them. We will work on those targets, work with our partners and work on the ecosystems approach, which is important. We have moved beyond the time of focusing narrowly on everything. To do the job that we want to do, we must change huge areas of our lives and, sometimes, areas of our country. I am increasingly interested in working with charities and others on that approach. A good start has been made to a long and difficult process and there is much still to do. We are committed to ensuring that Parliament receives reports such as this every three years, in accordance with the programme that has been agreed, and to supporting international efforts. I am grateful for that fact that so far the debate on the issue has been positive. I look forward to this afternoon's debate and to our moving forward on this most important topic.  I move, That the Parliament welcomes the collaborative work being undertaken by a wide variety of partners across the public, private and voluntary sectors to take forward implementation of the Scottish Biodiversity Strategy from 2004 to 2007, as set out in Scotland's Biodiversity: It's In Your Hands - A Progress Report 2005-07; commends the enthusiasm and commitment of all those involved in that work, and acknowledges that continued effort by all the partners engaged in conserving biodiversity in Scotland is required in order to address the challenges identified in the progress report such as climate change, invasive non-native species, river basin management, sustainable management of the natural world, the development of the ecosystems approach, wildlife crime and the need for the broader engagement of all citizens so that Scotland can play its part in delivering our national and international commitments to the cause of halting biodiversity loss.

Expenditure on the croft house grant scheme is demand led and depends on the terms of the scheme and the number and value of applications. Last year, the outturn was only one third of budget provision. This year, the budget is £3 million and forecast outturn is only £2.5 million. Next year, we expect full spend of the £2.6 million budgeted.  Support through specific crofting grants schemes will be reviewed in the light of the recommendations of the committee of inquiry on crofting. In addition, the Highlands and Islands croft entrant scheme, which is administered by the Crofters Commission, facilitates the entry into crofting of suitable young entrants to stimulate and encourage an innovative approach to crofting development. Support to help new crofters to develop their businesses will be available under the new Scotland rural development programme.

We keep the grant level under constant review. We are aware of how important the grant is. Last summer, for example, I was pleased to discover that people in new crofts on the Isle of Jura had been able, by making use of the croft house grant scheme, to more than stabilise the primary school, as there had been a resulting influx of young families. When the Shucksmith committee of inquiry on crofting reports, the issue that has been raised will be examined along with all the other crofting issues. If that committee recommends that there is a need to consider the way in which the croft house grant scheme operates, we will take that recommendation seriously.

There is no question that the scheme is hindering development—it is doing quite the reverse. Housing is one of the key drivers—it is not the only key driver—that ensure that there is a healthy crofting sector. We are aware of the many issues relating to croft housing and the use of croft land for housing, which is why I look forward to the Shucksmith committee's report. I expect to receive that report before Easter, and hope that we will publish it as quickly as possible thereafter.

Of course I recognise the barriers that exist and the fact that there are regulatory issues. I do not wish to sound repetitive, but the committee of inquiry has a remit to consider the whole range of crofting issues, and I know that it has considered in great detail the issue that has been raised. The issues of how crofting will develop, and access to land and housing, have been central to its concerns. I hope that Rhoda Grant awaits its report with as much anticipation as I do, and that she will take part in the vigorous debate that will surely follow.

The Scottish Government funds many organisations, including local authorities, through core funding and grant schemes to support local action to improve the environment. Delivery includes making better use of poorly used or unused green space.  The Scottish Government gives financial support to Greenspace Scotland, which works towards the goal of everyone in Scotland who lives and works in urban areas or in adjoining areas having easy access to quality green space that meets local needs and improves their quality of life. By supporting action on green space by national and local organisations, the Scottish Government is contributing to the achievement of a greener, as well as a healthier and safer, Scotland.

I agree that communities should be supported in recovering areas that have fallen into disuse or those that could be developed into useful green space. There is another side to the equation. We should be sensitive about the loss of green space. For example, in North Lanarkshire, a number of areas appear to be under threat. Recently, I had the privilege of going with Councillor McGlinchey, one of the Scottish National Party's councillors in North Lanarkshire, to see some of those areas and to talk to the residents about that threat. Local authorities must recognise that they must ensure that green space is protected and continued, and the Government needs to encourage communities and local authorities to develop new green space.

I gave a positive answer about allotments previously, and I continue to do so. However, allotments are not the only form of green space; there is a variety of other forms. Green space in which children can play is much needed, as is green space in which wildlife can flourish and which allows the protection and development of biodiversity—we will debate that later—and green space that allows the provision of allotments. I support all those things.

I concur with the member on that. I hope that every local authority has the desire to consult local communities. As I said in my original answer, Greenspace Scotland, which we fund, works towards the purpose of "everyone in Scotland who lives and works in urban areas or in adjoining areas having easy access to quality green space that meets local needs and improves their quality of life." A community's view that green space should not be built on or otherwise developed should weigh heavily on local authorities.

I start as Sarah Boyack did by welcoming the tone of the debate which, unfortunately, she did not keep going throughout her speech. However, the tone of the debate has been, by and large, very positive. I am pleased to support my friend Mr Mather in closing this debate on the UK Energy Bill. We have had a useful discussion about both the specifics of the bill and wider energy aspects and we have identified not just a Government with clear ambition and the means to achieve it but the areas on which there is great agreement across the chamber. An area about which we have heard too little in the debate is the environment. We develop our energy policy in the context not just of providing energy supply but of our five strategic objectives, particularly the greener Scotland objective. That includes not just a reduction in carbon emissions, which some members mentioned, but the consideration of the impact of energy developments on landscapes and habitats—indeed, Scottish planning policy 6, which we endorsed specifically, and our decisions on individual projects have made, and will make, that entirely clear. I will list some of the key points in the debate and then pay attention to two or three of the significant contributions this morning. The nuclear provisions in the UK Energy Bill that deal with nuclear decommissioning and waste do not extend to Scotland. We are very pleased that the UK Government has recognised the strength of feeling about nuclear power. We welcome that, but we would of course say that that is due to the benefit of having an SNP Government in Scotland standing up for Scotland's best interests. However, in the interests of consensus and in view of the unusual experience of working so closely with the Liberal Democrats—we will support their amendment—I note that some people in previous Administrations have also been strongly against nuclear power and have played their part, whatever part that was.  The UK bill could provide a common UK framework for a number of energy developments, a key example of which is carbon storage—a move that would be welcomed by the energy industry. We have proposed to the UK Government that Scottish ministers exercise new powers in that regard, both within and beyond the 12-mile limit. It is interesting that there is a clear read-across on that matter to our position on marine policy, which is supported in many parts of the chamber. I hope that our position on carbon capture and storage will be supported too. It is disappointing that, so far, the UK Government has not agreed with us. We regret that. We want to continue a productive dialogue and we hope that we can negotiate on the matter. We make it clear, as we have to, that we are prepared to introduce our own bill if we deem it necessary. We broadly support the bill's proposals on renewables and the proposed system of banding for renewables obligation certificates to allow higher support for emerging technologies. We are pleased to see that current executive devolution of the renewables obligation powers will be maintained, which will enable the Scottish Government to provide the appropriate levels of support for wave, tidal and biomass developments that are located in Scotland. I will return to the subject of biomass, which has not been given enough attention in the debate. We will consult more fully on the renewables obligation in the spring and we reserve the right, as we must, to suggest a different approach to banding from that of the UK. For example, we already consider that two ROCs for marine energy is insufficient. We heard a number of speeches on ROCs and other issues this morning. I was surprised by Lewis Macdonald's speech because he accused the Government of lacking ambition. The one thing that this Government never lacks is ambition. We continue in our ambition to export energy. Indeed, we made a manifesto commitment to pursue the North Sea grid to export the huge potential of marine energy. In undertaking our grid studies, we worked closely with the Crown Estate, whose study is reported in The Scotsman today. We recognise the need to export, so that remains in our energy mix. I was even more surprised by Gavin Brown's speech. It was the strongest plea for a managed economy that I have ever heard from a Tory spokesperson. He seemed to think that only the state could provide resources for energy generation. I am sure that he did this unintentionally, but he misled the chamber about the resources that are available from Government. Of course, those resources are only part of the matter—there is not just the £33 million a year that he dismissed out of hand, even though it is an increase of something like 60 per cent on the  money that was offered by the previous Administration. There is not just an energy budget; there is support through the renewables obligation, about which we have been speaking, for which the consumer pays. There is support through the work of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. There is access to UK funding. In fact, there is a range of resources that support renewable energy, rather than the limited picture that Mr Brown gave.

I am sure that somebody with much greater expertise in energy than I have—I am merely an environment spokesperson—would know the detail of those budgets and be able to talk about them. Of course, I am sure that Mr Brown did not mislead the chamber deliberately, but he certainly misled the chamber. I want to say something positive about Sarah Boyack's speech and her long-standing commitment to the issue. We acknowledge the importance of her proposed energy efficiency and microgeneration bill. As she knows, discussions are going on and there is a keenness to implement measures, but I ask her to be generous with us. It took eight years for nothing to happen under her party's Administration; we are only eight months into the new Administration and we are making substantial progress. Other Labour speeches can be described as the tale of two Daves. Dave Stewart made a tremendously strong contribution. I welcome his role as Labour spokesperson on the environment. He got right to the heart of the matter and asked important questions, for example about hydro power. We will answer those questions and I am sure that we can have a dialogue about them. He raised issues about biomass that I also want to discuss. The speech from Dave Whitton was scaremongering and negative. Its tone was contrary to the tone of the debate. It exposed the hollowness of the Labour case for nuclear power, because it was built on two issues of fear. It generated fear of an energy gap, which does not exist, and it generated fear that Scotland is isolated in the energy market, which it is not. When those props are removed there is no case for nuclear. I would like to talk about other speeches, but I can mention only one or two. Kenny Gibson made a tremendous speech, which fully justified his subscription to the New Scientist in that it  contained information of which we were all completely unaware. I am grateful to Joe FitzPatrick for giving me a new slogan. As members know, I am a retired spin doctor but, were I still in office, I would seize on the slogan "It's Scotland's seaweed" and exploit it as strongly as possible. I emphasise what my friend Mr Mather said at the beginning of the debate: Scotland does not want or need nuclear power. My friend Mr Tavish Scott made the point even more clearly when he said that nuclear power is neither clean nor green. The people of Scotland understand that—it is the Labour Party that is out of touch on the issue. There are many reasons why people should oppose nuclear power, such as issues to do with storage and disposal of nuclear waste, the legacy to future generations, concerns about security and health and, of course, cost, as consumers are faced with higher bills. The fallacy of cheap nuclear energy has been fed to the people of Scotland since the 1950s. It remains a fallacy. Presiding Officer—I was about to say, "Deputy Presiding Officer", but I see that there has been a seamless change—one point will serve to emphasise the difficulty with nuclear power. The clean-up of the Chapelcross works in Dumfriesshire will cost £1.37 billion and the site will not be available for reuse until 2128 at the earliest—in 120 years' time. I put that in context: in 1888, 120 years ago, the Scottish Labour Party made its first commitment to devolution, in the Mid-Lanark by-election, but we waited 111 years for devolution to be delivered. That demonstrates that 120 years is a long time, but that is the period for which nothing on the Chapelcross site can be used. In that regard, nuclear energy is not the cleanest form of energy but the most extreme polluting form of energy.

Of course I will work with the member on such issues, although I understand that probably it is technically not possible to reduce radiation at the site more quickly. I mention an area that has not received adequate attention in the debate. I am sure that keen observers of the Government's work will have read the report of the wood fuel task force, which was delivered to me last week. I pay tribute to the task force's members. If members have not read the report, I will be happy to provide it for them—Sarah Boyack has read it, of course. Wood biomass can make an enormous contribution. This  year we are using around 0.75 million green tonnes to produce energy from wood but, in the light of the task force's work, we can probably increase the amount to around 8.5 million green tonnes within 15 years. There is huge potential, even in such a limited sector, provided that we use ideas, recognise the importance of the energy source and work on it.

We have ambitious targets for wood and renewables and we have ambitious targets for Scotland. We are already looking at a future beyond nuclear power—that is the concluding message of the debate. Nuclear power is of no relevance to Scotland. That debate is over and the Westminster Government has recognised that it is over. Now we have to invest our energy, enthusiasm and intelligence in ensuring that Scotland's energy supply is a world leader in being clean and renewable. It is fortunate that the Government is capable of doing that. I am sure that the people of Scotland are glad of that.

As a number of speakers said in summing up, many members have been disappointed by the debate. I am sure that that is also true of Sir Neil MacCormick, who is in the gallery. He knows more about Europe than almost anyone in the chamber. The debate reminds me of the Christmas crackers that one gets at a certain type of luncheon. They start well—they look good and go off with a bang. I am sure that my colleague, the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture, will not mind my saying that about her opening speech. Then, however, one is confronted with three things: a useless object the purpose of which you are not entirely sure and which breaks anyway; a small piece of paper with an inexplicable motto; and a paper hat that falls to pieces. I will allocate those three things at the start of my speech. Undoubtedly, the cracker that started off rather well and looked interesting, only  to fall to pieces, was Malcolm Chisholm's introduction to the debate. He said nothing to persuade the Government that he believed in the right of the people of Scotland to decide their future. That is such a fundamental thing that not to mention it in either his speech or his amendment was a major problem.

No. I must make progress. The small piece of paper with the meaningless motto was the speech from Helen Eadie. I remain completely baffled by it. Does she want Europe to be effective or does she want to argue about a variety of other issues? I do not know. I come to the paper hat that falls to pieces. One puts on the hat only for it to slip down and eventually end up around one's neck where it becomes an annoying encumbrance. Mike Rumbles's speech was just that—an annoying encumbrance. He was also factually incorrect in what he said about fisheries and Richard Lochhead's great success today in Europe. The debate is first and foremost about the Scottish people's right to choose their future. It is absolutely fundamental to the Parliament that the Scottish people be given that right. We argue for that right as a pro-European Government. We support a referendum, not because we believe that the European Union is fundamentally flawed, that we should withdraw from it or that we should wreck it, but because we want to establish a democratic and effective European Union of which Scotland will become a member state. The rules that govern the European Union should be in line with Scotland's priorities and democratic imperative. In short, we want a people's Europe, not a political parties' Europe.

Mr Rumbles is, as usual, somewhat behind the debate, but let me be entirely clear: were Scotland an independent member of the European Union—as I profoundly hope that we will be—we would not be faced with that question. The question would be: "How well have we negotiated?" Of course, if a referendum has red lines, those red lines dictate the view of a political party. We have red lines.

My colleague Linda Fabiani informs me that it was. We are open and optimistic people—we constantly hope for the best and we hope for things to change. Not until the last minute, when we were let down by the UK Government, were we able to take our position. We were let down and we continue to be let down. There is a lot more to the treaty than fisheries, but I will finish on that point. Fishing is of real importance to Scotland's economic prosperity, particularly that of its rural communities. That importance is all the more germane today, given that the EU fisheries council in Brussels this morning reached agreement on the days at sea for Scottish fishermen in 2008 and on some final quota issues. The deal at the council is a good one for Scotland. I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing a groundbreaking deal for Scotland that, for the first time ever, devolves to Scotland the allocation of days at sea. If we had had that type of achievement every year, we would not have been in the difficulties that we have been in. If we can get that kind of deal as part of the UK, just imagine how much better the deal would have been if we sat on the council as an independent member state and with a reformed common fisheries policy. I will conclude on the issue of the common fisheries policy, with its centralised, top-down, regulatory approach and the annual inefficient and resource-intensive haggling over quotas. The policy has been a failure in Europe and a disaster for Scotland. It has failed to deliver the protection of stocks that it was purported to achieve and at the same time it has deeply alienated fishermen and their communities—the very people whose confidence was needed to secure long-term sustainable fisheries. Criticism of the common fisheries policy has been going on for many years and has come from many and varied quarters. It must be one of the most unloved long-established pieces of regulation anywhere in the world. I would have said the democratic world but, alas, Europe is not democratic.

Please sit down. I ask the member please not to lecture me on democracy—he is a Liberal Democrat. Scotland is leading the way in Europe by working in partnership with our fishermen and conservation groups to bring stakeholders together to find shared innovative solutions. We accept that the Commission is making slow steps in the right direction with a greater emphasis on regionalisation, but more radical redesign is necessary. The First Minister recently announced our intention to establish an expert group to devise new and innovative ways to manage our valuable fisheries outwith the context of CFP reform. We  will press unswervingly for an effective replacement for the CFP when it ends in 2011. The debate has been about more than fisheries, although that subject is very important. I commend our motion to the chamber. It is about giving the Scottish people the right to choose. I repeat a remark that I made some minutes ago: we want a people's Europe, not a political parties' Europe. Let us vote for the people of Scotland and the people of Europe.

But what about national management?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Iain Smith explain to me why the treaty entrenches "the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy" as an exclusive competence but treats all other aspects of fisheries as a shared competence, as it does with agriculture? The entrenchment is the issue. That is an entrenchment action.

There will be no herring if we let it happen.

Easily.

Will the member give way?

Mr Lochhead is of course in Brussels—as he is for much of the time at present—and I am therefore here representing his, as well as my, interests. Information on existing sites of special scientific interest is provided on the Scottish Natural Heritage website. As at 30 November 2007, there were 1,456 such sites in Scotland. The SNH website also contains information on the process and criteria for considering whether sites should be designated as SSSIs. That is an on-going process.

I do not think that I should be drawn on the issue of Menie Links and the SSSI. It is well known that SNH is a statutory consultee in such processes. I entirely agree with the member that Scotland has a rich, diverse network of sites of special scientific interest, which underpin the Natura 2000 sites, special protection areas and other similar sites. They are of local, national and international importance, and we continue to identify them, to celebrate them and to ensure that they contribute to our unique landscape and biodiversity.

We have received a request for a meeting, and we are considering our response.

I agree with Mr Wilson. The Government has invested in a new fisheries research vessel, costing £4 million, which will come into service at the end of this year. It will further increase the breadth and quality of fisheries research in Scotland. We must maintain our high standing in fisheries science. The Fisheries Research Services marine laboratory in Aberdeen is a world-renowned institute. The quality of the science and of the scientists in Aberdeen is such that the laboratory is considered to be among the best research laboratories in the whole of Europe. Our scientists continue to play a major role in the development of international advice on fish stocks in the north Atlantic. The Scottish Government will continue to invest in the lab to ensure that its role and reputation remain of the highest order.

The Scottish Executive will support organic production under the Scottish rural development programme through land-based payments for farmers who wish to convert to organics or to maintain organic farming methods.

We believe that organic farming plays a valuable role in helping to protect and enhance the environment and contributes to Scotland's reputation for high-quality produce  grown in an environmentally friendly way. During the summer, I was a guest on a number of organic farms where I saw the very high-quality work that is being done. We recognise that there is a growing trend among consumers to seek out organic food. Organic food will definitely be part of our national food policy. I should point out to the member that the Scottish rural development programme for 2007 to 2013 will continue to provide support for organic farming under the competitive scheme, the rural development contracts and rural priorities. It is expected that the programme will open for proposals early in the new year. The programme's resources for organic production have been increased.

I am grateful for the question because the Scottish Government is enthusiastic—if one can be enthusiastic in a slow way—about the slow food events that are being held. Indeed, the Scottish Government sponsored and was represented at a slow food event in Edinburgh last month, which Margo MacDonald will know about. We hope that the slow food movement, which started in Italy and has expanded, no doubt slowly, across the continent, will contribute to the forthcoming discussion on the national food policy for Scotland. The quality of the food in the national food policy will be influenced by the same type of ideas as lie behind the slow food movement.

I hope that my presence here is not merely as a stand-in but as an enthusiast for slow food. The member will be aware, and I am sure that other members will want to be aware, that the original slow food event involved three pig  processors who were flown over from Italy to Edinburgh last month. They brought a whole pig carcase and demonstrated how to make salami, sausages, pancetta and all sorts of other delicacies, making creative use of the whole pig. I know that Margo MacDonald would want to see more creative use made of whole pigs and other resources, so I can reassure her that we will encourage slow food wherever events take place. I am happy for us to have discussions with people in Linlithgow who are enthusiastic about such an approach to the good things that we have in Scotland.

I am grateful for the invitation, which I would be happy to take up. There is a serious point. In developing our food policy in Scotland, we should engage fully with the issues that lie behind the slow food movement. They include reconnecting people with food—particularly locally produced, seasonal food—and making people aware of the methods and environmental impact of production. Local food has different meanings to different people. The Scottish Government supports local food and, therefore, the ideas behind slow food and the movement itself.

It was a creative approach to the question, but I recognise the member's concern and it is a serious point.  I do not accept that the Scottish rural development programme has been put on hold. Both the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and I are very distressed that the further delay has taken place, and we have made it clear what we think of that—to the member and publicly. We are committed to ensuring that payments are made on time—considerable discussion is still going on. We are hopeful that that will be the case and I hope to be able to confirm that to the member shortly. We recognise the issue and are extremely unhappy that there should be any delay. We do not believe that Scottish producers or farmers should suffer from that. Similarly, we do not believe that there should be any suffering in the woodland sector, where the delay might also affect planting. We will be able to give reassurances to Scottish farmers on our own behalf and via the member.

The Government continues to support all initiatives that encourage recreation and enjoyment of the outdoors—indeed, we debated one of those yesterday in this chamber. It is a matter for the relevant authorities to determine what priority to give to funding for new projects in the light of their other commitments and responsibilities.

I look forward to speaking to a number of people who are involved in the project, following the arrangement that has been made by the member, and discussing the issue with them. In an era in which we are encouraging local authorities to work with us in a new relationship, it would be wrong of me to tell any local authority what it should be doing with its resources. However, we encourage every responsible body in Scotland to assess constantly whether such  projects fit in to their objectives. In the situation that we are discussing, not only Argyll and Bute Council is involved, but bodies such as the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. We hope that all the relevant bodies will consider the plans and possibilities sympathetically, in line with other requirements and budgetary constraints that they might have.

I am aware of the member's interest in this matter. Indeed, he was present last night at the launch of a reproduction of Roy's maps of Scotland, the great military maps of 200 years ago that demonstrate how diverse this country is and show that the best route from A to B is not always a direct line but, sometimes, around the coast. Although I am enthusiastic about the idea of an all-Scotland coastal path, I think that it is going too far to call it an embryo plan—I think that conception has still to take place. We need to discuss at some length how that can be achieved. However, the Loch Long path would, of course, form part of it.

The Scottish Government is facilitating consultation on the strategic framework for Scottish freshwater fisheries on behalf of the members of the freshwater fisheries forum steering group. The consultation is on-going, and its closing date is 4 January 2008. Views have been sought from all interests throughout Scotland. In addition to publishing the consultation document, a number of public consultation events have been held around the country.

It has been a comprehensive consultation exercise. To maximise coverage, consultation events were organised at Hampden and in Ayr, Stirling, Peebles, Aberdeen and Dingwall. There was a press launch and there is material on the Government website. More than 1,000 printed copies of the consultation document were distributed to interested parties; member organisations of the freshwater fisheries forum also undertook to make it known to their members. Drop-in surgeries were held, and those surgeries were brought to people's attention so that they could take part. The document contains proposals for a future management structure for Scottish freshwater fisheries. As the member said, access and protection issues are part of that process. We will treat seriously every response we receive from organisations and individuals. We are aware that some issues are contentious and arouse strong passions on both sides. I assure the member that, when we consider the responses, we will take a fair, balanced view that is based on the informed consent of those who take part in angling. Ultimately, it is they who will determine future policy.

Both the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and I meet NFU Scotland on a regular basis, as do our officials. At those meetings, we discuss a wide range of current issues that affect farmers in Scotland.

This is a serious matter, and I take seriously what the member has said. Recently, the cabinet secretary met Jim McLaren, the president of NFU Scotland, to discuss the revision of the Scottish action programme for NVZs; I have had a similar conversation. The 1991 nitrates directive is aimed at protecting the water environment across Europe. In 2002, 14 per cent of Scotland was designated as a nitrate vulnerable zone. There is scientific evidence that if slurry is spread on land in the autumn or early winter, a substantial proportion of it—often as much as 30 per cent—is leached to groundwater. If it is spread in spring, very little is leached. Current restrictions on spreading slurry are inadequate to prevent nitrates from getting into water bodies in the NVZs. We recognise the problems that arise as a result of the new regulations. The Scottish Government intends to allow livestock farmers in the NVZs at least two years to comply, and to provide capital grants of 40 per cent for slurry storage. The Scottish Agricultural College estimates that the total cost of providing slurry storage for livestock farmers in the NVZs who need it will be about £20 million; the member will know that some already have enough storage. Even if the cost of the manure and slurry storage option is £20 million, the call on funding for that option will be £8 million. That is only a small proportion—0.5 per cent—of the £1.6 billion in the Scottish rural development plan. Since we came into office, we have recognised the difficulty of implementing the regulations and have had detailed and lengthy discussions with the NFU and in Europe. The matter had to be resolved when we were putting the SRDP in place. Although I recognise the difficulties that each farmer who is affected by the regulations faces, the arrangements that I have described are the best possible deal that we could have achieved in the circumstances.

The Scottish Government has been in continuing discussions with the UK Government on the matter. Most recently, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment wrote to Ruth Kelly to express concerns about threats to the environment in the Forth that arise  from the proposals and to make the case for her to use the powers that are available under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 to address the environmental hazards that are inevitably associated with such transfers.

I would be happy to accede to the member's request. The Scottish Government supports the aim of Mark Lazarowicz's bill in the UK Parliament. The Scottish Parliament has made its position on the proposals for the Firth of Forth absolutely clear and we have urged the UK Government to take action. Concerns are expressed well at Westminster and I ask Scottish members of Parliament of all political parties to vote in support of the bill. However, the solution lies in transferring the appropriate powers for control or regulation of ship-to-ship transfers from Westminster to Holyrood.

I made it clear in my first answer to Mr Park that we have made a strong case to Ruth Kelly that she should use the powers that are available under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 to address the environmental hazards associated with transfers. The Scottish Parliament has spoken clearly about what it wants to happen and has taken the steps that it can take, which is entirely proper. I strongly believe that Westminster should have acted in the way that we requested. Like Ms Marwick, I am somewhat mystified that, so far, it has refused to do so.

I am happy to agree to do so. It is always a pleasure to meet Karen Gillon.

I will mention the member's amendment, even if he is not going to. This afternoon, I inadvertently said that 12,000 people were directly or indirectly employed in forestry. I should have said that there are 26,000 people involved in the industry, 12,000 of whom are directly employed in it. I am sorry to interrupt the member with that correction.

I always am.

I am not that consensual.

First, the amendment's call for "management contract incentives" is, as Mr Harper pointed out, quite contrary to what the motion is about. That issue is already dealt with under the Scottish rural development plan, which is where it should be discussed. Secondly, I am happy to be consensual; I would have discussed the terms of any amendment that had been brought for discussion.

Yes, it is.

I know that the member has a strong interest in the matter. In the light of his recent inquiries, I give an assurance that the Forestry Commission is keen to help his constituents to access land. The commission's recent acquisition of new land will make that much more possible. We are confident that the member's constituents—the Piranhas among them—will be pleased with that.

Given the spirit of trying to be co-operative, I think that the word "shirking" is a little strong. I hope that the member accepts that there is a triple lock on certain issues. Every Scottish local authority must undertake an open space audit; there is a presumption against development on open spaces that are valued and functional; and local development plans must set out specific requirements for the provision of open space. There is a triple lock on open space. This Government is far from against open space being part of every community.

In October, I had the privilege of speaking at the Central Scotland Forest Trust's conference, at which one of the big issues was the link between a high-quality physical environment and better health and well-being. I attended many events during the summer at which I saw such a link demonstrated before my own eyes. I visited several community woodlands, such as the Milton woodland in Tain, where I found myself playing a drum alongside a forester who was playing a home-made didgeridoo—if that was not good for me, I do not know what is, although it might not have been good for the audience. Green space plays an important role in all five of the Government's strategic objectives. High-quality green space that is well connected and popular with local people can play a vital role in delivering against several of the national outcomes. In that regard, apart from the greener objective, probably the most significant objective is the one on health. I am pleased to present the debate alongside my colleague the Minister for Public Health, Shona Robison, who will sum up the debate and respond to the points that are made during it. One area of our work in which the links between health and the natural environment are most fully developed is forestry. That work focuses on several priorities: encouraging physical activity by making local woodland welcoming and accessible to all; woodland as a therapeutic environment; woodland-based learning; and woodland as a venue for outdoor activity. In all those matters, there is a strong partnership between the health and forestry sectors. In October, NHS Health Scotland and the Forestry Commission Scotland held a green exercise conference that was attended by 130 delegates. The partnership is strong, but it can become stronger. Work is on-going to develop woodland's role in promoting mental well-being. We are developing more sites that encourage natural play by children. We are creating networks of green space, involving woodland and other habitats, not simply for their biodiversity value, but for the links that they provide, which allow communities to make choices about, for example, how they go to the shops, school or work. We are concentrating  on deprived areas and prioritising the use of woodland by target groups. Altogether, the Forestry Commission has committed £200,000 in the next three years to supporting a range of projects related to health and well-being. A particularly good example that I saw this summer, and which I was impressed by, is at Drumchapel. I have just had a look to see whether the local member, Bill Butler, is in the chamber, because he knows the real value of that scheme. The inspirational ranger, Jo Thomson, is leading a project that is bringing people into a piece of ancient woodland that is owned by Glasgow City Council and is now managed in partnership with the Forestry Commission. People are walking, playing and working in the woods—in a place that, only a year ago, people feared to enter. That wood is a centre of well-being. I am therefore pleased to announce today a further commitment of £100,000 by the Forestry Commission in 2008-09 to deliver a series of innovative projects to develop woodlands further. I should stress that that £100,000 is always matched in partnership with other organisations. It adds real value in ensuring that woodland and forest space contribute to our health objective. We have been talking about the links between health and environment. There are also links between health and business development, so I am happy to accept the amendment from the Tories. The Scottish grown timber industry contributes £494 million in gross value added to the Scottish economy—or 0.6 per cent of our economy—and employs about 12,000 people, directly and indirectly. If we add in the economic activity associated with access and recreation, which is exceptionally important, the value of that wider forestry sector becomes £760 million, or almost 1 per cent of the total economy. It is not a matter of promoting either health, well-being and access or commercial activity; taken together, the two things make an enormous contribution to our nation. We are supporting business development in the commercial forestry sector in a number of ways, including grants for woodland creation, support for the use of wood biomass and the promotion of timber use in construction. This morning, I was pleased to launch not just the timber development plan, but a new book by the architect Peter Wilson on the use of timber in building. We are also supporting forestry businesses and woodland owners as we reach the stage of application of the Scotland rural development programme. There is a challenge in all elements of government, but I am pleased to have the responsibility of looking after the forestry sector and of bringing issues in that sector to debate here in the chamber.  I am sorry to have to reject the Labour amendment, but there are strong reasons for doing so. I will give two of them. The consultation draft was issued in August 2006, and the policy was issued in November this year—there has been an extensive consultation period. On the two specific issues that have been raised, the national minimum standards for open space in new developments were well debated. The planning system, as many respondents pointed out, is operated largely by local authorities. Decisions about the protection of and investment in local open space are generally best left to local authorities and communities. There are concerns about the impact on brownfield development, regeneration proposals and affordable housing.

I am sorry that I am not able to give that explanation, but I am happy to find out and write to the member about why that was done. However, I do not think that any conspiracy was involved. What was involved was further consultation—something that the previous Government was very keen on. I would have liked to be able to accept the Labour amendment, but I am afraid that it is factually wrong with regard to what we are all trying to achieve. I will also be unable to accept the Liberal Democrat amendment, which has the hallmark of an amendment that was written before anybody had seen the motion. Everything in that amendment is in the motion or is already in our policy, and it seems somewhat unnecessary to ask for yet another commitment. In those circumstances, I cannot accept the amendment. There are good-news stories to be told about Scotland's forests. There are many such stories, including the commercial story, but the health story is a very strong one. I hope that the Parliament will unite in support for those many people who work in forests and woodlands in Scotland, delivering for the benefit of Scotland's people. I move, That the Parliament recognises the value of the physical environment in promoting health and wellbeing; recognises the role that woodland and other greenspace plays in this through increased opportunities for physical activity,  relaxation and social interaction in people's everyday lives, and calls on the environmental and health sectors to work together to further develop the contribution of woodland and other greenspace to Scotland's health.

The debate has clearly been more about heat than light. I was entertained, however, by the vying for who was one's favourite Englishman. I am sure that Elaine Murray's husband, whom I know, is an effective councillor. He would be on my shortlist. Members of my family would be on my shortlist. However, I will be voting for Cathy Jamieson's nomination. As you know, Presiding Officer, when I hum along to my favourite songs, I often hum along to this particular verse from Billy Bragg: "Britain isn't cool you know, it's really not that great. It's not a proper country, it doesn't even have a patron saint. It's just an economic union that's passed its sell-by date." Those are the words of my favourite Englishman. Time is short, and I want to mention two speeches in particular. George Foulkes made the best speech that I have heard him make in this chamber.

That is indeed not much, as the Deputy First Minister says, but it was a good speech. If I may use this term kindly, it was the bellowing of a devolutionist mammoth. George Foulkes has a long history in the movement to move Scotland forward. He has given distinguished service. Obviously, however, he represents part of the Labour Party that is deeply uncomfortable with continued change.  I enjoyed the contribution from Kenny Gibson. If I am to call George Foulkes a mammoth, I should probably call Kenny Gibson a tyrannosaurus rex. He made an important point about scaremongering, which dragged the debate down from time to time. Members should remember the reality of modern Europe, as Kenny Gibson said. This March, I travelled from Copenhagen to Malmö by train in 45 minutes. There were no border guards; there was no need for us to show our passports. People commute from one country to another. That is modern Europe, and modern Europe needs a modern Scotland as an independent country. Like the Deputy First Minister, I am delighted that other parties are converted to the Parliament having more powers. I acknowledge that there are members, not just in the SNP, who have always fought for more powers in the Parliament. Some of us were converted to supporting more powers for the Parliament even before it existed. I was converted in February 1974, when I joined the SNP. Others are even longer in the tooth in their support for more powers for this Parliament. If members are genuinely in favour of more powers for the Parliament, they must be converted to another concept as well: the primacy of the Scottish people to decide their future. Those two things go hand in hand. The real problem with the motion is that it has no place for the Scottish people. It has a place for the great and the good, and a place for the independent expert, but it has no place for the voters of Scotland. If members believe in the primacy of the Scottish people, they cannot vote for the motion.

I am sorry, but I want to make progress. There is a substantial difference between the content of the motion and the national conversation. The motion would set up a commission with no public involvement. Let me tell members about the public involvement to date in the national conversation: 43,734 hits, 245,567 hits on the theme pages, 20,993 call-ups for the white paper and 6,999 downloads. There have even been 2,639 comments on the ministers' blogs. This morning I noticed six on mine.

Only one comment was from Mr Fraser. Failure to recognise the fact of democracy holes the motion below the waterline. Its programme, when it is examined in the cold democratic light of day, fails. It fails in another light, too. Presiding Officer, I know that you are familiar with the concept of Occam's razor: all things being equal,  the simplest solution is often the best. If we pare down the motion, we find that what it offers is far from being the best solution. First, the motion's content fails. It proposes a commission. For how long? The motion does not say. How many members should it have? How will we choose them? It does not say. How much will it cost? It does not say. Where will the money come from? It does not say. What will the role of Westminster be? It does not say. At the end of the process, to whom will the commission report? The motion does not say. What mechanism exists to translate any conclusions into law? It does not say. The only thing that the motion tells us is that the Scottish people will have no role in the process.

I suggest that Mr Smith adds that to our blog, and we will give him an answer. The motion fails the test of Occam's razor in another, very significant way. If I may introduce another medieval philosopher to the discussion, the motion is the equivalent of angels dancing on the head of a pin. There is no logic or sense in what it proposes. The simplest and best solution to the problems that Scotland faces is not another commission, nor is it a debate on devolution. The simplest and best solution is independence, and that is the choice that the Scottish people should be asked to make. That is the time-honoured, tried and tested way in which nations throughout the world go about their business. The mental contortions that we have heard from other parties prove that independence is the best way forward. Independence is about freeing Scotland, but it is also about freeing the minds of the people of Scotland and freeing the democratic potential of the people of Scotland. I invite the parties behind the motion to think again. If they can come up with a genuine way of discussing Scotland's future, this party will take part in that. We invite them to take part in and contribute to the national conversation. We invite them to move out of the cloudy valleys of constitutional guddling that they are locked into and to come up on to the heights, where they can see a real vision for Scotland.  What we have heard today has been deeply disappointing. The motion contains another trap for the Scottish people. The only way that the Scottish people move forward is to vote. They voted on 3 May and chose a new Government. They will vote to choose a new nation.

Scottish planning policy 7 deals with planning and flooding, and it provides a framework for assessing coastal flood risk so that planning authorities can include policies in their development plans and co-ordinate their decisions on planning applications.

The member has a long-standing interest in the matter, and I answered a question from her on the subject last week in the chamber. I have repeatedly—I do so again—offered to meet the member to discuss coastal  erosion and flooding that is effected by the River Forth and the surrounding area. I am absolutely certain that the process that the council has gone through is leading to the right answers, but if the member wants to continue with this matter, I am open to discussing it with her.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. I was unable to attend the presentation at lunch time, but Mary Scanlon helpfully and generously brought me some samples. I look forward to using the skin-soothing face mask as soon as the debate is over—I hope  that it has the same effect on me as it has had on Mary Scanlon. The name of the product is seen by some to be a little unfortunate. Bog myrtle is indeed the proper Scottish name, but it is also known as sweet gale. We might like to note that it has a number of different names in Gaelic, the commonest of which in Lewis is roid. The uses of the plant are wide, particularly in the Hebrides. We have heard about its effect as an anti-depressant and that it is used to flavour beer. It has, of course, also been used as an insect repellent, and it has many other uses. It produces a yellow dye, which can be used to dye tweed—that was certainly its use in South Uist. In Barra, it was used as a specific for children, as a remedy against worms—I am sure that members do not wish all this information, but it might be useful. In Barra, it was drunk in tea and given to children who suffered from skin problems or gastric problems. In Islay and Jura, it was used as a garnish for food. It has a remarkable history, but it is only now that it is coming into its own. All credit goes to Boots and Highland Natural Products, which have been active in the matter and are taking it forward, although perhaps more for its cosmetic use than some of its previous uses. Sarah Boyack indicated that ministers and officials have met those involved on a number of occasions over the past few years. It is fair to say that there was enthusiasm in the previous Administration and there is enthusiasm in this Administration. The uses that have been identified by Boots and Highland Natural Products are important and they possibly have a Scottish, UK, European and global reach. We would encourage that for any Scottish product, particularly one that uses natural Scottish ingredients. We acknowledge that this is a significant potential commercial opportunity for the consortium. As a result, Roseanna Cunningham was right to say that it is a significant potential commercial opportunity not only for the Highlands and Islands, but for Scotland. We must recognise that some significant questions still have to be answered. For example, the research to date suggests that the oils that are produced from plants grown in natural, wild boggy conditions are the best. The current cost of producing the oil is many times higher than that of producing other, comparable, oils. A reduction in production costs will be required to enable the development of a viable supply chain for the oil in Scotland. The key issues that must first be tackled are agronomy factors related to cultivation, oil yield and analysis of the oil produced. That can be done only through a thorough programme of research and development. I am therefore pleased that  Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the University of the Highlands and Islands Millennium Institute have provided almost £300,000 towards that task. The agronomy institute on Orkney is considering how bog myrtle can best be grown and cultivated, and Boots research and development is analysing the oils produced. This is a good opportunity for the agronomy institute and a variety of other organisations in Scotland, including UHI, to be involved in a world-scale project.

I am sure that that is the case and I am happy to confirm it. My point is that the timetable means that it will be some time before the work is completed. Currently, 2010 seems to be the likely completion point, when we can move on to the next stage. As well as providing public support for research and development, the Scottish Government is putting in place a system of support for farmers, crofters and other land managers who want to develop their businesses, including diversifying into new crops. I will deal with that in some detail. The Scottish rural development programme will provide £1.6 billion over seven years to encourage and enhance the viability and sustainability of farming, agriculture, forestry and other land use in Scotland. Rural development contracts represent the central part of our programme's integrated approach. Regional priorities will be set, which is particularly important in this case, so that resources are directed to the areas of greatest need. The measures will encourage land managers to invest in and restructure their businesses, and support will be available for farmers and crofters who wish to supplement their income by developing alternative land uses or novel products.

I would like to give way but I wish to be able to make some progress. Although much work has still to be done on the project, the prospect exists for land managers to consider diversification into a non-food crop such as bog myrtle, and to secure Government support for that. The support will be considerable; support for up to 50 per cent of the costs will be available. Mr Hume and Mr Scott do not qualify for this, but for a young farmer—under 40 years of age—the  support will have a 10 per cent premium, and 75 per cent training grants will be available to ensure that the farmer has the right skills to make use of that diversification. Rural development contracts also highlight the importance of co-operation, so that there can be co-operation between those who are growing, those who are developing and researching, and those who are marketing and selling. The building blocks are in place and I am glad to be able to give two specific commitments that have been asked for, by Mary Scanlon and Sarah Boyack among others. Mary Scanlon mentioned the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme, which is being rolled up in the new rural development programme. Under that scheme, it is and will be possible for crofters to apply for assistance with the cost of establishing alternative agriculture, such as bog myrtle crops, under farm diversification measures. Once the Scottish rural development programme is in place, which we hope will be at the turn of the year, that will be possible. There is also another possible line. Paragraph 2(10) of schedule 1 to the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007 amends section 42 of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993, which is about financial assistance. It changes assistance from its inclusive focus on agriculture to supporting any reasonable use that promotes sustainable development. It is fairly obvious that the bog myrtle scheme might well qualify.  Of course, lots of people want to get into the scheme and there is some competition, but it opens the door to say that support will be available for diversification. All the contributions to this debate have been important and useful. The Government acknowledges the work that has already been carried out, supports the research that is taking place, and is keen that agricultural diversification among crofters and farmers will see this crop as having as much potential as many others. We hope that this product will be part of the process of Scotland finally establishing its unique place in the world as a place of environmental cleanliness, of wonderful biodiversity and of products that will help everyone on our planet.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

How does the member know?

I sympathise with Willie Coffey, who at the start of his speech mentioned the difficulty of speaking on a subject on which a large number of members have considerably more knowledge. As Tavish Scott and Richard Lochhead—who have considerable knowledge of fisheries—sit next to me, I feel much the same way. The debate has been different from previous fisheries debates in the Parliament, in that it has not been a doom-and-gloom debate—even if one or two members have tried to introduce an element of that. It sends a strong and positive message to the young trainee skippers from Banff and Buchan College who are sitting in the gallery. If we strip out the usual politics, we find that there is a feeling that the industry has a future because policies are being pursued that can give young people a future in it. The fact that Richard Lochhead will go to take part in the negotiations in a positive spirit of optimism that he can achieve things for Scotland is also different. Before I come to the substance of my speech, I will consider some of the other speeches that have been made. I do not think that I have sat through a debate in which I have heard so many instructions being given to, and requests made of, the final speaker. Members must have realised that, as I  was to make the summing-up speech, I might be in some difficulty. Tavish Scott was correct to ask what the Scottish position is on the EU-Norway talks. It would be wrong for the cabinet secretary to reveal everything, but it is quite right that a broad outline be given. We are seeking up to a 15 per cent increase in the total allowable catch for North Sea cod; we are seeking adequate provision for banking and borrowing of the North Sea haddock TAC; we want to limit the cut in the TAC for North Sea whiting; we support the Dutch request to limit the cut in the North Sea herring TAC; and we support lower levels of blue whiting transfers. Pre-negotiations, we are making good progress, but the process will continue to be tough. Tavish Scott also mentioned kilowatt hours, as did a number of other members, including Karen Gillon. A days-at-sea regime that is based on a member state pot of kilowatt hours offers a number of potential advantages. In particular, it would give Scotland much greater control over its own industry. We are exploring with the Commission the scope for such a regime—which has some positive elements—for our white-fish fleet. Robin Harper asked a large number of questions at minute seven and a half of a six-minute speech, so he will forgive me if I do not answer all of them. He was immensely critical of real-time closures, but he should not have been. The real-time closures scheme has been up and running for only a few weeks, but there is evidence that vessels are avoiding juvenile stocks—so the scheme is already making a significant impact. I had hoped that he might welcome that. Richard Baker dealt comprehensively with the priorities of the wider industry. He knows—and I am happy to confirm—that food is of strategic importance to the Scottish economy. Seafood is a key component of Scotland's larder. In government, our party is strongly committed to working with the processing sector to ensure that improvements are made. That work is being kicked off by the proposed Scottish fishermen's council.

The cabinet secretary mentioned it in his opening speech. It is not correct to say that it is "by far the most valuable" component of the industry, but it is an extremely important one. We are keen to encourage the development of the shellfish sector—indeed, I met shellfish interests recently and will continue to do so.  Tavish Scott mentioned individual transferable quotas, which I am happy to say the Government, like the Scottish fishing industry, does not support. Instead, we want arrangements that support the particular needs of the Scottish fishing industry and Scottish coastal communities. In a thoughtful and distinguished speech, Peter Peacock claimed that 16 out of 21 stocks are beyond sustainable levels, but that is not strictly true. For example, on monkfish, as he will know, we do not have enough evidence to say what levels are sustainable, let alone to work out whether existing stocks are beyond those levels. The Scottish Government will make resources available to identify what a sustainable level of fishing would be in every sector. Sarah Boyack was absolutely right to talk about incentives. Incentivising is extremely important—we must go with the grain of the sector, rather than penalise it. We are doing that in clear and specific ways: with the observer scheme and by granting extra days at sea for the use of selective gear. We are doing all that we possibly can in the circumstances and will continue to do so. The Labour amendment is extremely important and I hope that Sarah Boyack is pleased that, as the cabinet secretary indicated, we intend to support it. We recognise the balance that has to be put in place and we will encourage it. Sarah Boyack referred in passing to climate change. We might put that more prominently among the issues that we will consider. We must certainly think about the issues that climate change will present to us. The latest science indicates that, whatever the changes, we can still expect there to be a sustainable and viable fishery in Scotland, but we need to ensure that the decisions we make now do nothing to alter that. We must think not just about what we have at present but about what might be ahead of us.

I would like to make some progress. The biggest concern that we have heard from members today is discards.

I am glad that I have reached the point Mr Rumbles wanted me to get to. We have strong concern about discards. Indeed, the Labour amendment mentions it and we are happy to support the Labour amendment. It is a very, very complex issue. I was interested to read material from the Norwegian fishing minister the other day. He said that Norway's approach, which has been mentioned and which certainly has admirable qualities, would not read across absolutely into Scottish circumstances. What can  we do? The real-time closures are important. A number of members mentioned gear and technical improvements. As Richard Lochhead is doing, we must put the issue centre stage in the negotiations. No one in the chamber or in the industry believes that the current situation is a happy one to be in. We must find a way forward, but a number of measures will be required. The cabinet secretary mentioned one of the key measures, which is to allow an increase in the total allowable catch while giving incentives to stop people targeting cod. That is a key part of the strategy. We take the fishing industry in Scotland very seriously. All members take it seriously—as well they should. We have heard a range of statistics today, but it is useful to remind ourselves of them. Scottish vessels land two thirds of the total value of UK quota landings. They account for more than 70 per cent of regulated effort in the cod recovery zone. The Scottish fishing zone makes up 60 per cent of UK waters. Scottish over-10m vessels account for 60 per cent of the tonnage of the UK over-10m fleet. Communities have been mentioned often. Scotland has around 20 travel-to-work areas with a fishing dependency, compared with just three in England and one in Northern Ireland. That is 2 per cent of Scotland's population. The Scottish industry accounts for 1 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product, compared with 0.1 per cent for the UK as a whole. Fishing is 10 times more important in economic terms in Scotland. There is a vast range of other statistics, but they all go to show how important fishing is to Scotland. The debate goes to show how important fishing is to the Parliament. However, there is still an incomplete issue for us. I make absolutely no excuse for returning to it because it is at the centre of our concerns. Des McNulty argues that that issue is irrelevant, but he misses the point of the debate. In an intervention, Liam McArthur asked a question of my friend, Dr Allan. He asked for one example—just one—of when a Scottish fishing minister had either not been consulted or had not been allowed to make a decision. I thought that Dr Allan dealt with the question well, but I will give one example: the sole-nephrops swap. Surely no Scottish minister agreed to that measure. If they did, they were not acting in Scotland's interests.

No, I will not. I am sorry. I am tight for time—I have half a minute and the Presiding Officer will hold me to it. Karen Gillon asked what the difference would be if Richard Lochhead were sitting in the key chair. I will tell her the difference: all the difference in the world. It would be the difference between speaking  up for Scotland and having Scotland spoken for. We can see that in fishing most of all. In the 33 years we have been in the European Union—from Heath, through Wilson, Thatcher, Major, Blair and Brown—Scotland's interests have not been at the forefront of fisheries negotiations. If members doubt that, they should read a wonderful book called "Stop the World: The Autobiography of Winnie Ewing", which tells us time and time again. That is why it is a wonderful book. I declare my interest in fishing and in literature, and I commend the book to the chamber. I will finish by making a clear point. On Sunday, when Richard Lochhead goes to take part in the negotiations, he will go with the knowledge of what has taken place in the debate, and he will go with the good will of the chamber and the desire to do well for Scotland. He will do very well indeed, but he could do even better if he was there as a representative of an independent nation.

Before I make general remarks, I will address issues that were raised during the debate. Bill Butler asked about Glasgow's recycling rates. Although recycling rates are rising, city rates tend to be lower than countryside rates, and where there is a high proportion of tenemental and multi-occupancy housing it is harder to provide recycling facilities. However, Bill Butler is right to aspire to keep raising recycling rates, which are vital for the future. Recycling is one way of tackling waste. We should remember that waste, in all its expressions, represents the misuse of the planet's resources. In this debate we consider how we manage sensibly the resources of our planet and of our country. Mr Wilson was right to raise the issues that he raised, which relate to how we use the resources that we have to prevent depredation of resources elsewhere. I congratulate Bill Kidd on his motion, which raises interesting issues. He asked for assurances on one-stop shops for advice on funding. Advice on recycling can be found at the Community Recycling Network for Scotland, for which the Government is providing funding of more than £500,000 in the current year. Equivalent organisations exist for social enterprises, but if it is suggested that there is a need to develop new organisations to provide information for social enterprises, I am sure that my colleagues will listen. One does not have to be a Labour or Co-op sponsored member of the Scottish Parliament—as Mr Butler put it—to enthuse about social enterprise. We also heard such enthusiasm from the Conservative spokeswoman on the environment, who I am pretty certain is not sponsored by either body. I congratulate her on drawing attention to the Grampian scheme, which is important.

I apologise to Mr Butler. My comment showed how old-fashioned I am. I thought that the old days of trade union barons sponsoring MSPs and MPs were still with us, but of course those days have been swept away by new Labour. I am sure that Mr Butler is grateful for that. The Scottish Government recognises the valuable role that the community recycling sector plays in helping to deliver our objective of a greener Scotland. Of course, community recycling applies not just to wood, but to a range of materials. I think that we are all very pleased that a number of the projects that are funded by Increase—investment in community recycling and social enterprise, which is a specific fund for these purposes—have focused on a range of materials, including mattresses, carpets and bicycles. In some cases, these Scottish projects have learned from elsewhere; in others, we are teaching others. The Scottish Government intends to carry on providing support for community recycling projects across Scotland. Currently, we are in discussion with the Community Recycling Network for Scotland on the type of support that should be made available. Social enterprise is clearly ideal for building some of those projects. As members have said, social enterprises have demonstrated that they can work in many sectors of the Scottish economy, often as the best solution in areas where there is a market failure or an emerging market. As Bill Kidd said, social enterprises provide employment opportunities. They also help disadvantaged people, assist with transportation, provide care services, support homeless people—and even help with kerbside recycling. The list is virtually endless. On 14 November—that memorable day last week—when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth delivered his remarkable and most successful budget, he announced that, for the years 2008 to 2011, the Scottish Government would make £63 million available to the third sector for a development programme and £30 million available for direct investment through the Scottish investment fund. The fund will support investment in the third sector by investing in assets, business development and the skills of those who work in the sector. I am sure that everybody is pleased about that. These days, I spend quite a lot of my time in woodlands and forests, or watching wood products being made—or sometimes sold. This morning, I was in the Borders, at Ancrum, visiting the Borders Forest Trust, which is a remarkable organisation that takes wood from the woodland straight  through to the most amazingly well-designed furniture in Scotland. I commend to the chamber the Albannach brand, under which the trust is looking at how Scottish wood can be used in Scottish building, furniture and a variety of other ways. I will return to Ancrum in the spring to see more of that work. I encourage other members to pay the trust a visit. That work is at one end of the spectrum. At the other end, we find the challenge of taking wood that has been involved in a variety of purposes, but abandoned—the issue that Bill Kidd raised and which Robin Harper addressed so well. We are talking not about the wonderful wood that craftsmen are working with in Ancrum, but wood that would otherwise go to landfill. If waste is the misuse of the planet's resources, placing wood into landfill is a misuse of the planet's resources too. It is vital that we recycle and reuse our existing supplies of wood. We need to do that in the ways that we have heard about today, which ranged from reusing timber in construction to the Glasgow School of Art students' use of wood in the project that Bill Kidd highlighted. We can also use wood in another way. Earlier this year, I was pleased to chair the initial meeting of the wood fuel task force, the aim of which is to increase the supply of wood for renewable energy production. A key resource in all of that is wood waste—wood that would otherwise go to landfill, or even be left on site. I am referring not only to wood that has been used in construction, but the brash that the forestry industry leaves behind. When I receive the task force's final report on 14 December, I know that it will have identified the issues on wood waste and recycled wood. Bill Kidd has brought an important issue to the chamber. The Government recognises and celebrates the work that is being done in Drumchapel. Indeed, Drumchapel is becoming increasingly important in the forestry world, not only because of this project, but as a result of the remarkable and successful Drumchapel community woodland, which I had the privilege of seeing in June. If our focus is on recycling wood, we will eventually turn our attention to the many new uses to which wood can be put. I hope that the chamber will remember that—as the Government will in its work across sectors. In commissioning new housing, undertaking procurement policies, and all its other actions, I hope that the Government will remember the importance of the issue and act upon it.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

Officials have had regular discussions with Falkirk Council concerning the Bo'ness flood prevention scheme, and I regularly meet authorities and SEPA. No discussions have taken place with the Forth Estuary Forum regarding flooding and coastal erosion, but I am sure that the member would join me in welcoming the fact that in the next three years the funds that will be available for dealing with flooding—£126 million—will be up 34 per cent. That is good news for Scotland's communities that are threatened by flooding.

It is not always possible fully to understand what Helen Eadie is talking about in this regard. I have never refused to meet her, and I would be happy to do so. She may have been trying to meet ministers over a planning issue, but there are—of course—restrictions on that, given that planning applications may be called in. As far as I am aware, I have also never refused to meet a local authority to discuss flooding. I remain open to meeting all the relevant local authorities to discuss serious issues.

The Scottish Government is carrying forward a wide range of measures that support implementation of the Scottish biodiversity strategy across the public and private sectors. Those include enhancing public understanding and participation, as well as providing support to Scottish Natural Heritage and other public sector partners. The Scottish biodiversity indicators,  which I launched in October 2007, demonstrate the success of the work carried out and what still needs to be done. We will also be providing financial support to land managers through the Scottish rural development programme to encourage land management practices that benefit species and habitats.

I am happy to give that assurance. There is always a balance to be struck, but increasingly the balance has to take into account the absolute need to protect not just individual species or habitats but the entire rich, diverse and precious ecosystem in which we live.

The Scottish Government meets environmental organisations regularly as part of its day-to-day business. Indeed, later this afternoon I shall be meeting RSPB Scotland, among others. Most recently, on 7 November 2007, Richard Lochhead and I had a very full meeting with Scottish Environment LINK, in which we had an extremely constructive discussion about how we can work together to deliver the Scottish Government's five strategic objectives.

Those are interesting and full questions—and perhaps they have answers. We should recognise the success of household waste recycling, which has reached nearly 30 per cent. That is a considerable increase from a time when we thought it was not possible to make such good progress. There are a number of innovations in that field. As an MSP for the South of Scotland, I was fortunate last week to see the new eco-deco plant at Dumfries in operation. It is technologically most impressive and environmentally very advanced. We have to meet our targets, and the work that we are doing with local authorities and the responsibilities that are being laid on them in outcome agreements will be part of that. We are keen to ensure not only that targets are met but that we tackle waste not just at the end of the process but at the beginning too, so that far less waste goes into the system. I note what Mr Carlaw said: it will inform my colleague Richard Lochhead's deliberations as he develops the waste strategy.

I hope to give some advice, to offer an apology and to make an accusation. My advice is for members of the Labour Party, including Frank McAveety. My colleagues and I are experts at losing elections. We have spent our entire political lives losing elections, so we know how to lose them. In those circumstances, I must tell Labour members the right way to do it, because they are exhibiting the wrong way. After losing an election, the right thing to do is to reassess, regroup and rethink. The wrong thing to do is to get a sour look on one's face, to start whingeing, to pretend that it has not happened—and, finally, to insult the voters, because that is what we have heard this morning. That is not the right way to lose an election. I would have more sympathy with Labour members if I thought that the motion really was about scrutiny. However, every speech that we have heard from Labour members has been about politics, not about process. It has been about Labour members' anger that the SNP manifesto was popular and Labour's was not, and the fact that we in the SNP are delivering and Labour never did. It is about not process or scrutiny, but sour grapes, and the people of Scotland should know that. I apologise to Elaine Murray if, in some forgetful way, I have done something to offend her; I noticed that she was offended when I tried to intervene. I make my apology, and I will set it right. People become forgetful as they get older; I was struck by that during Elaine Murray's speech, because she appeared to have forgotten that she was deputy convener of the Finance Committee when the agreement was made with the Executive with regard to the budget process. That is  important, because there is an agreement in place, and the attempt to alter it six days before the budget announcement is bizarre. I move to my accusation. Wendy Alexander asked a question—in fact, she asked it repeatedly: why is there no stage 1 process at this stage? When Des McNulty, her predecessor as convener of the Finance Committee, rose, I thought that he might have given the answer. However, in the words of Ayr academy's motto, which I remember my friend Alex Neil talking about, there was much prospice—a lot of looking forward, but no looking backward. The reason that there is no stage 1 process is contained in "The Budgeting Process Agreement between the Scottish Executive and the Finance Committee", which is still in force. Mr McNulty convened the committee at that time, and he was succeeded by Wendy Alexander. Paragraph 7 of that document states: "The Finance Committee and the Executive have therefore agreed a biennial cycle, with a full three stage process in Spending Review (even numbered) years, and a more limited process in non Spending Review and election ... years". The answer to the question is in that document, and if Wendy Alexander did not know that the document existed, she should have done. I offer her some further advice—if she is going to ask rhetorical questions, she should ensure that the answers will not undermine her case. The debate should, in reality, have been about process. Despite Mr McCabe's view about the perfection of the budget process, it is probably not perfect. In those circumstances, it is right to review the process through the mechanisms of the Parliament, and primarily through the work of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. As Wendy Alexander recommended in her legacy paper as convener of the Finance Committee, other mechanisms could also be used—for example, involving the Conveners Group. That process should take place in the proper way and not in an improper way. Members should have learned the lessons of having things imposed upon them at the last minute. Such impositions turn out to be disastrous, and the Labour Party has been responsible for two of the most disastrous—let me remind members about them. The first took place in June 1999, when the then Labour Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, sprung on members a system of expenses and allowances without going through process and without getting agreement from members across the chamber. That system remains to haunt us to this day—indeed, it is being reviewed again. Secondly, there was the Parliament building. Once again, Labour imposed a disaster on Parliament and on members, which damaged our  reputation for years. If Labour wants to review the budget process, and has a genuine commitment to change, it will find willing support in discussing how that change should come about.

No, I am sorry. The proper way to undertake that process is to allow the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, or another committee of the Parliament, to look at the budget process and come back with recommendations. I would be more convinced by that idea if I did not think that it was being suggested not because of a great commitment in principle to scrutiny, but due to—as I said at the beginning—sour grapes. The Parliament is too important to be treated in that way. Its members should—in the words of my friend Robert Brown—speak for Scotland. The voice of Scotland should be heard clearly, consistently and in a way that the people of Scotland will understand. If all that we hear is the sour whingeing of a party that has lost an election, that does no credit to Scotland, to members in the chamber, and to the things that this Government is determined to achieve—and will achieve.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I wonder whether Wendy Alexander recognises the following quotation from the Labour Party's former Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform on the budget process of which she is now so critical. He said: "The Scottish budget process is uniquely tailored to ensure that as many people as possible can contribute to the debate, which ensures that our budget is spent transparently and efficiently".— [ Official Report , 26 January 2006; c 22818.]  That is the budget process that you enjoyed last year, but you seem to be against it now. What has changed, apart from the Government?

And of KT Tunstall?

Will the member give way?

I fear that this is a singularly inappropriate moment for me to intervene. [ Laughter. ] Every Labour member has said that the motion does not address urban Scotland, but it contains a number of names that do. For example, the books of Robin Jenkins deal strongly with the urban environment and the problems that arise there. Urban Scotland has not been neglected in the motion.

People from SCAPE have been giving evidence to a variety of bodies. The coast at Baile Sear is retreating by 5m a year, with the result that much of the ancient heritage of that place and other places is being destroyed. It is absolutely right that we should be concerned that action be taken quickly. I commend the member's concern and hope that it is shared by members of all parties.

It is only Mike Rumbles who is confused.

Will the member take an intervention?

In the spirit of co-operation, I am sure that Mr Rumbles will be pleased to know that the chairs and chief executives of those organisations are happy with the arrangements. I have chaired two meetings with them and they are very happy with how well things are going. Given those circumstances, I am sure that he will welcome the efficient delivery that is going to take place.

I wish to indicate at the outset that I regret that I cannot accept the Labour amendment. Members should know that the amendment was e-mailed to spokespeople in every party a week ago, with an invitation to discuss the debate. I would have liked the opportunity to discuss the matter with representatives of the Opposition so that we might have agreed on an amendment. I am prepared to accept the amendment in the name of Mike Rumbles. I do so because, as many people know, my wife is the headteacher of a primary school and she tells me that we should adopt an attitude of positive reinforcement towards those who are not doing very well. The amendment proves that point. The Scottish Government has five clear strategic objectives, and I want to talk about the way in which they come together in the subject that we are debating today. Our landscape and the cultural life that it supports have a powerful contribution to make to our strategic objectives for government. Our cultural industries are major earners and employers in their own right, and they help to support our global reputation as a nation to visit and in which to live, work and do business. Our tourism and food and drink industries in particular draw great strength from our well-deserved reputation for the beauty and grandeur of our countryside, coastlines and townscapes. The sense of identity and belonging that we derive from our land and culture supports our sense of well-being, helping to make us healthier and our communities safer and stronger. Landscape and culture together help us to deliver our objectives for a smarter and greener Scotland. They enable us to discover and explore our history and environment, how they have made us who we are and how we and future generations depend on them. They encourage us to value and enjoy our environment and, importantly, to acknowledge our responsibilities towards it, for our own sake and for that of future generations. Bringing together culture and environment is not abstruse, but central to achieving our strategic objectives. The work that Linda Fabiani and I hope to do on the issue demonstrates not only joined-up  government but a joint commitment to meet our strategic objectives. However, it does more than that. As I said, landscape has made us and we go on making landscape. We have interacted with what is around us in this country for at least 11,000 years, and the signs of that interaction are all around us. Who is here and what is here help us to understand why we are here and, more importantly, what we need to do to remain here and to retain an environment that is healthy and sustainable. That is a general point, but there is a particular point to be made. I suspect that, in this debate, each one of us will reflect for a moment on what we particularly value in our culture and landscape. I pay tribute to the work that has been done on landscape issues by the Scottish landscape forum, which informs this debate. As a child, I was much influenced by a book called "The Hill of the Red Fox". To show the co-operative nature of this debate, I freely acknowledge that its author, Allan Campbell McLean, was a chair of the Scottish Labour Party. It was an inspirational book—a spy story that took in the island of Skye. It is what first excited me, as a child growing up on the Ayrshire coast, about the Highlands and its landscape. Of course, Allan Campbell McLean had a great fondness for the Highlands and Gaelic. The book was atmospheric and had an effect on me as I grew up. Later on, I was gripped by the poetry of Sorley MacLean when learning about the Highlands and Islands as I lived in the Western Isles. I am not the only person to have been so gripped. The great poem "Hallaig" was translated by the Nobel laureate Seamus Heaney. His translation starts: "Time, the deer, is in Hallaig Wood There's a board nailed across the window I looked through to see the west And my love is a birch forever By Hallaig Stream, at her tryst". Sorley MacLean's poetry, never more than in "Hallaig" , is a poetry of place: it places individuals in a landscape and makes them relate to it, not in the past but in the century that we live in. One can go further and look at the work of the Scottish colourists on Iona, and be inspired by their vision, the brightness of the things that they saw in Scotland and the way in which they made Scotland sing on canvas. We can look at the poetry of Duncan Ban MacIntyre, which has inspired a musical work composed by Ronald Stevenson—who will be 80 next year—that will be performed at next year's Celtic Connections festival. It will celebrate "Ben Dorain", and will truly be a landmark achievement. I turn to the work of a failed Hebridean: James Hogg, the Ettrick shepherd, who attempted to establish a sheep farm but found the journey by  ferry so unpleasant that he never went back. He was born in the Borders landscape—I am sure that we will hear that again from Jim Hume—and he celebrated that landscape. Indeed, his first book was a treatise on the diseases of sheep. He showed contempt for the society he lived in because, having been encouraged to apply for a ticket for the coronation of George IV, he discovered that it coincided with the sheep sales at St Boswells, and as he always went to the sheep sales he went there instead of the coronation. I could go on about individuals who have been inspired by the landscape and have reflected that inspiration. Each one of us has been moved in that way. The question is, what have we been moved to do? We have been moved to think about where we live, whether in town, city or countryside, and I hope that we have also been moved to do some other things. The modern purpose of what Linda Fabiani and I are talking about today is the urgent need for each one of us to remember our place in the world and the landscape, and to change our lives as a result. That is the imperative in this debate. We live in a world in which we face the biggest challenge that any generation has faced. If we do not care for, love and nurture the landscape, and change the way that we work within it, we will destroy our planet. Even on a small scale, unless we take action to maintain rural and urban communities in a truly sustainable way, we will have little to pass on. As was confirmed to me last night by one of the chief environmental advisers to the United Kingdom Government, the links between biodiversity, language and culture are well understood throughout the world, and now need to be understood in this country. The motion, which I have pleasure in moving, is about celebrating creativity, and the fact that we in Scotland have a wonderful environmental inheritance and it is our responsibility to keep it that way. If we can learn from those who have celebrated it, have made it and who go on making it, we will do well. I hope that members feel as passionate about the subject as I do, and I hope that they will support the motion and the joint working that will take place between the environment and culture departments that will lead to new things in the coming weeks and months. I move, That the Parliament notes the important relationships among Scotland's natural and built environment, culture and history, which together make us who we are; recognises the achievements over the centuries of artists such as Sir Walter Scott, James Hogg, Alexander Naysmith, Robin Jenkins, Sorley MacLean, Joan Eardley and Ian Hamilton Finlay and, continuing those connections today, Angus Farquhar, Alasdair Gray, Andy Scott and Frances Walker among many others; is glad that so many  artists from Scotland and from elsewhere have taken their inspiration from Scotland's people, landscape and natural resources and the ways of life which they support and continue to do so, and recognises the need for the Scottish Government to work closely with cultural and environmental organisations, local authorities, community groups and individuals to celebrate, explore and reveal the diversity and ever-changing nature of Scotland, its people and its place in the world.

The Scottish Government aims to tackle the cruel and destructive practice of poisoning wildlife. First, we will ensure that detection and prosecution are consistent and robust. The inspections of the police and prosecution service that were announced at the debate in the chamber on 4 October will assist with that. Secondly, we aim to build trust among all those with an interest in the countryside, so that we can identify and work towards shared objectives. I have been encouraged by the commitment of landowners, managers, gamekeepers and, of course, non-governmental organisations in that respect. I believe that their knowledge and skills will be of great help in identifying those who commit these dreadful crimes.

The member makes an important point. Many of us are astonished that there has not been damage to human beings—casual passers-by—as a result of the use of such  poisons. I emphasise the extreme, criminal recklessness of people who use such poisons. The point that the member makes is very much in our thoughts, and I will make sure that we continue to draw the attention of all the relevant people in the legal system to the reckless use of illegal substances.

A total of £42 million has been made available to local authorities for 2007-08 to support their flood prevention and coast protection programmes. It is for the local authorities in Lanarkshire and elsewhere to come forward with suitable schemes to take up those resources.

It is for the planning authority to decide whether a building or a scheme will create additional flooding problems or be subject to flooding. I would have expected the local authority—which, if my memory serves me correctly, I believe is controlled by the party of the member who asks the question—to have taken those matters into account before it gave permission. If it did so, there can surely be no question of additional resources being required for flooding. If it did not do so, and such resources are required, the local authority will be required to apply in the usual way.

The sites of special scientific interest system in Scotland was thoroughly reviewed by the previous Administration prior to the introduction of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004. There are no plans for a further full review, but I continue to have discussions regarding designation and public involvement in the process—issues about which I am profoundly concerned.

I am familiar with the issues raised by Mr Matheson; indeed, I have made a commitment to meet him and his constituent shortly to discuss the matter. There is considerable concern where there is no equity in the process. It will be necessary to consider that point as we have that discussion. I confirm that a goose scheme is in operation on the island of Islay and in the Outer Hebrides. I am not aware whether it could apply to his constituent, but there is of course precedent for compensation where land cannot be used because of goose depredation.

Before I devote myself to some of the speeches that have been made, I make two further points in addition to what the cabinet secretary said in his opening speech. The first small addition is that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency is to set aside the second instalment of the disposal to land charge in 2007-08, which will benefit roughly 1,600 sheep farmers to the extent of £91 each. It is also important, at this stage, to thank the officials who have been involved in dealing with many of the difficulties that have occurred over the past few months. Along with the cabinet secretary, I pay particular tribute to Ian Anderson, who led our response to the recent outbreak and who was involved in managing the 2001 outbreak. He will be familiar to former Labour ministers. He retires on Friday after many years of service and I know that all of us will want to wish him the best for the future. [ Applause. ] Before I lay to rest some serious mistakes that have been made in the debate, I will deal with a number of speeches, beginning with that of Mike Rumbles, whose inability to understand the financing of government is truly breathtaking. It is impossible to spend money that has not yet been drawn down and which will not be drawn down until next year. In addition, his speech contained an element of political grandstanding that we have come to expect from him, but the worst aspect of it led me to decide that we should try to swap him for his Welsh colleague, Roger Williams, the Liberal Democrats' Welsh affairs spokesman. At the Welsh Lib Dems' autumn conference—no doubt a crowded event—Mr Williams said: "The decision of the Westminster Government not to pay Welsh and Scottish Farmers compensation for the restrictions placed on them due to Foot and Mouth in England is outrageous. Especially so as money was promised by the Minister, Hilary Benn, before last weekend who then withdrew it once it was known there was to be no election. Yet he is still going to pay farmers in England."  Mr Williams understands the issue; Mr Rumbles does not.

That is exactly what we are doing, so Mr Rumbles will have to vote for our motion. Now, I will agree with a Liberal Democrat, Tavish Scott, whose endorsement of regionalisation I welcome. We are extremely keen that a regional approach to such outbreaks be adopted. That would have helped in the present case—Tavish Scott is right to say that it would have avoided some of the difficulties in which we now find ourselves, which I wish we could have avoided. The key speech on those difficulties was what I can only call a masterly speech from Dr Alasdair Allan. He laid out the moral, legal and political background to the issue and placed it in the context of the constitutional settlement. Alas, we are discussing not what Tavish Scott referred to as a spat, but a legal, moral and constitutional failure by Westminster. This Government is attempting to deal with that matter. I want to lay to rest two issues that Sarah Boyack raised—unfortunately, because both were errors. First, she expressed regret, which was echoed by Peter Peacock, that more time was not allocated to the debate. My friend the Minister for Parliamentary Business informs me that he offered the business managers more time for the debate on 2 October. He said that if any business manager wished to have more time, they should come back to him and that it would be granted—no business manager did that. The second issue is the invidious and divisive comparisons that have been made between the 2001 outbreak and this outbreak. Those comparisons demean the work that Ross Finnie did. It is wrong to attempt to undermine what he did by making comparisons that would alter the historical record, so let us make the record clear. First, let us look at the size of the packages. There was £32 million from Ross Finnie, which was a rural recovery package; the present package is an agricultural one worth £25 million. That is the difference between them. In fact, given the nature of the outbreak, the level of help that we are giving is considerably larger than that which was given in 2001.

No. I must make progress.  Secondly, the timescales involved are crucial. The outbreak in 2001 started on 20 February and the first livestock disposal welfare scheme was introduced on 22 March—we all praised Ross Finnie for doing that. In this case, as we know, the second outbreak triggered the requirement for the welfare scheme. That outbreak took place on 12 September, and the welfare scheme was announced on 9 October.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I do not praise Richard Lochhead at the expense of Ross Finnie; I praise both of them for the way in which they reacted to a crisis that developed regarding foot-and-mouth disease. That is the right thing to do and I think that many of us would reject the divisive approach that Sarah Boyack took.

Assessments are made, in a variety of ways, by officials. In all those circumstances, the chosen scheme seemed to be the most affordable, and one that could be introduced as quickly as possible. My colleague Richard Lochhead has made it clear that there will continue to be discussions. He said in his speech that he will meet representatives of the pig sector. In those circumstances, the scheme is affordable and right. In fact, it is a larger scheme than the previous one. I know that it will be welcomed; it does not provide everything that was asked for, but it is substantial. I deeply regret some of the speeches that we have heard, particularly from Labour members. I would have hoped that the Labour Party had learned its lesson by now and realised that its job is not to stand up for Labour, but to stand up for Scotland. What we heard today was a case of defending the indefensible, of aiding and abetting, and of a failure of moral, political, constitutional and legal leadership. That failure involves Hilary Benn, Gordon Brown and, regrettably, every Scottish Labour MP who supports what has taken place. A complete misunderstanding of the situation in Scotland, which is at the root of the matter, has also been aided and abetted. The misunderstanding is that, in some curious way, the situation in Scotland is of little consequence and can be massaged out of existence. The wisest thing that I heard in the debate—apart, of course, from what was said by my colleague the cabinet secretary, who is always wise—was Robin Harper's interjection. We heard regrettably little about the future of the agriculture  sector in Scotland. I conclude with the very words that Ross Finnie used in his speech in May 2001: "Farming creates the attractive landscape and environment that tourists are keen to visit. As recent events have demonstrated so painfully, many tourists will not come here while a negative message is coming out of our countryside." We have heard such a negative message from Labour today. Ross Finnie continued: "A healthy rural economy needs a healthy farming sector. We must take that on board to ensure that we recognise the wider role that agriculture plays in today's Scotland."— [ Official Report , 24 May 2001; c 1047.]  I endorse Ross Finnie's view. I hope that members will endorse the package that was announced today, so that we can move forward together.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that particular point?

I wonder whether Jim Hume could square what he has just said with the statement that he made on 11 October: "I want to see a commitment from the Westminster Government that Scottish farmers will not be left out of pocket by an outbreak which is not their responsibility." Does he still hold to that? If he does, is the statement that he just made not intellectually incoherent?

I welcome the amendment. I am very grateful to Sarah Boyack and Des McNulty—those are words that I never expected to say—for the work that they did to ensure that we could accept the amendment. The key issue was that we must  recognise the independence of the prosecution services in Scotland; we must recognise the operational flexibility that chief constables require. The change that was made to the amendment allows us to do that, and I very much take on board the useful suggestions that are contained in it. My view is that we can consider the guidance issue very quickly. It is important, however, that the reviews and inspections have a chance to consider the other issues, but they will do that. In a moment, I will come to the issue of how the inspections will take place. The message from today's debate—and from the unanimity in the chamber—is absolutely clear. Wildlife crime is crime; it is not trivial, nor is it victimless. Aside from cruelty to animals, members of the Scottish public are the victims—indeed, the whole nation suffers. Internationally, wildlife crime is a slur on the country and how we are presented in the world. There is, can be, and will be, no excuse for murdering birds of prey. There is also no excuse for the barbarities that we see in activities such as hare coursing. I was delighted that the Solicitor General opened and took part in the debate. In doing so, he demonstrated absolutely the seriousness of the matter as a crime and the independence of the prosecution service in ensuring that that crime is pursued. I am grateful to the members who participated in the debate and to the organisations that contributed. In the public gallery, we have representatives from a range of organisations that took part in informing the debate. I am particularly pleased to see representatives from the Scottish Estates Business Group, the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, the Scottish Countryside Alliance, the British Association for Shooting and Conservation, and my very good friends, the gamekeepers. All those people recognise very strongly that it is bad for them, bad for the interests that they represent, and bad for Scotland to permit wildlife crime, in any sense, to take place. That enormously strong message is going out from the chamber and, now, from those organisations Wildlife crime is not only the poisoning of wild birds, horrific as that is. I note the presence in the public gallery of Mark Rafferty, who, of course, is the constable who works on wildlife crime for Lothian and Borders Police; I met him some weeks ago when he showed me the corpse of the golden eagle, the death of which he is investigating. Wildlife crime is also hare coursing, which is not a sport but organised cruelty. It is frequently reported in Scotland and hares are often left  injured, dead or dying in the fields—there is not even the justification of hunting for the pot. Since September 2005, operation Lepus has recorded 103 coursing incidents in Tayside and has detected and charged individuals in 34 of those cases. Wildlife crime is also badger baiting, as those who have read today's issue of The Scotsman will know. In badger baiting, badgers are dug out of their sett, after which dogs are set upon them or they are bludgeoned to death with a spade. That is a barbaric crime. Wildlife crime can also be poaching, which is not the romantic activity that some portray, but organised crime. In those circumstances, large sums of money can be involved. We must ensure that poaching is stamped out. Wildlife crime can also be the stealing of birds' eggs, a practice that has been much reduced by the vigilance of enthusiasts.

I hope that you might give me an allowance for the time that that intervention took, Presiding Officer. I sympathise with John Farquhar Munro's point, but I will come in just a moment to the Langholm moor demonstration project, which demonstrates the concern on both sides of the equation to moving forward. I return to my remarks on the types of wildlife crime. Wildlife crime also concerns the freshwater pearl mussel, a rare Scottish resource, which criminals are exploiting. Wildlife crime is also, of course, the trade in endangered species, which is particularly cruel and barbaric. The thematic review by HM chief inspector of constabulary will look at all those areas and many more. As is common practice, the review will have elements; in this case, the first of those elements will be leadership, both in Government and across  public bodies in Scotland, including voluntary bodies and others.

No. If I may, I will make some progress. The review will also look at policy and strategy; people and resources; partnership; and processes. Of course, HMCIC will work with the inspectorate of prosecution to ensure that a complete survey will be made. I give the chamber a commitment that we will bring those reports to the Parliament whenever we possibly can.

I shall certainly try to ensure that all that information is drawn to Paddy Tomkins's attention. Taking a tough line on wildlife crime does not mean opposing country sports—they have an important role to play. However, it means considering new ways of doing things. The second Langholm moor project, which I launched on 20 September, brings together a range of organisations in an attempt to find a way forward for traditional shooting industries, grouse moor management and the preservation of raptors. On 22 October, I shall open an international endangered raptor conference at Loch Lomond, which will be attended by nine Government ministers from various jurisdictions around the world. The eyes of the world will be on Scotland that week, and I hope that I can tell the conference that the Parliament has unanimously renewed its commitment to drive out wildlife crime in Scotland.

I appreciate Mr Hume's point—it is the same point that Mr Rumbles made. For the avoidance of doubt, I repeat that in the serious circumstances of taking away people's livelihood, we would require the heaviest burden of proof—I am happy to clarify that once again.

rose—

I want to be absolutely clear on the issue, as it has been raised on a number of occasions. I hope that I can satisfy both Cathy Jamieson and Mike Rumbles on the matter. I stand by my suggestion of a number of penalties. The difference between Mr Rumbles and me relates to the level of proof that will be required. I am entirely happy to say that the burden of proof must be no lighter than that for any other crime. However, I believe that further penalties are required.

I did not say that.

I want to make it absolutely clear that I have never suggested those things in the way that Mr Rumbles has described. I think that he must have misread one of the reports of what I said. Had I said what he thought I said, I would have opposed it myself. I think that Mr Rumbles will now have a much better understanding of what we are trying to do, as was so well described by the Solicitor General.

I do not want to keep interrupting Mike Rumbles but, for the avoidance of doubt, I want to make it clear that there is no proposal of any sort to empower any organisation other than the police to be involved in evidence taking or to interfere with the chain of evidence. I am absolutely certain that members across the chamber will agree that that would not be the right way in which to proceed.

I thank Sarah Boyack for her helpful amendment and for the manuscript addition that allows the Scottish National Party to accept it. We will accept it. I am interested in the issue of guidance and I hope people on all sides of the chamber can work to develop such guidance with the agencies and to ensure that it is distributed.

I want to be absolutely clear that Mr Kerr claims that the Labour Administration built a school a day over eight years. That is  extraordinary. I do not know where those schools are; the Labour Party must be hiding them.

I have said before in the chamber that when I was a student at the University of Edinburgh, staying in Pollock halls just up the road, there was on the wall of my room a 1970s Pan Am poster of a cartoon character looking over his shoulder, saying, "The real world's not in here—it's out there." When the real world judges this debate, it will see as ludicrous and unnecessary the motion and a number of the amendments—apart from the Greens' amendment, which is appropriate. The motion exists for two reasons only. The first is that, in the real world, Labour in Scotland is, and is seen to be, in a huff about losing an election. The second is that, in the real world, it is scared of the possibility of another election. That is what the motion is about. Let us start with the election that the Labour Party lost. As my friend Tricia Marwick has said, Labour believed that it had a God-given right to rule in Scotland. The party could not believe that any election would come along in which the Scottish people would choose an alternative. The last democratic politician who had the same feeling was Mayor Daley in Chicago. He took some extra steps to ensure that failure did not come along: he had an electoral officer called "Short Pencil" Lewis, whose job it was to rub out the votes of other parties and put in votes for Richard Daley. The Labour Party may eventually be reduced to that if its negativity continues as it is. I do not mind, and nobody on my party's benches minds, the resentment—

No, Mr Henry, I will not. I have heard enough this morning from Iain Gray, Johann Lamont, Paul Martin, Mary Mulligan, Hugh Henry, and shortly Andy Kerr—the happy gang of Scottish politics. The reality of—

What I said was a joke, but the happy gang cannot even get a joke. I do not mind, and my party does not mind, the resentment that has come up—although it is not a good thing. However, the people who should be worried about it are the Scottish people. The motion is an insult to them. This Government has been in place for four and a half months. It has been working hard—indeed, it has been working flat out—but it does not matter what this Government does; the Labour Opposition does not like being in opposition, it does not know how to be in opposition, and it cannot handle opposition. This is about not just the past but the future. The grand old duke of North Queensferry has marched his lot up to the top of the hill. They are looking over that hill and they can see something rather unpleasant—that they are bound to lose seats in Scotland in a coming general election. We have heard the opening lines of a general election campaign, and I must give the Labour Party a word of advice: one of the main reasons the party lost the election on 3 May was its negativity. If it goes into the coming election negatively, it will lose, and lose badly. It is especially regrettable this morning that, with a new leader who uses the words "optimism" and "hope", the best that the Labour Party could bring to the chamber was a debate of such negativity. It is rather sad that the other parties have been suckered into it. We should have been hearing ideas for the future, but we have heard not a single idea—not one idea—from the happy gang. What we have actually had—

No, I will not give way. What we have actually had—

No, I will not give way. We have heard enough this morning. What we have actually had is what the former First Minister, the late Donald Dewar, called "the awful predictability of Oppositions through the ages." He used those words on 9 September 1999, when launching his first legislative programme. He went on to say: "I know all about opposition. I relish the challenges of government".— [ Official Report , 9 September 1999; c 273.]  The SNP relishes the challenges of government.

No, it has not been broken. I would say to that member of the business community who showed enthusiasm for change—it is not just Jim Mather who meets such people—that change is under way. In my area, a substantial amount of change is already taking place to do with regulation. This document in my hand—the SNP manifesto, which so fascinates the Labour Party that its members apparently support it in its entirety and want every item in it to be implemented—is a positive, optimistic, hard-working, visionary document, and it is about government. What we are doing is translating this document into government. The Scottish people expect much of their Government. For eight years they were disappointed and let down by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. Now the Scottish people are hungry for change, and they are not being disappointed by this Government. This Government is delivering what it promised, and it will go on delivering what it promised. This Government has vision and hope and optimism, which will be the hallmarks of the Scotland that we will see. I have to say this to the Labour Party: get over it. The party should learn from its mistakes, otherwise—alas—it will be fated to repeat them. On the evidence of today, the next election cannot come soon enough. The people of Scotland will judge the Labour Party by the negativity of what its members have said today. The happy gang is not an attractive gang and it is not a vote-winning gang. In the 100-days document, my good friend the First Minister—my very good friend the First Minister—quoted Alasdair Gray, who talked of working "as if you were living in the early days of a better nation." We are in the early days of a better nation. This party in government is delivering that better nation. It is what the Scottish people asked for, it is what the Scottish people voted for, and it is what the Scottish people are getting. I invite every party in this chamber to join us in our task, because we need a better nation. In the light of what we have heard from the Labour Party today, oh we do need a better nation.

It was me.

At one stage the member was the convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. She must be aware of worldwide evidence—including from the student teacher achievement ratio project in Tennessee, which was the largest such project—of the effect of reducing class sizes to 18 or fewer in primary school and early years education. If she is not aware of that evidence, she should be.

Will the member give way?

What a pity.

Will the member give way?

Mr Rumbles talks about his noble fight to ensure that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee backs him on this issue and suggests that he represents a view that has unanimous support in the chamber. Will he tell us what the result at each of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee meetings at which he has put the matter to the vote has been? In case he has forgotten, he was the sole person to oppose any of the measures to which he refers.

As members know, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has had to be at a foot-and-mouth disease summit in London and is unable to answer questions today. I am happy to be here to answer questions. The Scottish Government is committed to helping local authorities increase protection for vulnerable communities that are affected by flooding through investment in flood alleviation measures and defences. A total of £42 million has  been made available to local authorities for the period 2007-08 to support their flood prevention and coast protection programmes. The Scottish Government is of course examining all funding for future years as part of the spending review process. That includes support for local authorities' flood prevention and coast protection programmes.

The issue of liability in this matter has not been fully resolved and it would be wrong of me to make assumptions about liability while speaking here. However, what took place in Milnathort is important to our understanding of where we might go in legislation on flood management, which was referred to in this morning's debate. There are two key issues: one is uncertainty regarding what lies ahead, in terms of the level and height of flooding; the second is that we must rely to a great extent on the knowledge of local people. One of the strongest points in the report that was produced for Perth and Kinross Council is that a large number of local people were dissatisfied with the solution found and yet it still went ahead. That is uncannily reminiscent of some of the complaints that are being made with regard to coastal flood prevention in the Western Isles, where it was felt 20 years ago that the presence of a new causeway would be a likely contributor to coastal flooding. It is important that we listen to local people and take advantage of their knowledge as we plan flood defences.

As Alex Neil knows from this morning's debate, there have been only 12 cases in the past five years in which a local authority's decision to go ahead and give planning permission has run contrary to Scottish Environment Protection Agency advice. In all those cases, matters have been re-examined closely, and two cases were called in by the Scottish Executive. It is important to recognise that there are still some local authorities that seem unsure about the issue. I repeat the answer that I gave a moment or two ago: one of the strongest determinants in such matters is local knowledge and knowing what local conditions are. If local people view a place as being unsuitable for building, it is important that local authorities listen to them. We heard this morning about a school that is being built in a constituency in Scotland and which is likely to be Scotland's first underwater school. I hope the one that Alex Neil referred to is not the second underwater school.

There have been a number of meetings between the Scottish Government and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. This lunch time, I had the honour of launching the second Langholm project—the director of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds in Scotland was present, and the organisation is a partner in that programme.

I utterly reject the view that the marine bill has been delayed. In reality, the marine bill was planned in a number of manifestos. This Government gave a commitment to it and substantial work is being done on it. The issue of damage to marine habitats, in particular to seabirds—of which Mr Peacock is well aware—worries many of us. There are a variety of reasons for it, but he can rest assured that the legislation that this Government is bringing forward will be adequate for the task of protecting habitats and environments. We will take seriously our duty to collaborate with all those who share borders with us at sea or on land. It is unfortunate that Mr Peacock wishes to criticise so quickly, when he should be working with the Government to ensure that the interests of the RSPB and other organisations are well met.

We want to encourage the most responsible use of the countryside by all those who work and make their living there. We are conscious that, as we work towards the Scotland rural development programme, which is going through its approval mechanism in Europe, there will at certain stages be problems with matching exact dates. We encourage all farmers, land managers and land users to operate responsibly in an environmental sense—and, of course, in every other sense. If difficulties are experienced, for example as a result of the developments on set-aside—which lie alongside other developments that are taking place—we will work closely with farmers, land managers and land users and do our best to ensure that, together, we find solutions for them and the countryside.

As I have just said, the Scottish Government has submitted the Scotland rural  development programme to the European Commission for approval. We await a response, which we hope to have by the end of the year. The programme will inject £1.6 billion into rural areas over the next seven years to support a wide range of rural development options. The Scottish Government recognises that a sufficient supply of housing is vital for economic growth and sustainability of rural communities. We have set up a housing supply task force to identify and tackle the obstacles that inhibit the delivery of more housing. Housing supply issues in rural areas are an early priority and I know that the housing supply task force has already discussed the issue.

I never resist a temptation, as Mr Kerr knows. The answer was contained in my answer; it is a great pity that the noble lord does not listen. The member is absolutely right to be ashamed of the record of the Government of which he was not a part. He does not therefore have to take the shame personally. However, he has been absent from this country for a considerable period and he probably does not know, for example, that the Scottish rural development programme is not just a name, as he implies, but is worth £1.6 billion. That may be small change to a member of the House of Lords, but it will be very significant in rural Scotland.

As Mr Kerr knows as a resident of Scotland, local authorities have made a significant contribution to exceeding recycling targets.

The report is interesting, as Mr Kerr suggests. However, its criticism lies not in four months of the Scottish Government but in eight years of the Scottish Executive. It is a very good thing that I am able to tell the chamber that the next stage in the discussions will be the waste summit, which will take place on 3 October 2007 at Easter Road, a venue that will be known to residents and non-residents alike. Easter Road, in Edinburgh, will be where the summit will take place. At the summit, a range of issues will be discussed, including the issue that Mr Kerr raises.

Representatives of all local authorities were invited to attend a recycling workshop on 13 August 2007. We are holding a waste summit with local authorities and others on 3 October 2007, as I have said. I hope that Glasgow City Council will be represented. There will be an opportunity to discuss constructively the matters that Mr Martin raises.

Mr Martin raises an important point. The involvement of young people in such issues is crucial. The eco-schools project brings into schools many environmental concerns, including waste management and recycling. We are always willing to consider ways in which we can enhance that programme. Keep Scotland Beautiful, which administers the eco-schools project, is introducing a major campaign on food waste, in which schools will be actively involved. If the member would like to discuss with myself and the Cabinet other things that we could do to help schools to participate—indeed, to help Glasgow to participate, because recycling rates in Glasgow are lower than we would like, partly because of the difficulties of recycling from tenements—we would welcome a conversation with him.

The Scottish Government fully appreciates the difficulties currently facing farmers. A fair price for farmers is essential to ensure a profitable and sustainable agriculture sector. Although Government cannot intervene in the market, we are encouraging the different parts of the food chain to engage effectively in order to secure the future for all parts of the chain. The First Minister and I met the industry—including farmers, processors and retailers—on 13  September. That was a first step. We agreed to establish a food forum to ensure on-going positive engagement. We have also begun to hold meetings with all the major supermarkets; that has allowed us to hear more about their policies, in particular their sourcing policies and relationships with their Scottish suppliers.

We have never made a secret of the fact that should such robust action be required, we will not be afraid to take it. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the First Minister have found a strong and growing realisation, particularly among the supermarkets, that something must change. We are looking for that change in the short term, rather than the medium or long term.

Croaking a little, I welcome the new team on the Labour benches. It will be most enjoyable—as it always has been—to work with Karen Gillon. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on her promotion. One of my lifelong ambitions has been to spend more time with Des McNulty; it will now be fulfilled. I praise those who have taken part in the debate for their consensual approach. Karen Gillon is right to say that it is the role of every Opposition party to press hard on issues of resources and policy. I confirm that additional resources will be required. However, given that the spending review is currently under way, it is impossible at this stage for me to say anything in detail about those additional resources. There are a number of other reasons why that is impossible.  The one contribution to the debate that was completely unhelpful was that of the Liberal Democrats. There are six strong reasons why the amendment should be rejected, and I will give them all. First, since 1999 there has been a degree of consensus in the chamber on environmental issues, and we should try to maintain that. Of course we should ask tough questions, but Scotland's environment is more important than individual political careers. Mr Rumbles finds that amusing, which says a great deal about his approach. The second reason relates to the policy issues that the amendment raises and that Mr Hume addressed in his speech. Every one of those issues was addressed by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment in his contribution.

No, I will not. Thirdly, Mr Rumbles's amendment fails to recognise the new thinking that will be required to fund flood prevention and flood risk in Scotland. As Mr McNulty indicated, a number of funding streams must come together. The briefing from WWF makes the same point, so there is external verification of the need for new thinking. Fourthly, the amendment ignores completely the clear commitment that the First Minister made last week. That is ungracious, at the very least. Fifthly, the amendment takes no account of the work that the present ministerial team will do and is doing to ensure that a key part of its policy portfolio is adequately delivered for Scotland. Sixthly, the amendment is incompetent. It expresses regret "that no commitments have been made", but Mr Rumbles cannot know that that is the case, as the spending review process is not yet complete. For six strong reasons it is impossible for members to support the amendment. I am sure that I could think of another six reasons, were I to be given an additional five minutes.

No, I will not. We have heard quite enough of Mr Rumbles's nonsensical arguments. I turn to the substantive contributions to the debate that were made by everyone but the Liberal Democrat team.

No, I want to make some progress.  Sarah Boyack made an important point about flooding guidance and planning. Over the past five years, planning authorities have approved only 12 applications contrary to SEPA's advice. On a number of those occasions, the applications were called in, and one of them was refused. However, there is a case for our continuing to examine the issue, and we will do so. Sarah Boyack raised a number of other important issues, including that of coastal inundation. Dr Alasdair Allan spoke about the moving meeting that he and I had with the victims of the tragedy in Uist. Next month I will return to Uist to continue discussions on the matter, but the chamber should have no doubt that promises that were made previously must be honoured, especially in fragile rural communities. [ Interruption. ] I put on record that I am immensely surprised that Mr Rumbles appeared to make some sort of interjection at that point. I hope that he will honour the commitment that was made by the Government that he supported. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's inquiry into flooding and flood management, which the Government welcomes. We will work closely with the committee. She was right to say that this is a fast-changing situation. Our understanding of the problem changes almost month to month. The work that SEPA is doing on it through its flood control centre at the Heriot-Watt business park is fascinating and needs to be seen. If any member who is concerned about flooding wishes to visit the centre, I would be happy to arrange that. Keith Brown mentioned the Milnathort scheme. Both he and Elizabeth Smith raised the issue of local satisfaction. It is clear from the independent report that Perth and Kinross Council commissioned that advantage was not taken of local knowledge of the situation in Milnathort—it should have been. Peter Peacock and Robin Harper raised the issue of habitats. A number of members spoke of the need for urgency—not just in planning for flood prevention and speeding up construction of flood defences, but in dealing with people who have been badly affected by flooding. Those who were present at the flooding summit will know that one of the worst consequences of a flood is the growing sense of alienation of people who have been through that traumatic experience—the feeling that no one really cares. It is important for the chamber to show when debating flooding over the next year that members from all parties recognise the real needs of flooding victims. We must also recognise the need to join up the work that we do. A number of members, including Elaine Murray, said that at local level we often fail to join up activity. She and I saw the results of that  failure in the community of Eaglesfield, and we are both active on the issue. It is extremely important that, at the level where individuals are suffering, those taking actions on the ground should recognise what has happened and work with one another, rather than handing the problem on to other people. Robin Harper and many other members raised the issue of sustainable flood management, which is crucial and must be at the centre of what we are trying to achieve. The Forestry Commission is looking at how it can work with SEPA and others to identify for the first time a catchment in which large-scale trials can be carried out to evaluate the contribution that woodlands can make to sustainable flood management. We believe that they can make a difference, but their contribution is only one part of a complex set of measures. I point out to Mr Hume that FIAC was a two-year, short-term initiative by the previous Government that was always intended to end now—it has not been cut off suddenly. The success of the flooding summit and FIAC's work demonstrated clearly the value of involving stakeholders at an early stage in developing new policy. We must define stakeholders very widely. They include all members who represent people who have suffered flooding or who work in communities that have been affected by it. Of course, there is a wider issue in which we are all stakeholders. We live in a country that will suffer more flooding. I have already invited people to visit SEPA; if they look at the river charts, they will see that almost without exception the mean and high water levels of rivers in Scotland have been rising exponentially over the past 40 years. There is no doubt that the problem of flooding will get worse, which is why we must all recognise that the current legislation is not fit for purpose and why we must find the best legislation with which to move forward. That said, one important caveat must be borne in mind. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the situation is flexible and fast-changing, and it is quite clear from the flooding summit and this debate that it will continue to change very speedily. As a result, the considerable challenge facing the committees and, indeed, the whole chamber is to devise legislation that is neither rigid nor prescriptive but is flexible enough to allow us to take different steps to protect the people of Scotland. We need a legislative approach that does not seek to lay things down in very straight lines but, instead, recognises that we do not know—and will not know next year or even two years from now—everything that we need to know about what will happen in Scotland.

Mr Harper is, as ever, both right and wrong. He is absolutely right to point out the effects of planting trees. However, the fact is that we have been replanting very vigorously over the past two or three generations; the level of afforestation in Scotland has risen considerably and will, I hope, continue to rise. The equation is not as simple as Mr Harper makes out. Moreover, we cannot seek afforestation solutions in every possible situation; after all, we cannot plant forests in the middle of cities. We and the experts in this area need to know exactly how this kind of flood plain management will work. I would have thought that Mr Harper would have welcomed my desire for more trees to be planted to prove that such an approach can work. That is definitely what we are going to do. We are going to work with every possible agency, all members and the committees of the Parliament to ensure that we honour our basic commitment to protect the people, the land and everything in Scotland, including its biodiversity, from the degradations of flooding. We will do our very best in that respect, but perhaps the last word should go to Mary Scanlon, who highlighted SEPA's line on this matter. Although we cannot actually stop flooding in every place, we can certainly take every possible action to diminish its effects and ensure that the people of Scotland do not suffer in future as they might otherwise have done.

I have listened with care to what the member has said. He has listed a number of policy issues that he says will need to be addressed in advance of the introduction of legislation. He claims that those issues have not been addressed, but each of them was mentioned in the cabinet secretary's opening speech. Will the member therefore withdraw that assertion, as he is clearly wrong about that?

Where?

I certainly yield to no one in my enthusiasm for forestry these days, but let us be absolutely realistic. A recent report states: "Although it is very unlikely that floodplain woodland on its own would be able to provide complete protection for downstream towns or cities, it could make a valuable contribution". Forestry has to be regarded as part of the mix and not as a solution in itself.

The member raises an important case that illustrates an issue that needs to be highlighted, which is the absolute need for much simpler procedures in cases of flooding. As Sarah Boyack said, when four or five local authorities are involved, it can be a nightmare.

Just in case the hysteria that is breaking out behind me goes too far, I give the member a personal assurance that the questions  that he asked did not precipitate this debate or the bill.

Before I make my point, I welcome Des McNulty to his new post. I am sorry that he will not be here to hear a personal tribute in my summing up—maybe I will not bother with it.  He raised an important point about the decay of drainage systems, which points to another financial issue that should be borne in mind—indeed, it is raised in the WWF Scotland document "Slowing the Flow: A natural solution to flooding problems". There are a number of funding streams that need to be applied to the issue of flooding, so the lack of subtlety in the amendment is another problem with it because we need to call on a number of resources, not just one.

Will the member give way?

I think that the member is unduly addicted to conspiracy theories, but let me press him on a substantive point—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I am a little throaty this morning. I want to press Mike Rumbles on the point that Brian Adam raised. The motion refers to our desire for consultation—we recently held a flooding summit—so we would welcome the member's good ideas if he has any. Can he tell us, for example, what balance he would strike between soft solutions and hard solutions and how that would relate to a financial package? If he would help us in that regard, we could move the debate forward.

I, too, congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this debate. I fully acknowledge the issue's importance and the fact that it should be addressed, and I hope that what I have to say goes some way towards reassuring her. This Government enthusiastically supports the statutory right of responsible access to most land and inland water for recreation, passage and other purposes throughout Scotland, which is the exact provision set out in part 1 of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. The Parliament's clear will during the passage of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill—and as confirmed after its enactment in 2003—was that the widest possible access should be available to all in Scotland. Indeed, the bill was passed by 101 votes to 19—and I note without comment that of those 19 only nine remain members of this Parliament. That might say something about what has transpired in the intervening period. As far as we are concerned, the 2003 act is important and we want to support it in every possible way. I should say in passing that not only members of the Labour Party regarded the legislation as important and as a founding principle in the approach to land. Many people in my own party and in others—although probably not the Tory party—were passionate about passing it. We should pay tribute to all those people and make it clear that we will work hard on this important legislation. However, we have to judge the situation on the evidence before us and ask ourselves some evidence-based questions. Peter Peacock made a  good point in highlighting issues that should be considered in any post-legislative scrutiny. Two questions, in particular, should be examined. First, does the legislation have any loopholes that need to be closed urgently? Secondly—and this is the real question that must be addressed—does the legislation require to be improved in any way? We should not simply base our approach on a knee-jerk reaction—no matter how justified it might be—to a single case that, as members have said, does not set a precedent. We also have to consider such matters responsibly. The word "responsible" has been used several times this evening and, 10 years after the devolution referendum, we should reflect that the Parliament has not only rights but responsibilities, one of which concerns the leadership of debates. As a result, I regret a little the fact that the phrase "Save the Land Reform Act", which is in the title of the motion, and which Pauline McNeill welcomed, is not exactly accurate. Language about reviewing, developing or protecting the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 should have been used, because the act does not need to be saved; it is operating well. Before I say any more about that, let me clear up some of the issues that have been raised during the debate. My friend Roseanna Cunningham mentioned planning. She will be pleased to know that the new Government is already fully addressing that issue. As regards the future provision of planning guidance to local authorities, a draft of Scottish planning policy 11, which is entitled "Open Space and Physical Activity", will shortly be sent to ministers. I can tell members that it states that access rights will be a material consideration in determining applications for planning permission and that local authorities will have a duty to uphold access rights over most land and inland water. The planning issue is being addressed. Expenses are another issue that has been raised repeatedly. However, it is important to acknowledge that that issue does not apply exclusively to disputes under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. It would be perfectly in order for any member to suggest that protective costs orders, which protect organisations that act in the wider public interest in England, should apply in Scotland and that the relevant legislation should be developed in Scotland. We could have a good debate about that. However, it is not the purpose of the 2003 act to address that issue, so I cannot deal with it. Another reason why I cannot deal with it is that, at present, there has been no final determination of the costs. It is important to state that clearly.

Of course. I have always strongly supported the principle that there should be equity, but we should remember that there is a legal obligation on local authorities to fight such cases. It is not simply a question of David versus Goliath; other bodies are involved and we should remember how they are involved. Although I am sure that he does not mean to, Mr Peacock slightly misrepresents the situation. Given that he is a man who is well known for his caution, it is a privilege indeed to be described by him as timid. I turn to the access code. Much has been made of what the judgment said about the code. In his determination, the sheriff concluded that the code was relevant in court proceedings for the provision of guidance. That is exactly what the code was meant to do. It is not possible to complain about a piece of legislation on the ground that it does what it was intended to do. The code exists to provide guidance, but the code is not the legislation. If that position were to be changed, it would be up to the Parliament to change it. The previous Administration made a commitment to review the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 in its totality. I am grateful to some members for raising other issues in the act, which is not just about access. Mr Peacock, Roseanna Cunningham and Rob Gibson all raised issues that need to be reviewed. As a Government, we will continue with that commitment. I hope to be able to bring some ideas about review to the Parliament shortly. I would also be happy to talk to committees such as the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee about review. However, we will talk about post-legislative scrutiny. We must not lead anyone in Scotland to believe that a piece of legislation that is working well—all the analysis of the act shows that that is the case—needs to be saved. More people are taking the opportunity to visit the countryside and more people are, like Mr Fraser, halfway to bagging all their Munros. In those circumstances, let us celebrate what the act has achieved and let us improve it if we can. Knee-jerk  reaction is always wrong, and it is wrong in the present circumstances.  Meeting closed at 18:10.

I thank Mr Macintosh for indicating that the amendment will not be pressed—I am certain that that is the appropriate step. It reflects the spirit of the debate today, which has been overwhelmingly positive, and it reflects the assurances that the cabinet secretary has given, not only in the chamber but throughout the process. I pay tribute to the overwhelmingly positive nature of the debate. The only negative contribution came at the beginning from Mr Henry. Mr Henry exemplified in my mind P G Wodehouse's memorable remark that "it is never difficult to tell the difference between a Scotsman with a grievance and a ray of sunshine." Mr Henry's approach was out of keeping with the nature of the debate, so I am glad that sense eventually prevailed with the charm of Mr Macintosh being applied to the problem. On a serious note, I declare a number of interests in the matter. The earliest of them is that I visited the Crichton site more than 40 years ago to visit a relative who was an in-patient at the Crichton when it treated people with depression and other nervous illnesses. That was an upsetting experience for a child, and I remember it very well. The air of hope and the positive nature of the work that is now being done at the Crichton and the way in which it draws people in never fails me to excite me every time I go there, because it contrasts so strongly with that childhood memory. Another interest that I wish to declare is that I gave the first public lecture at the University of Glasgow's site at the Crichton in 1999. Finally, I am proud of the fact that—although perhaps he is not—Ted Cowan, the current principal, was my tutor in my first year at the University of Edinburgh. The Crichton is a place of amazing potential, which will be fulfilled not only as a result of the actions that have been taken by my friend the cabinet secretary but because of the tremendous abilities and enthusiasm of all those who are associated with it. We should pay tribute to everyone who has campaigned with vigour in recent months to ensure that that potential is not diminished in any way. I am happy to pay tribute to Elaine Murray. She and I have had a strong and positive relationship on this and on other matters. I am glad that we have been able to work so constructively together with a wide range of people: Alex Fergusson,  Alasdair Morgan, members who have spoken in the debate such as Mr Brownlee, Mr Hume and Mr Hume's wife, Lynne Hume—who was a candidate in Dumfries during the recent election—and a range of other people. The real impetus to the campaign has come from the people of Dumfries. The local newspaper, the Dumfries & Galloway Standard , took up the matter as its campaigning issue and has followed it through tremendously enthusiastically up to the present day. The students walked from Dumfries to Glasgow and did much else, including buttonholing every politician they could find not only in Dumfries, but throughout Scotland. Of course, the participation of the people of the town is always very important. I am struck in Dumfries by the fact that it sometimes feels that Dumfries does not matter in the councils of Scotland—a matter that I have to say is not helped by the imprecation towards the start of the debate that the issue was not important enough to detain the chamber for two hours. The people of Dumfries matter. In November 1706, the largest demonstration against the Act of Union took place in Dumfries.

Absolutely. I am happy that it may happen again. Dumfries was invaded by a group of men on horseback who fenced the market cross, burned the articles of union and told the provost of Dumfries, who was a delegate to the Parliament, that on no account should he support the Act of Union. That action made Dumfries matter in the debate that took place during the winter of 1706. One of the things that this Government has to do is to make not only Dumfries matter—although that is important—but to make every part of rural Scotland matter to this Parliament. This debate and this issue should tell the people of Dumfries and the south-west of Scotland that they matter, that their concerns matter and that this Government will ensure that that is always borne in mind. The investment that is being made today is not small by any means, but Mr Fraser in particular raised the issue of funding for rural delivery. My colleague the cabinet secretary informs me that the Scottish Funding Council is reviewing the costs of delivery, including the costs of rural delivery and delivery in areas of deprivation, as part of its funding methodology review. The cabinet secretary will, apparently, write soon to the chair of the council to reinforce the messages that require to be reinforced. Jeremy Purvis and Elizabeth Smith raised the question of demand. It is important to acknowledge that the number of places that the  package allocates for primary teacher education is a conservative estimate of continuing local demand. There is a larger demand that is currently met outside—with an associated loss to—the area. Given that demand, I am certain that the places will be taken up. Regarding demand for the liberal arts, there are currently more students than funded places, which was one of the problems that already existed. The Government aims to—and does—work competently, quickly and with vision. There are three aspects to the Government's approach to the Crichton campus. First, we worked with all partners to deliver an effective, value-for-money solution. Secondly, we acted quickly and ensured that others did the same. Thirdly, we considered the issues from fresh perspectives to identify a creative solution. It might, as David Mundell MP has asserted, have required a miracle, but the miracle was the ability to consider things in a different way. That is precisely what the cabinet secretary and her colleagues have done.

Mr Purvis has to take on board that the question is not when the work started but when it was completed. On 8 March, I spoke at a public meeting in Annan with the First Minister—of course, he was not First Minister then. He made a clear, high-level commitment that a new SNP Government would ensure that the issue was resolved. If my memory serves me correctly, he became First Minister on 16 May. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning took office a day later, so she had one day less to work on the matter. The solution was announced on 20 August. Time was of the essence and the solution was delivered such that there was no delay whatever. We have to consider the detail of what the Government has done as well as the broad sweep. We did not respond to the University of Glasgow's calls for additional funding simply by handing money over—that would have been a bad move. From the outset, the cabinet secretary, her colleagues and those who support her looked for an approach that would protect existing delivery in a way that would maintain momentum on the development of the campus and its future potential within the region and within the ecosystem of Scottish higher education. The development of initial teacher education for those who wish to study and then work in the region does just that—it opens up new options to respond to the needs of the region and the nation. The development of the campus infrastructure does the same. It will be led by the University of Paisley as part of its ambitious  and innovative multicampus strategy. Again, it will make a contribution to the area and the nation. In the minute or two that remain to me, I will concentrate on an issue that is particularly important to me, given my responsibilities as Minister for Environment. The development of the new and unique carbon centre will bring to the region additional postgraduate and research opportunities in a field that is of national and international significance and which has clear economic potential. One cannot live or work in the south-west of Scotland without knowing that the impact of climate change is already upon us. The temperature has been rising and rainfall has been increasing. One has only to walk down the Whitesands from time to time—as I know Elaine Murray does—to know that the rate of flooding of the river is increasing year on year. The issues of climate change will face us all for a long time to come and some of the solutions will come from the carbon centre at the Crichton campus. I pay tribute to those who are involved: Mary-Ann Smyth and Vimal and Gillian Khosla are key figures in promoting the carbon centre, which will help to address the needs of the energy sector in the region and be of national significance. It will drive the local aspiration to become the first carbon-neutral region in these islands. It will provide opportunities to commercialise the activities of the higher and further education sectors—again, good news for both the region and the nation. That development is an example of innovative thinking. It shows where we can look to utilise natural resources and enable communities to benefit economically and environmentally from renewable energy. That demonstrates that rural communities can benefit from cutting-edge industrial development in 21 st century Scotland. Certainly under this Government they can, because they are responding to need and we are happy to support that. The Crichton carbon centre will work collaboratively with a range of Scottish universities, offering academic expertise in return for access to research facilities. It is a great example of Scotland—and Dumfries—capturing benefits to create a wealthier, smarter and greener nation. The Government's expectations for the Crichton campus are high. We would not have been involved, nor would we have intervened as we have if we did not have the highest expectations and strongest aspirations for it. We look forward to working with the people who work at Crichton and with all the people of the south-west so that it can become an exemplar in innovative delivery of higher education in rural communities. It is now important that the people who are involved—those  who have been most affected and who have campaigned—can move forward with confidence. That is why I am glad that the negative amendment will be withdrawn. Parliament can send a completely united message: Crichton can move forward, and we support it. The academic strategy and the Government's additional support will help the region to seize the opportunities that are offered. A strong foundation has been put in place, not only to preserve what already exists but to move in new directions that will meet the needs and expectations of the people of Dumfries, the south-west and the whole of Scotland. I therefore commend the motion to the Parliament.

I would like to add the name of Murray Tosh who, both as a Conservative candidate and as an MSP, worked hard with Elaine Murray, me and many others.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you confirm that the business motion that was presented to the chamber yesterday was endorsed by all members of the Parliamentary  Bureau, including the representative of the Labour Party?

At the outset, I say that we have had a positive debate with many good speeches, and I hope to address some important points that have been raised. I also want to pay tribute to Sarah Boyack, who I know showed great concern about this issue and instituted entirely appropriate work to deal with it. However, I pay stronger tribute to the cabinet secretary, who has accelerated that work in order to bring this matter to the chamber today. Let us be very clear what we are talking about. If Forth Ports were to decide to proceed with a set of proposals that, as Iain Gray has indicated and as we hope will be demonstrated this afternoon, have no support in this Parliament, no support from any of the local authorities bounding on the Forth, no support from the environmental organisations and no support from the members of the public, we would require Westminster to act, because the  regulations governing ship-to-ship transfers are reserved. Westminster could act in various ways. I, of course, feel that the best way would be to transfer the powers in question to this chamber, but it could make regulations under section 130 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 or make amendments to the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994, similar to those before us today. In any case, Westminster would be required to act. We need to consider a number of points before we can think about what we can do to complement any such action. For example, some members have wondered whether the amendment regulations are ultra vires. We have been assured—and I think that I can assure the chamber—that the amendment regulations create a proportionate set of powers for ministers to help to ensure that the habitats directive is complied with, and powers conferred under the European Communities Act 1972 allow us, within our devolved competence, to introduce such regulations. Members, especially John Scott, have asked whether we are the competent authority to legislate on this matter. We are indeed the authority that can make these regulations, and I hope that they will be passed today. Sarah Boyack asked whether the regulations are too wide and whether they will cover other public authorities. All the competent authorities will be covered under our devolved competence to deal with them. As a result, the regulations must have this particular shape and form.

I see that I have interventions from both sides. I will take Sarah Boyack first.

The regulations will attach to existing plans and projects that are not compliant with the directive. In reality, the regulations must be shaped in their present form. I think that Mr Scott had a similar question, so I will let him ask it.

I am happy to commit the cabinet secretary—with his consent—to write in those terms so that Mr Scott is reassured. The only member who suggested that our proposals might have been rushed was Mr Rumbles. His point was somewhat negated by his colleague Iain Smith, who said that tackling the issue was a matter of urgency. We know that our proposals have been produced in a short time, but the situation that we face meant that that had to be the case. We are arguing that Westminster should act and we are suggesting how it should act, but the issue of the marine bill is a chimera because, as Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, a marine bill could not take reserved powers and give them to the Scottish Parliament. Such a bill could not do that. To stop ship-to-ship oil transfers, we must ensure that Westminster acts and that we make the progress that we can make with the regulations that we can pass—of course, all SNP MSPs would like us to be able to pass all appropriate regulations. We will take our steps and Westminster must take its. I repeat the point that the constituency interest of the new Prime Minister might impel him to act where others have failed to.

No, I am sorry—I really must make progress. We have worked hard on the issue, as did the previous Administration. There has been acknowledgement in the Parliament that we have had to work hard on it. Now we must ensure that, unanimously, the Parliament sends the right message. As a Government, we have done what the Parliament asked us to do. We have reported in advance of the summer recess on measures that are within the powers of the Parliament. We have been swift to develop appropriate new legislation that puts our own house in order—the proposed powers are immensely useful in that regard—and which will send out a strong signal from the Parliament.

No, I must make progress.  As the cabinet secretary said, the Scottish Parliament has a vital role to play in ensuring that legislation that implements the habitats directive is fit for purpose. I repeat that we need Westminster to act on the proposal in question. It is clear that that is where the powers to regulate or stop ship-to-ship oil cargo transfer lie. The motion, as amended, rightly calls on the Westminster Government to exercise those powers now. I urge other members to accept the amendment, as we have done. We will continue to attach the highest priority to progressing these important matters with Whitehall to secure action. Taken together, our actions will solve the problem and ensure that it does not occur again. The Scottish environment is extremely precious. I spent the early part of this week on the island of St Kilda, so I know how precious such places are. We must protect and preserve our environment. The proposals that Forth Ports favours have no parliamentary or public support. I hope that the Parliament will send a unanimous message and that progress will be made.

The member is correct to say that the  final and important power lies with Westminster at this stage. Will he therefore join me in appealing to the new-in-post Prime Minister—a Fife MP—to ensure that action is taken now?

The Scottish Government has provided local agencies with a range of powers and resources that they are using to deliver safer, cleaner and more attractive town centres. The quality of life initiative is being used to improve street lighting and closed-circuit television provision. The antisocial behaviour legislation, supported by £120 million over four years, is enabling swift and effective action to be taken against a range of low-level offending in town centres, from antisocial driving and noise nuisance to vandalism and littering.

Mr Matheson has campaigned tirelessly on that issue and there is certainly a problem to be addressed. Unfortunately, prohibition of the adaptation of vehicle exhausts—which is a possibility, as it is exhaust noise that causes a great deal of problem—is a reserved matter, strangely enough. That came as news to me as well, but a range of other actions can be taken. Part 10 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 includes provisions that allow the police to seize vehicles that are being driven antisocially, and that power has been used successfully to seize 170 vehicles and to issue 1,917 warning notices, to the end of September last year.  Mr Matheson is right to say that other things can be done. For example, the Environmental Protection Act 1990 can be used, or a local authority can apply to the courts for an antisocial behaviour order to restrict a persistently antisocial driver from a particular area or even to prohibit the individual concerned from driving a particular vehicle. My colleague, the Minister for Community Safety, will visit Tayside Police in the coming months to see the new seizure of vehicles initiative that they have introduced. However, we plan to take a fresh look at the community safety and antisocial behaviour strategy to determine how it can be strengthened and improved. Mr Matheson's point is important and will be included in that process.

I am always willing to consider good ideas wherever they come from: that is true of my colleagues, as well. There are a variety of moves afoot to assist the regeneration of town centres. As Mr Peacock points out, it is not simply a matter of behaviour, although there are considerable problems of behaviour that can be encouraged out of existence. It is extremely important that premises do not remain empty for too long. The radical, exciting and, I am sure, worthwhile initiative on business rates that is coming may do even more on that than any town centre regeneration trust could.

I am sure that Mr Brownlee would not expect me to commit to immediate funding for Dumfries, much as I would like to. However, he made a valid point. Dumfries is an interesting example of a town where a mix of actions will be required. I believe that the reduction and elimination of business rates will have an enormous effect in Dumfries because, as Mr Brownlee will know, one of the major problems is the difficulty for start-up businesses to base themselves in town centres. There are other problems. There is work to be done on historic buildings in Dumfries town centre—I understand it is likely to be under way shortly—and there is the question of behaviour in all town centres. The Government intends to focus strongly on promoting positive social behaviour among young people and others, and to crack down on the antisocial minority. Those two aspects must be taken together. We want to promote good behaviour as well as to punish bad behaviour. Provided that we do that in the context of a variety of initiatives, all town centres—whether in Dunoon, Wick or Dumfries—will flourish.

I am happy to arrange for that to happen so that we are working cross-party and in the spirit of consensus to improve our towns throughout Scotland. Mr Purvis and I were in Hawick on Friday morning. We saw some of the difficulties that that town faces and some of the exciting things, particularly the new Tower Mill development, which is immensely impressive. The use of such buildings, in the way that Tower Mill is now being used, can only be a good thing for any small town.

I was pleased to support the living garden approach by visiting the living garden earlier this month at gardening Scotland. The living garden was a show garden and information village that was put together by the garden for life forum to demonstrate how to put garden for life principles into practice by using peat-free compost, by planting for wildlife, by growing food in the garden, and by dedicating an area to recycling and composting. The Scottish Government is a member of the garden for life forum, along with a range of conservation, environmental and health charities, horticultural organisations and Scottish Natural Heritage. The aims of the forum are to increase enjoyment and understanding of biodiversity, to support action by gardeners for the benefit of Scotland's biodiversity, and to promote the benefits of gardening for health and well-being. Grounds for Learning, one of the forum partners, offers help and advice to schools on all aspects of school grounds development for biodiversity. It is important to note that the Scottish Government actively supports the eco-schools programme, which includes modules on biodiversity and developing school grounds as outdoor classrooms to enhance pupils' interaction with, and understanding of, the natural world.

Certainly. The issue of local food becomes ever more local when young people are involved in growing it for themselves. It is an important matter for this Government. We acknowledge the importance of the hungry for success programme and its achievements. Just this morning, the cabinet secretary and I met a range of environmental organisations, including Friends of the Earth. One of its priorities is to stress the importance of growing fruit and vegetables for oneself in gardens or allotments.  I am aware of the strong pressure from the Scottish Allotments and Gardens Society in its report, "Growing Scotland", which I read with great interest. It talks about the need for more allotments. Although that is a matter for local authorities and others, it is actively supported.

Initiatives to improve the local environment are generally for local authorities to pursue. If the historic environment is affected, then Historic Scotland might become involved in associated casework on behalf of Scottish ministers.

I am sorry to hear of that experience of Historic Scotland, which works closely with the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture. That is an operational matter for Historic Scotland. I am aware that the member has written about the case to Historic Scotland's chief executive, but I am sure that her comments today will be drawn to his and the relevant minister's attention. The land in question belongs to the Forestry Commission Scotland. Historic Scotland is involved in discussions with Forest Enterprise and others about improving the amenity and landscape of that land. Historic Scotland recently received a general inquiry from Croy community council about infilling the quarries and has offered to meet the interested parties to discuss that. It might reassure the member to know that although the case she refers to is important to the community, the wider issue of the bid for world heritage status  for the Antonine wall will not be affected by it. The professional advice is that the problem is not significant enough to affect the bid. National planning guidelines on archaeology are in place and must be observed. We must also ensure that local plans, development plans and policies are adequate to cope with circumstances such as the one that the member mentions. The policy in the Kilsyth local plan from 1999 states: "The Council will oppose any development which would adversely affect or threaten a Scheduled Ancient Monument or its setting, in particular in the vicinity of the Antonine Wall." There is a commitment from the agencies, including Historic Scotland and Forest Enterprise and from ministers, to ensure that we get the matter right. I hope that that reassures the member, but I know that Historic Scotland will have heard the question and, I presume, will be in touch with her again as a result.

I pay tribute to Jim Hume for securing the debate. Like Cathy Jamieson, this is my first members' business debate for quite some time, but I remember these debates with great affection,  because they are broader and more knowledgeable than normal chamber debates. It was not I who observed that, but Winnie Ewing, who was a great fan of these debates and would always wait in the chamber to take part in them. The debate has united the Parliament's best-known vegan—perhaps its only vegan—with its best-known carnivore. It has brought in the Parliament's best-known prawn fancier, too—Mr McGrigor's knowledge of nephrops is legendary. It is entirely fitting that the debate is taking place on the first day of the Royal Highland show, as many people have observed. Perhaps we would have had a larger audience had we held it in the show ring, but, in any case, it has been an informed debate. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, along with others, has been at the show and has met key individuals in all parts of the food supply chain, from producers right through to the main retailers. The motion debated reflects some of the key concerns of the new Scottish Government. I will run through our five strategic objectives and link them to the concerns raised in the debate. We want a Scotland that is wealthier and fairer. Scotland's farmers and fishermen work to the highest standards and sustainability. By encouraging people to buy local, we will ensure that the wealth generated by locally produced food remains more fairly in the hands of communities. As many members have observed, we want a healthier Scotland. Scotland undoubtedly has some of the best natural produce and the most skilled food and drink producers in the world. It stands to reason that by encouraging a greater local consumption of our wonderful quality food and drink, we will contribute to the better health of our population, particularly our school children, who would get a positive experience of food at school by eating tasty, fresh, local produce. I pay tribute to the hungry for success scheme, which has been a wonderful success, and to schools such as Inverary primary school and their class teacher, Fiona Hamilton, who did such inspiring work to show how important local food is to the area and the school. There is no doubt that, as Liam McArthur and others have observed, our national diet has been—and in some places still is—notoriously poor. That is why it is all the more important to promote the very best locally produced proteins and meat, encourage greater consumption of our traditional catch of mackerel and herring, which are rich in omega 3, and take all the benefits from vegetables, as Cathy Jamieson does.  We want a safer and stronger Scotland. We have to have confidence in the way that our food is produced throughout Scotland so that we know that it will conform to the highest food safety standards and that we can promote it locally. We want a smarter Scotland. We need to encourage people in Scotland to know more about their food and understand its great benefits and how to prepare it. We need to ensure that from the earliest stages in school children ask, "Where did that come from?" "What is it?" "How can we use it?" and "How can we get more of it?" We must ensure that at every stage, particularly in relation to school meals—I will mention the East Ayrshire project and other projects in a moment—local food is coming into schools and engaging the curiosity and interest of every child in them. As Robin Harper and others said, we want a greener Scotland. We need to consider ways to shorten the food chain from farm or net to plate so that we can reduce the environmental impact of transport emissions, among other things. By encouraging greater diversity in land use and innovation in sustainable production methods, we will maintain and improve Scotland's natural environment.

I was smiling only because Ms Grahame is well-known for her pre-emptive strikes. The reality is that of course we will make absolutely certain that the guidance is not only adhered to, but improved. The issue of food miles has been raised frequently in the media and in the Parliament. We must not be over-simplistic about it. The definitions that we apply will be important but, in general, we are keen to see primary producers and others in the food and drinks industry working more closely together to shorten the supply chain as much as possible between producer and consumer. A number of members have mentioned allotments. There is a strong desire in Scotland to ensure that the use of allotments is as widespread as possible, but there is a shortage of them. We must turn our attention to that matter. I am pleased that the five strategic themes that I have mentioned will underlie everything that the Scottish Government does. That means that we have ambitious plans for Scotland's food and drinks industries. Today, my friend the Cabinet  Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment announced the creation of an enhanced resource in the Scottish Executive for dealing with food and marketing policy. The new dedicated resource will consider how best to deliver an overall package of support to our food industry that will facilitate the higher uptake of local food in public and private domestic markets. I hope that, in time, it will help to grow local producers' capacity to respond. Mr Hume knows that ensuring that the capacity exists to fuel and increase demand is a key issue—I see Mr Scott nodding. Farmers markets have been an important part of that. In that context, I pay tribute to John Scott, as I have often done.

I acknowledge that. Indeed, £20 million more than previously is available for organic produce in the new Scottish rural development programme. We will continue to build that capacity. We have talked about East Ayrshire Council's groundbreaking work. What has happened with respect to procurement is important; indeed, East Ayrshire Council's work is already being replicated in places in the Highlands and Islands and in Tayside. Important lessons have been learned, and local authorities and other public bodies, such as health trusts, are considering ways of increasing their use of local, fresh and seasonal produce of high nutritional quality.

I am sorry; I am in my final minute. We will continue to learn lessons and to expand the work that I have mentioned. I take the point that Cathy Jamieson made about prisons. It is entirely appropriate that people who are doing porridge should have Scottish porridge, and we will ensure that that happens. In conclusion, the Government recognises the role of food production in sustaining rural economies and communities, and it is useful to be reminded of that role by Jim Hume. I thank him for doing so. We support the provision of fresh local produce through a range of outlets, and we will ensure that Scottish food businesses have the opportunity to grow by supplying local, domestic and other markets. We know how important food and the environment are. Jamie McGrigor talked  about food and tourism. Food is central to who we are and what this country is. The Government will do all that it can to ensure that it fulfils the objectives that I have outlined.   Meeting closed at 18:03.

It is for Moray Council to determine whether it will implement its own proposed schemes in full. Once the council decides its plans and submits them to the Government, we can consider them for the purpose of confirmation by the Scottish ministers and, in turn, I hope, grant support.

I thank Mary Scanlon for that pertinent question. I know that she, the local member for Moray, Richard Lochhead, and the previous member for Moray have been active in ensuring that the council can find those moneys. As Mary Scanlon knows, the two schemes that are presently under consideration—the Burn of Mosset and the Rothes flood alleviation schemes—are nearly there. In terms of objections, we are almost at the stage at which we can move forward, and grant will be available. The larger schemes to which the member referred are still under discussion, and finding the balance in funding will be an issue as the question of flood prevention continues. My friend sitting in front of me, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, will say more about flood prevention this afternoon.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to close this debate on a greener Scotland. We deliberately chose the subject debate approach so  that a wide range of views could be heard. I remind Liam McArthur—he may not be aware of this—that subject debates were vigorously pushed by another Liberal Democrat, Donald Gorrie, who wanted members to have a chance to think about issues and debate them properly.

No, thank you. I will not. It seems strange that the Liberal Democrats now oppose subject debates. I pay tribute to Joe FitzPatrick, who made his maiden speech in the debate. Those of us who know him know that he is thoughtful, principled and rooted in his community. That was reflected in his speech, on which I congratulate him. I was heartened by the speech that was made by someone to whom I referred two weeks ago as "Disgusted of Midlothian". She is a mite less disgusted these days, but there was a curious conundrum in her speech and in Des McNulty's closing speech. If it is true that the Labour and Liberal Executive did everything so well and successfully for eight years, how come the people of Scotland did not want it to continue to do what it was doing? What a strange political thought. Perhaps the Labour Party and the Liberals should ponder that at some length and in silence.

Not just now, thank you. I have only seven minutes. I was slightly concerned by Ms Brankin's comment that her party would instruct Labour members on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. That does not seem to me to recognise the primacy of parliamentary committees. I hope that she will rethink that approach. Before I come to more pleasant issues, I will address what Mr Rumbles said. It is interesting that the school of leadership to which he belongs in dealing with his remit is the same Liberal Democrat school of leadership as that to which Nicol Stephen and Ming Campbell belong—that is, there is no leadership at all. I was sorry to hear his speech; I hope that his speeches improve. There have been positive contributions from across the chamber. Peter Peacock, to whose thoughtful points on the marine environment we must listen—even if we do not agree with all of them—certainly made a positive contribution. Tricia Marwick offered her thoughts on the ways in which large businesses can be involved in protecting the environment. I assure her that we are working hard to ensure that Tullis Russell  succeeds in its aims. John Scott and Nanette Milne gave us their thoughts on the primacy of producers and the need for local food and local consumption to be much more closely associated. We also heard Patrick Harvie's thoughts on a shared green agenda for the environment. I pay tribute to him for his speech, in which he identified something that became a strong theme: the need for us to work together rather than to indulge in—I hear it in voices off—the old politics that has failed the people of Scotland. I move on—[ Interruption. ]

In the debate, the best exemplar of the new politics was the speech from Sarah Boyack, who brought some real substance to the debate. I assure her of two things. First, better environmental governance will not distract attention from real priorities; it is intended to focus attention on real priorities. I assure her that the days of such things being done behind closed doors are gone: we will bring the matter to the chamber to be discussed fully. Secondly, I offer encouragement on the ideas that she raised regarding community microgeneration. Last week an oral question was asked in the chamber on individual microgeneration. As Rob Gibson rightly pointed out, there is a need for every individual to be involved in the issues that we have debated this afternoon. This is not about politicians; this is about people, and we will do everything that we can to encourage such schemes. The really important audience for this debate was not in here—it was out there. We know how strongly young people in Scotland feel about environmental issues. More than 81 per cent of those who responded to a recent Young Scot poll said that they were worried about global warming, and the Scottish Youth Parliament's recent manifesto, "our scotland", includes a series of demands on green issues. Young people are passionate about green issues. We need not just to help them to translate that passion into action, but to learn from them. We must listen to what they say on green issues, encourage their involvement and give them and everybody else opportunities to develop skills and confidence so that they can make a difference not just to Scotland, but to the planet. We will build on existing initiatives, including the 2,531 eco-schools in Scotland. The Liberal Democrat manifesto contained the ambition that every school should be an eco-school—we will endeavour to make it so. Eco-schools are giving young people in Scotland the opportunity to learn about sustainable development, to put it into practice in their local environment and to share their ideas and experiences. Young people— indeed, all people—are at the heart of our approach. As Richard Lochhead said in his opening speech, much good work is already being done across Scotland, and I agree with Rhona Brankin and Des McNulty that some of it came from the previous Executive.

I would have given way otherwise. Sustainable development is a global challenge. We in this chamber have no monopoly on the answers. This Government wants Scotland to play its full part, setting an example and learning from and sharing good practice and experience internationally to create the frameworks that will help us to deliver. Richard Lochhead has already blazed a trail in Europe, and I look forward to attending my first environment council meeting in Luxembourg on 28 June. I shall endeavour to get from Scotland's first world heritage site, St Kilda, to Luxembourg as quickly as I can—by public transport, of course. This Government's vision for Scotland is based on the values of success, social and physical well-being and interconnectedness. However, a greener Scotland is not an end in itself; it is an integral part—along with our four other strategic objectives—of how this Government will make life better for all the people of Scotland. A greener Scotland must be achieved not just by this small team of ministers, the larger ministerial team and the entire chamber, but by everyone right across Scotland. It is a job for all of us. We are all in this together.

Mike Rumbles has no answers and admits that he does not listen. He is doing well.

The provision and maintenance of parks are primarily the responsibility of local authorities, and rightly so. It is for local authorities, their community planning partners and any other owners or providers of green spaces to decide whether new parks should be created in their areas, whether volunteers should be invited to participate in the process and, if so, what financial or other support they should receive. The Scottish Government provides a range of grants for the voluntary sector in general and they are listed on the Executive's website. BTCV Scotland's community local action network system, which is supported by the Government, provides advice on the grants, awards and support services that are available more widely to help voluntary groups to carry out conservation projects. Those would probably apply.

I thank Cathie Craigie for her good wishes. I must not stray into the built environment but must instead comment only on the natural environment. Environmental volunteering and the good work that is taking place both in Cumbernauld and by groups such as the Friends of Kelvin Valley Park will be supported—and are being supported—by the schemes that I mentioned. In addition, an implementation group has been considering ways in which the Government can further assist the environmental volunteering sector. We expect to receive a report from the group shortly and I am sure that we will have good news on that.

Green spaces of all types are extremely important, both for the well-being of every member of society and indeed for the well-being of the Government, because green spaces  contribute both to the greening of Scotland and to a healthier Scotland. We will do everything we can to encourage such work throughout the country. On the specific example of Cumbernauld, all responsible local authorities want to make sure that the green spaces that they have—and their potential—are taken forward in a way that achieves the aim of a healthier and greener society. We will do all that we can to encourage local authorities in general and, I am sure, North Lanarkshire Council in particular.

People in Scotland rate climate change, energy and recycling as their top three environmental priorities. A growing number of households recycle paper, glass, plastic or cans and many take action to reduce their energy use. The Scottish Government offers information to households in Scotland at a national level and provides funding for practical support and advice through organisations such as the Energy Saving Trust. Our aim is for households to adopt ever more sustainable ways of living and to reduce their carbon footprint. We will build on and develop existing work with both national and local delivery programmes in partnership with local authorities, the wider public sector and non-governmental organisations. Our aim will be to reduce waste, improve energy and resource efficiency, and reduce emissions from transport and housing. Those actions will support every domestic household and every individual in reducing their carbon footprint.

Dr McKee makes an important point. Indeed, the Government made a manifesto commitment to develop much simpler and more accessible planning regulations on the matter. I am pleased to say that we are now actively considering changes to planning controls  so that more microgeneration equipment can be installed in existing buildings without the need to obtain planning permission. Research has been undertaken on the scope for doing so, and public consultation will be undertaken this year on the need to change existing legislative provisions. In the meantime, we are certain that development plan policies should encourage and support, rather than obstruct, microgeneration proposals in existing buildings that satisfactorily address the broad criteria that apply, including appropriate environmental and amenity safeguards and the requirements of building regulations.

I am always happy to endorse the consensus approach and new politics—I have lived with them for a long time. In that spirit, I will be delighted to look constructively at a Tory proposal. We are setting up mechanisms so to do, and we will certainly consider from throughout the chamber all positive ideas that can make a difference and ensure that every individual in every household reduces their carbon footprint.

I am more than delighted that the spirit of the new politics is sweeping like a wave across the chamber and has reached Ms Boyack. I am delighted to welcome that  contribution. We will look favourably on those ideas. Sarah Boyack raises two extremely important points, the first of which is the work that WWF has done and the simple and comprehensive calculations that it can help individuals to do. We want to encourage that. Even more, however, we want to encourage the role of individuals, starting at the earliest age, so that in the circumstances in which we find ourselves, when there is urgency in changing and encouraging change, we can engage every individual in the process. Just as I am warm and supportive to Nanette Milne, I am warm and supportive to Sarah Boyack.

The Private Water Supplies (Scotland) Regulations 2006 implement the additional measures necessary to comply with the revised drinking water directive. As Mr Fraser knows, the regulations came into force on 3 July 2006. The Government has no immediate plans to review the duties and powers of local authorities in relation to the regulations, but measures relating to drinking water safety are monitored carefully to take account of medical, scientific and technological advances. Safe drinking water is essential to a healthier Scotland. The 2006 regulations will help all of us to achieve that objective through the provision of clean and wholesome drinking water for those who are dependent on private supplies, as I am.

I should have declared an interest, as I have a private water supply. Therefore, I am as sensitive as anybody in the  chamber to the issue of ensuring that there is no overregulation or overburdensome regulation. I am grateful for the advance notice of Mr Fraser's supplementary question, which I received via the pages of the Aberdeen Press and Journal yesterday, in which he demanded that the regulations be immediately withdrawn. The reality of the situation is slightly different from what Mr Fraser has presented. It is, for example, important that the new regulations had the full backing of the Scottish E coli 0157 task force, because there can be a danger to public health from private water supplies in certain circumstances. Mr Fraser may not be aware that research that was commissioned by the Executive confirmed that all of the 33 supplies that were monitored in north-east Scotland throughout 2002 and 2003 suffered from some form of contamination at least once in those years. Health Protection Scotland has estimated that people who are served by private supplies are 10 times more likely to become ill as a result of drinking contaminated water than those who are served by the public supply. I am drinking the bottled stuff at the moment. In those circumstances, a one-off scheme that allows people to improve their water supplies is desirable. I am always aware of overregulation and regulatory burdens and costs. However, I ask Mr Fraser to consider whether, as the holiday season arrives, it is sensible to pursue a policy that puts holidaymakers at risk. Surely we should pursue a policy that makes them feel safe.

I start by thanking those members who wished Richard Lochhead and me every good fortune in our new roles. Most speakers did so, albeit briefly, but we take what we can get and I am grateful to them all. I point out to the Presiding Officer that this is my maiden speech in this chamber. However, having spoken in the Scottish Parliament before, I cannot describe this speech as a maiden, so perhaps I will have to describe it and the speeches of Rhoda Grant and Kenny Gibson as dowager speeches in this place. Today's debate has been good in parts. I welcome the strong and positive speeches and I hope to work closely with Jim Hume, Nanette Milne and Sarah Boyack to work on the issues that  can and will unite us. I am happy to make that pledge now, and I will continue to make it. I hope that it will be taken up and that we will work together on it. However, I will address some of the more unfortunate contributions to the debate before I go on to the good parts. I start with Mike Rumbles. I was slightly surprised by his speech—

Yes, I was. I am a person of great optimism—I thought that he might have changed. Then I realised that he was indeed the old Mike Rumbles. He was against the Government when he was in the Government and he is still against the Government even though he is not now in it, so I do not take his speech seriously and I never will take him seriously on the basis of today's performance. I must address in more detail the contribution of somebody I now know as Disgusted of Midlothian, who is sitting beside Disappointed of Central Edinburgh. Indeed, she is Doubly Disgusted of Midlothian, because when our team comes to the chamber with a programme worth £1.6 billion that offers an enormous amount—I will speak about the programme in a moment—do we hear a word of welcome from Disgusted of Midlothian? We do not. Do we hear any appreciation of the programme that she was involved in drawing up? We do not. She is simply disgusted—that was her first and last word in a deeply disappointing speech. Not even Richard Lochhead—I go further; not even John Swinney—could have drawn up the programme in a fortnight. This programme that I hold in my hand is Rhona Brankin's and Ross Finnie's programme. We had to work solidly on the programme in the past fortnight to ensure that we could talk about it in the chamber and then send it to Europe, not in a week or a fortnight, but tomorrow. The chamber should congratulate Richard Lochhead on his work on the programme. Bizarrely—politics is clearly still a bizarre world in Scotland—the person who drew up, costed and set the budget for the programme now complains that all three are deeply defective. What a strange, bizarre attitude to take.

No, I will not at this moment. Another reality is that not a single thing has been cut out of the programme and not a single penny has been taken away.

No, I will not.  I was about to say that it is unalloyed good news that nothing has come out of the programme; in fact, we have added to it. The new entrants scheme has been added and the resources have been increased. It is unfortunate that every word we heard from Rhona Brankin was based on something that was not true. That is to be regretted deeply, and it is not the way in which we should go forward in the chamber—and we have to go forward.

As Ms Brankin knows, the truth of the matter is that the rural development programme was complete and costed—there was no proposal for her to add a single penny to it. The programme that we are discussing is the programme that she would have brought to the Parliament, so to say anything else is nonsensical. We have unalloyed good news about the programme and about the level of voluntary modulation, which should be welcomed. If the Opposition spokespeople were less curmudgeonly, they would welcome it.

I will not—I am sorry. Before I focus on that unalloyed good news and on how we will move forward, I congratulate those members who have made maiden speeches in the debate. It is obvious that the SNP's new entrants scheme is working exceptionally well. I am happy to accept the invitation to go to Biggar. It is obvious, too, that some members of Labour's new entrants scheme are also working well. In particular, I commend David Stewart for a thoughtful and intriguing speech. Mr Peacock's speech would have been intriguing, had he not fallen into his old ministerial ways towards the end of it. I want to focus on the environment and the rural development programme. Mr Lochhead was clear in laying out his commitment across his wide-ranging responsibilities. As the Minister for Environment, I reiterate that commitment and, indeed, go further. Later today, I will have my first formal meeting with Scottish Environment LINK. From now on, I hope to meet as many as possible of the organisations and individuals who are passionate about our country, its land, its landscape and its people, and who devote themselves, day in and day out, to ensuring that that land—that small part of our planet—has a  sustainable, environmentally sound and ecologically rich future.

Not at the moment, thank you. I intend to learn from them, to work with them and to support them. I want to have a productive dialogue with them, and I will do everything I can to address their concerns, for their concerns are my concerns, this Government's concerns and the Parliament's concerns. We have a duty and a responsibility to ensure that we in Scotland answer the urgent demands of climate change, environmental degradation and the daily threat to Scottish biodiversity. The rural development programme contains part of the solution. We will answer the demands that are made of us as people—as human beings who inhabit our landscape. There has been a common theme to the debate: our landscape is inhabited by people, and we must work with, engage with, inspire, encourage and inform them so that they can be part of the solutions to the problems that we face. Our theme will be people and place in harmony. Of course, we have a big opportunity, because now is a good time for a fresh start. In modern times, it has been the fate of Scotland for its future, its prosperity and its environmental needs to be constantly in thrall to political forces beyond its borders. The creation of the Scottish Parliament was an attempt, at least in part, to address the frustrations of the democratic deficit and to meet the aspirations of the Scottish people. If the electorate said a single thing to the Parliament in the recent election, it was that we must do better. There is a desire for us to push forward towards bigger and better horizons. The people of Scotland are hungry for change. In this country, we are witnessing a resurgence of national pride. It is not triumphalist—it is a calm and relaxed national self-belief that is underpinned by a belief in our land and landscape and in people and place. There are practical reasons for optimism. The rural development programme is strong and progressive, even if it still needs some fine tuning by a new Government.

No—I must finish. The programme directly address issues that relate to all of us, but which relate, in particular, to the 21 per cent of the Scottish population who live outwith our towns and cities. Those rural communities are a vital part of our national life and identity. We must all work together to help them to thrive. They can do so only if they have the right  services, the right economy and the right infrastructure. The Government's five strategic outcomes all apply to rural areas just as much as they apply to urban areas, and all of them will benefit rural Scotland as much as they will benefit any other part of Scotland. The new rural development programme will give us the opportunity to direct resources in line with our key priorities and outcomes, which will affect and enhance the lives of people in Scotland. Whether through social and economic benefits that will help to maintain our rural communities or through environmental measures to mitigate climate change, the programme is an opportunity that we need to grasp and build on. We will do precisely that—we will build on good practice and bring in new ideas. I commend ideas that are already in the pipeline, such as the Forestry Commission's efforts to make land available for sustainable housing. Today's debate is both an end and a beginning: it is an end to a process to which we as a Government were not party, but on which we have had the resolve to consult, ponder and conclude; and it is a beginning, because it is the first step in meeting our objectives of having a flourishing agriculture sector, successful forest industries, a strong business base in rural Scotland, a comprehensive agri-environment strategy, a protected and renewed Scottish environment, vibrant rural communities, rejuvenated crofting, and a partnership with every interested organisation and individual. Our invitation today is that we want every member of the Parliament to be part of that partnership.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to reduce class sizes. (S1O-6701)

How? How much will it cost? Where will the Executive get the money from?

I echo the minister's tribute to Ian Jenkins, who is the only member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee who is choosing not to return to the Parliament. It has been a great pleasure to  work alongside him. Members who know him well know about his idiosyncratic approach to deciding how to vote in any committee. Most of the time, one is on tenterhooks wondering whether he will vote with one or against one. Sometimes he manages to do both. He will be greatly missed by many of us. The bill illustrates two aspects of the Parliament, one of which is a determination to achieve things for the people of Scotland. Brian Monteith was right to say that, when the committee received the Executive's memorandum about a children's commissioner, it decided that the best way to tackle that important issue would be to work across the parties to see whether progress could be made in such a way that there was no division in the Parliament. By and large, we have achieved that and the bill is a testimony to that. I will not echo every thank you that the convener gave, although I agree with them all, but I want to pick out three people in particular who should be thanked. The first is the convener, Karen Gillon, who steered the process through. She did that first as deputy convener and then as convener of the committee—although she has been absent on two occasions for the best of reasons. Latterly in particular, she has had a difficult task in getting the bill through in the time available and she has done remarkably well. I also pay tribute to Jackie Baillie and Irene McGugan, who took on the burden of the work connected with the bill by being involved in the long, detailed and never-easy negotiations with the non-Executive bills unit and the Executive. They did exceptionally well. Those people and the committee have shown that, where there is a will, things can be done. The other thing that the bill says about the Parliament is the historical continuity in which we stand. The last bill that we will pass today, on a fairly remarkable afternoon, is a thoroughly modern bill, which, as Fiona McLeod indicated, has its roots in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. It is particularly important to reflect on that today, at a time when the rights of children in other parts of the world are being threatened. What we do here this afternoon is concerned not only with Scotland, but with showing the determination of many people to support the rights of children throughout the world. We are taking a thoroughly modern and contemporary action. Only an hour ago, we were repealing one part of the Theft Act 1607, which was passed before the Act of Union 1707. Members all know this, so perhaps there is no need for me to repeat it, but the bit of that act that we repealed was concerned with the theft of fish and bees. However, members will be pleased to know that the bit about the stealing of bees has been retained on the statute book—I mention that in case any members were  thinking of trying to get away with stealing bees this afternoon.

It is not a capital offence as yet—although, with the present Prime Minister, one never knows what will happen next. There is a historical continuity in this Parliament, which stands in a direct line of succession to the Parliament before the Act of Union 1707, and which stands as a Parliament for the future of Scotland, however that future may turn out. There are differences on that issue across the chamber, but however they turn out, the type of action that we have taken this afternoon is an important part of the process. We have established something new in Scotland that will serve the children of Scotland well. However different that pre-union Parliament was, it too contained people who wished Scotland to do well. I want to finish with one thought, which I hope is not a sour note—I will try not to make it one—about the four bills that we have considered this afternoon. One of those bills was introduced two weeks before the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, one was introduced two weeks after it and one was introduced three weeks after it. Certain people in the Parliament believed that we did not have enough time to pass that bill, but, as I have said, where there is a will, there is a way. I hope that the Parliament finds the will before too long to do some good for the Gaelic-speaking people of Scotland as well.

I commend to the Parliament the speech of my colleague Alex Neil, not only because of the style in which he delivered it but because of the analysis that he provided. I will start by using part of his analysis, which referred to the difference between micromanaging things and having the ambition and vision that will achieve the goals that have been set. The Executive, particularly under First Minister Jack McConnell, is an Executive of micromanagement; it spins small solutions that have little to do with the whole problem, but it dresses them up as if they were big ideas. If there is an example that one might use in this debate, it lies in one phrase in the Executive's motion: "the introduction of education for work and enterprise for every pupil at every stage of school". What a grand statement. Marilyn Livingstone just expanded on it by saying that that idea would be at the heart of education from primary 1 to S6. How? The Executive does not explain that in its motion, so let us ask how it could be done. I shall start with the five-to-14 curriculum, which represents the basic guidelines for education for that age and stage. In the paper that the Minister for Education and Young People presented to the Parliament in response to the great debate, she accepted something that is well known throughout education and that we have been talking about for two years: the five-to-14 curriculum is massively overcrowded. Every teacher and parent will say that we need to deconstruct that curriculum before we can have effective primary and early secondary education. We also know that the curriculum is massively overcrowded because attainment figures tell us so; we know that many young people are not meeting the literacy and numeracy attainment targets. How is education for work and enterprise to be introduced into the five-to-14 curriculum without knocking something else out of it or without overcrowding it even more? The Executive has no answer to that.  I will go further. How is education for work and enterprise to be introduced into the post-five-to-14 curriculum? How is it to be introduced into the standard grade and higher still years? Is it to be a subject? If that is the case, where are the proposals for that? If it is not to be a subject but is to be taught along with other generalities such as social and moral education, how is it to be taught? The Executive has given no answer to that. The reality is that although the idea might have some merit, it is being promoted as if it was the solution to the problem. We have heard the solution to the problem from my colleagues Andrew Wilson and Alex Neil. They gave the correct analysis of the political problem in terms of Scotland's growth rate and dismal performance for several generations. We then heard from them the solution to tackle the problem in our growth, but we heard none of that from the Executive. We have heard instead about micro-measures that are dressed up as solutions. The education situation is grim. If we are to have a smart and successful Scotland it must be based on literacy and numeracy, which are the basic skills that people require to go anywhere and on which are built the skills of thinking and learning. What is the reality under new Labour? The reality under new Labour is that those skills are not being achieved by 50 per cent of our young people. New Labour can build all the castles in the air that it wants and it can create spin about all those micro-measures. New Labour can talk about education for work and enterprise as if it is "nirvana"—to quote Helen Liddell—but the reality is that we can achieve none of that unless we have an education system that works and which is based on the basics.

I know it is—I recognise a question when I hear one. As my colleague Andrew Wilson said, we will not do that. I was talking about something else that we should be focusing on. Before people get to acquiring skills in later life, they have to be able to read, write and count. If we have an education system that does not achieve those aims for 50 per cent of Scotland's young people—

Let me finish. If our education system does not achieve those aims, it has failed. By that definition, the Executive has failed in the past four years and, indeed, the past six years.

I am winding up. The reality of the situation is that the Executive has come to the chamber, as it has done repeatedly over the past four years, with either applehood and—[MEMBERS: "Mother pie?"] Indeed. My emotions are getting the better of me; I have never had mother pie, but there is still time. The reality is that if the Executive continues to come to the chamber with such motions and ideas dressed up as solutions, it will continue to fail Scotland. That is why my party and I look forward to 1 May and the start of something new.

I have given you notice of my point of order, Presiding Officer, and I have given notice of it to members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, among others. I received a letter from you this morning that said that the Parliamentary Bureau had voted by a majority not to timetable the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill. I understand that the Executive was in the process of considering a financial resolution, but that that consideration has been halted by the refusal of a majority of members of the bureau to timetable the bill. Another effect of that decision has been to cancel the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's stage 2 meeting that was scheduled for next Tuesday. The point is not that time was not allocated for the meeting, but that the meeting has been cancelled because of the actions of the bureau and because the Executive has not produced a financial resolution. Presiding Officer, I ask you to consider whether the bureau has jumped the gun on the matter. The issue is not whether the bill should proceed to stage 3, but whether it should be allowed the stage 2 hearing that was already scheduled. Will you consider whether, if the Executive were to honour its commitment—[ Interruption. ]

As I was saying, the reality of the situation is that we are only two short meetings away from achieving secure status for Gaelic. One meeting has already been scheduled and there is the possibility of discussing next week whether—[ Interruption. ]

I will complete my point of order, although it is fortunate that you received it in writing, Presiding Officer.

We are two very short meetings away from achieving secure status for Gaelic, and there is huge disappointment about the fact that we might not be allowed to do that. Even if we are not allowed to do that next week, the cancellation of a meeting that has already been scheduled, but which could take place if the Executive were to produce a financial resolution—it has said in writing that it is in the process of drawing one up—seems to be very wrong. I ask you, Presiding Officer, to consider the matter and perhaps to say to the Executive that it would be helpful and generous to allow us to have that stage 2 meeting and to return next week to the issue of how to deal with stage 3.

Presiding Officer, without going into the point, one might also argue that proper scrutiny could not be achieved by lodging 500 amendments on the final day of consideration of a bill. The reality is that it would still be possible to have the stage 2 debate if the Executive were to produce a financial resolution tomorrow—which it has often done at short notice. I realise that you cannot overturn the view of the bureau; however, if the Executive were to give notice that it intended to produce the financial resolution, the bill could proceed to stage 2. Many members object; there may be arguments against the bill, but only small amendments to it are required and discussions with the Executive have taken place. Many members would accept an honest vote in the chamber on the bill. What they find difficult to accept—and what the Gaelic  community will find it impossible to accept—is the fact that the Parliament is being used by the Executive as a procedure to kill the bill. That is wrong.

It is.

Presiding Officer, could I make one further point of order? I was unaware of the procedure under which members got to respond to points of order, but—

Well, further to the further to the point of order, the Minister for Parliamentary Business has proved my point. What she is arguing for is the reason why stage 3 of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill should not take place; she has not argued why a timetabled meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, during which that committee was to consider stage 2 of the bill, should not take place. The only barrier to such a meeting is the lack of a financial resolution. The only people who can move a financial resolution are members of the Executive; ergo, Presiding Officer, the Executive is killing the bill. Let it not avoid that fact.

I am sure that the First Minister accepts that many of us believe that it should never have come to this. I have two questions about children. First, what active steps is the Scottish Executive taking to assist children's charities in Scotland who will want to and, indeed, need to be involved in looking after the children of Iraq, during and after the conflict?  My second question is about the children of Scotland. Whether one agrees with them, the children of Scotland have shown their extreme horror at what is taking place. What action will the First Minister take to try to persuade the young people of Scotland, against all the evidence that they have, that politicians listen to people, because most people and children in Scotland do not want this conflict to happen?

Mr Fitzpatrick talked about narrowing the debate. Let me narrow it down sharply to one group of people. I will do so for personal reasons. As I have said previously in the chamber, in 1947 my mother left her native city to teach in Iraq and to teach the children of Iraq. It is because of that, and not simply because I speak for my party in the chamber on children and education, that I want to talk about the children of Iraq. It is estimated, as George Reid said, that the number of civilian deaths resulting from a war could be as high as 2 million, although some estimate a figure of 500,000. Children under 14 make up half the population of Iraq. Therefore, it is likely that half of such deaths could be the deaths of children, which could mean a quarter of a million to a million dead children. After the UN  campaign in the gulf in 1991, a UN assessment team described the situation in Iraq as one of near apocalyptic destruction, in which most modern means of life support were destroyed or rendered tenuous. That was in 1991; things will be even worse if there is a campaign this year. Since 1991, the situation has gradually stabilised, if that word can be used. The proportion of children with acute malnutrition has fallen from 11 per cent to only 4 per cent. Twelve years of sanctions have created a vulnerable population, of whom 60 per cent are entirely dependent on the oil-for-food programme. That programme produces a month's food for a family in the equivalent of two Safeway shopping bags. As always, children are at most risk in such an excessively vulnerable population. In a potential war zone, children will be completely unable to operate independently, as they always are. If they do not die from malnutrition, they will die from preventable diseases such as water-related health hazards, typhoid or diarrhoea, which result in 70 per cent of children's deaths. If they try to flee through the borders, they will have to cross the most heavily mined areas in the world. Save the Children has said of the present situation: "The fragile gains in the humanitarian situation achieved in recent years could be erased for years to come." In Iraq, 500,000 children under the age of five have died since 1991. The incidence of childhood leukemia is out of control—each day, four children die in hospitals in Baghdad. There is no cure rate for infant leukemia in Iraq, which is caused largely by depleted uranium that was used in the previous war. Education has fallen to pieces. A quarter of children do not attend school. The increase in the number of children who suffer from mental illness cannot be quantified. They suffer from depression, anxiety and behavioural disorders. The number of children who do not go to school, but work, beg on the streets and clean cars—the street children—has increased massively. Children are being drawn into the conflict. They feel dispossessed and alienated and believe that the entire world is against them. The impact of war on children is always horrific. Within days, we will face a situation in which thousands of children will die. Members have been asked to vote to say that the case for war has not been proven. Certainly, the case for killing millions of children has not been proven. Whatever else members do today, I ask them to think of those children, who should not die in our name.

I will do my best to shave a little bit off my speech. I welcome the Parliament's positive support for the bill. Although I would be grateful if members supported the bill at stage 1, that is not the end of the process. As members—especially Murdo Fraser—have indicated, stage 1 of the bill represents the start of a process that can be completed in this parliamentary session. Like Duncan Hamilton, I want to address the point that was made by Alasdair Morrison and Maureen Macmillan, who is convener of the cross-party group on Gaelic in the Scottish Parliament. They asked me why I did not introduce the bill earlier. I plead guilty to trusting the word of the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic, who, in October 1999, said that he had the matter on a fast track. I did not know that Alasdair Morrison would let down the Gaelic-speaking people of Scotland and his constituency. If I did not know that then, I know it now. The bill is perfectly possible to achieve. The reality of the situation is that the bill can be achieved if members choose to vote for it because they want it to be achieved. I will respond to the positive points that have been made in the debate. The model for the debate is undoubtedly Ian Jenkins, who changed his mind during the stage 1 process. He admitted that.

He could. Like me, the convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee has long experience of Mr Jenkins changing his mind during meetings. Having changed his mind on the bill once in five weeks, he has stuck to that position. Ian Jenkins is a model for the bill, as he saw the reality of the situation. I pay tribute to the members of the committee who saw the reality of the situation and recognised that the bill was necessary. I pay tribute, too, to Winnie Ewing, whose lifelong dedication to the cause was reflected in her speech today. Unusually, I pay particular tribute to George Lyon, who asked the most—[ Interruption. ] It is possible; this is a most unusual day. He asked the most searching questions of any member about the bill. He asked about the detail of the bill and the things that needed to be done. I will respond to him.  First, education is absolutely central. A member's bill of this nature cannot of itself produce new teachers, but it can produce a new confidence within the community, a new determination and a new feeling on the island of Ìle in George Lyon's constituency, where I was on Monday, that it is worth while pursuing the matter. It takes time to produce teachers. I say to the minister that teachers cannot simply be produced from Gaelic-medium education; other ways will have to be found. Let us get the bill in place and work on that. Secondly, on resources, some councils are already spending money on Gaelic, but the wisest evidence, from the Welsh Language Board, made the clear point that that is integral to work, not extra to it. The bill might mean changing some patterns of work, but if additional resources are required—and I shall deal with that in my comments to the minister in a moment—that will need to be addressed head on. There is no penalty in the bill. In one area, I departed from the Comunn na Gàidhlig proposals, because the reality of the situation is that the Comunn na Gàidhlig approach of fining or setting up punitive sanctions does not work. Ultimately, the only sanction in the bill is naming and shaming those who do not implement it, but I hope that by that stage people will realise that they should be doing so. Finally, George Lyon asked how we can open up the whole issue and spread it across Scotland. Indeed, that point was referred to again and again. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee's view—and I respect that view—was that Gaelic should be seen as a national language. In those circumstances, there should be a wide responsibility, but George Lyon's points about resources reflect upon that too, because if resources are limited, it might be wiser to apply them in a smaller area for more effect at an earlier stage, rather than spread them more widely. I am open to how that debate progresses. If the bill is amended to make it apply across Scotland, there will have to be a concomitant amendment that does not lay a heavy duty on, for example, Shetland or Orkney. Indeed, it is perfectly possible, using the example of Gaelic in the education national priorities, to have an authority say in the first phrase of a Gaelic language plan, "We are not having a Gaelic language plan because we do not need one." That would be the situation, I am sure, for Orkney and Shetland, although they might want to—generously—publish a leaflet or two and perhaps do it in Old Norse as well. The reality of the situation in Mr Lyon's constituency—which is, I am sorry to disappoint him, the constituency with the third-highest  concentration of Gaelic speakers—is that Gaelic is a vital part not just of social development or community development, but of economic development. Investment in Gaelic in that place will pay dividends. I will address the minister's question on resources. I will take up his generous offer; I am happy to meet his officials to discuss the matter. We operate in this Parliament by the standing orders. The financial memorandum as submitted conforms to rule 9.3.2. It had to, otherwise the Presiding Officer would not have given the bill a certificate of competence. The bill has been introduced under that memorandum. If the proposals in the bill change after stage 1, of course there will be a changed financial memorandum, but the introduction of the financial resolution—which only ministers can do—is dependent on the stage 1 process. The information is in the memorandum. It conforms to the stage 1 process, therefore it conforms to the standing orders of the Parliament. I would be happy to have a meeting with officials, but the minister knows that, if the financial resolution is not moved, stage 2 cannot move ahead. Developing the financial resolution and then moving it are something that we can do jointly. Many other points were raised in the debate, which was, by and large, positive and good-tempered.

No, I am afraid that I cannot, because I am almost out of time; I am in my last minute. Mr Monteith answered Mr Fraser's question about the use of the phrase "basis of equality". It was a Tory phrase in a Tory act. It was the best phrase for the time and, after extensive investigation, it remains the best phrase now. I ask members to support the bill at stage 1. More important, I ask members to realise that there is a will and a commitment in Scotland to have the bill not only pass at stage 1, but complete its passage and be in place—[ Interruption. ] Members in the back rows of the Labour benches might still be sniping, but we will attempt to have the Parliament pass the bill. We will attempt to honour the commitment that exists in Scotland and to do what we can to save the Gaelic language. I commend the bill to the chamber.

I am happy to provide the letter for the Parliament's consideration. I should point out that it does not say what Mike Watson suggested. Rather, it makes three comments: first, it points out that the minister is the former convener of the Finance Committee and is no slouch at criticising financial resolutions, although the Executive has often been found wanting in that regard; it has been difficult to assess certain aspects of legislation. Indeed, the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Bill had those problems. Secondly, as the minister knows, it is necessary for a financial resolution to be in place before stage 2 starts. However, any such resolution must reflect the bill as introduced. The bill has not yet been amended and I cannot guess what the amendments will be. If it were amended, work would have to be done on amending the financial resolution. Thirdly, if officials of the Parliament and the Executive have views about the costs, the proper and sensible thing for them to do is to meet and talk about such matters. However, I have also said that it would delay stage 2 if the financial resolution were not approved, so it should be approved now.

I was correcting an error.

Tha an deasbad seo an-diugh a' comharrachadh na darna oidhirp reachdail gus Beurla agus Gàidhlig a chur air stèidh cho-ionann ann an sùilean lagha na h-Alba. Chaidh a' chiad oidhirp a dhèanamh le Dòmhnall Stiùbhart, ball Pàrlamaid airson nan Eileanan Siar, ann an Taigh nan Cumantan anns an Fhaoilleach 1981. Chaidh taic a thoirt dhan bhile aige le, am measg dhaoine eile, Dennis Canavan. Ann an aithisg Hansard airson an deasbaid, bha òraidean làidir ann a bha a' toirt taic do inbhe laghail dhan Ghàidhlig, mar a bha againn air aig an àm, bho iomadh ball Pàrlamaid thar nam pàrtaidhean, a' gabhail a-staigh òraid chumhachdach bho Sheòras Robastan. Ged a bha cruaidh fheum air an reachdas seo ann an 1981, tha tòrr a bharrachd feum air a-nis. Tha àireamh luchd labhairt na Gàidhlig fhathast a' crìonadh, le nas lugha na 60,000 duine ann a-nis le coimeas conaltraidh anns a' chànan. Ged a tha na figearan as ùire bhon chunntas sluaigh air nochdadh gu bheil barrachd dealais is barrachd ùidh ann anns a' Ghàidhlig am measg na h-òigridh agus am measg na feadhna nach eil a' fuireach ann an cridhe na Gaidhealtachd, is e fìrinn na cùise gu bheil a' Ghàidhlig a' gluasad nas fhaisge agus nas fhaisge air a' bhàs. Agus cha bu chòir teagamh sam bith a bhith air duine mun bhàs a tha sin. Bidh cànan a' bàsachadh àiteigin air an t-saoghal gach cola-deug. B' urrainn dhan Ghàidhlig bàsachadh mar  na cànanan eile sin. Bàsaichidh i mur a bi oidhirp daingeann ann gus a cumail beò.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Today's debate marks the second attempt to put the English and Gaelic languages on an equal footing in the eyes of the law of Scotland. The late Donald Stewart, who was member of Parliament for the Western Isles, made the first attempt in the House of Commons in January 1981 and among the supporters of his bill was Dennis Canavan. The Hansard report of the debate contains strong speeches in favour of what was then called "legal status" for Gaelic by a number of MPs from across the parties, including a particularly impressive speech by George Robertson. The legislation was much needed in 1981, but it is needed even more now. The number of Gaelic speakers has continued to decline; fewer than 60,000 people in Scotland are able to communicate in the language. Although the most recent census figures show an increasing commitment to, and interest in, Gaelic from the young people and those who do not live in its heartlands, the reality of the situation is that Gaelic is moving ever closer to extinction—let no one be in any doubt about the possibility of that extinction. Every fortnight, a language dies somewhere in the world and Gaelic could die just like all those languages. It will die unless there is a determined attempt to keep it alive.  The member continued in English.  There are more than 6,000 languages in the world and perhaps as many as 90 per cent of those languages are at risk. Somewhere in the world a language dies every fortnight. Gaelic can die just like all those other languages and it will die unless we do everything that we can—this afternoon "we" means each one of us in this chamber—to keep it alive. The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, which I introduced on 13 November, seeks to give the Gaelic language the secure status that it needs so that it can begin to overcome generations of neglect and even hostility and to give it the chance, to be frank, to survive. Mine is a modest bill that has limited scope. It will lay on a number of public bodies within a defined geographical area—that area could be expanded by statutory instrument—a duty to prepare and implement Gaelic language plans. It also specifies a limited name and shame sanction against those that do not. The bill's inspiration lies in a number of reports and consultations on Gaelic, some of which were commissioned by the Executive. For example, the report of the ministerial advisory group on Gaelic, which was delivered to the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport in March last year, had as its  first recommendation: "That immediate action is taken to develop and implement a Gaelic Language Act to establish secure status for the language. The creation of such an Act is seen as vital by the Gaelic community ... in establishing community confidence and in securing the future prosperity of the language." The detailed proposals of the bill mirror closely some of the provisions of the Welsh Language Act 1993, which has been on the statute book for more than 15 years. Indeed, the definition of secure status is drawn from that act. The bill is also close to some of the ideas in the report on secure status that was drawn up by Comunn na Gàidhlig in 1997. Secure status has been the aim of those who are involved in, and who have worked for, the Gaelic language for many years. I acknowledge freely that secure status—the recognition in law of the need to treat Gaelic and English equally—is not the only strategic tool with which to start to rebuild the language. It is clear that family transmission in the home; education—Gaelic-medium education and the teaching of Gaelic as a second language; broadcasting, in particular radio; publishing; the arts; and the use of Gaelic in commerce are all vital, but secure status would underpin all those other actions. Secure status would be both symbolic and practical in its effect. It would be symbolic because the passage of the bill in this parliamentary session—which is still possible, despite what others say—would tell this nation and the world that Scotland cares about its culture and that it will work to save the parts of that culture that are endangered. The bill's passage would be practical because the bill takes the first steps towards ensuring that Gaelic is recognised by public bodies, and towards making certain that its use is at least thought about, planned for and made possible by those bodies. Secure status can and should go further. It should provide a legal right to Gaelic-medium education and it should be introduced into other areas of life, including—this is important—business and commerce. Secure status should have an influence on the media and the Parliament, but those things will have to wait because they are outwith the scope of the bill. However, a member's bill can start the process. We should remember that secure status as I have expressed it was the policy—and apparently still is the policy—not only of the SNP, but of the Executive parties. Legislation to establish secure status was promised by the Executive parties and by the SNP prior to the 1999 elections. Since then, as the minister and his predecessor know, I have consistently offered my support for the introduction and passage of such a bill. Indeed, as an incentive  for movement, I lodged a proposal for such a bill three years ago, but during all that time I have continued in private and public discussion with the key players, because so many want the bill to succeed.

I think that it will assist them. I accept the point that Pauline McNeill makes and I will say something specifically about Glasgow later in my speech. The Executive's failure to bring forward a plan for a bill—finally shown in its reaction to the MAGOG report—made it painfully clear that the only way forward in the first parliamentary session of the first Scottish Parliament in 300 years would be to introduce a member's bill. Much has been made, including by the minister, of the supposed "lateness" of the bill. I admit that it is late; secure status is at least two generations late. We can, however, achieve secure status and we can achieve it now. I am grateful to all those who have helped with the bill: to my co-sponsor John Farquhar Munro; to the many organisations that gave evidence at various stages; to the individuals who advised and discussed the proposals; to the non-Executive bills unit under its leader David Cullum, who I drove almost mad; to the Gaelic officers of the Parliament, Alasdair MacCaluim and his predecessor Alex O'Henley; and to the members of the cross-party group on Gaelic. I am especially grateful to the members and clerks of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee who undertook thorough and detailed scrutiny of the bill over no less than five evidence-taking sessions. The committee's report is valuable, well informed and makes many positive suggested amendments. I turn to the question of amendments. I have said repeatedly that I am open to anything that can make the bill better. I have also made it clear that getting on the statute book legislation that says, as the bill says, that "the English and Gaelic languages should be treated on a basis of equality" is a prize for which it is worth compromising. The evidence to the Education, Culture and  Sport Committee shows that there are two main areas of concern. First, there is a strong feeling that the bill should apply, from the start, to the whole of Scotland. I still feel that there are practical reasons for doing things in the way that is set out in the bill. Pauline McNeill made an important point and I accept that the application of the approach that is set out in the bill, particularly in the case of Glasgow, but also in other areas, could create anomalies and difficulties. I am open to the committee's suggestion that further evidence should be taken and that there should be amendments to the bill that would widen its scope. That said, a concomitant change to the bill would have to be made to allow for variation in language plans in different parts of the country. That happens in Wales, as Mr Jenkins and other members know from the evidence that Education, Culture and Sport Committee members heard at stage 1. I turn to implementation. Bòrd Gàidhlig na h-Alba, in its strong support for the bill—for which I am very grateful—said that it wishes to be deeply involved in the process. In the past, the minister has indicated that one of his objections to the bill is that it does not mention that board. Of course the minister knows that the bill cannot mention the board because the board has not yet been established in statute. If the minister establishes the board in statute, everybody—I repeat, everybody—would be delighted to have the board involved. Only the minister can establish the board in statute. With fewer than 60,000 speakers, Gaelic is now in the intensive care ward of the world's languages; it needs urgent attention. I acknowledge the Scottish Executive's, and the minister's, commitment to Gaelic and I applaud the establishment of the board. All of us, however, admit that those actions are nowhere near enough. We need more opportunities for learning Gaelic, more work on Gaelic in the home, more emphasis on radio, and more promotion of the importance of Gaelic. What is needed, most of all, is determination and political will. Determination and political will have brought other languages in the world back from the edge of the grave, so it can be done, because it has been done elsewhere with great success. Gaelic is not, as some would have us believe, ill-suited to the modern world. It is no better or worse as a means of communication and as a world view than English or any other language. Gaelic has been, as all the threatened languages of the world are, a victim of economics and politics, but economics and politics could breathe new life back into it. The passage of the bill through its first stage today would be an expression of the determination and political will of the Parliament and of a new Scotland to work to  do precisely that—to bring the language back to life. Conversely, rejection of the bill would tell the Gaelic community and the world that, in this "three voiced nation"—as it is called by the Gaelic poet Iain Crichton Smith in words that Tom Fleming read in the chamber on the Parliament's opening day—we are still not prepared to take all the necessary and increasingly urgent steps that are required to preserve and protect a unique part of our culture and our national life; one for which we alone have the responsibility. Presiding Officer, I have the honour to move the first ever legislative motion in Gaelic in the Scottish Parliament and probably in our country's history. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill.  The member continued in Gaelic.  Agus, anns a'Ghàidhlig, Gu bheil a' Phàrlamaid a' toirt taic do phrionnsabalan coitcheann Bile Cànan na Gàidhlig (Alba).

There has been an outbreak of consensus in the  chamber this morning, in particular between Mr Monteith, Mr Fraser and the minister. Although I am always happy to welcome consensus, we should wait to see what the consensus is. The consensus seems to be based—I shall put it charitably—on mistaking concern for action. The consensus in the chamber should be one of anger and outrage at the situation that exists in Scotland today, and about which we have heard. It should also be based on taking action and making progress. This debate shows, as previous debates and reports have shown, that it is possible to have consensus as long as we recognise the key elements of the problem. In all those debates and statements—there have been five, plus one that we introduced last year that dealt partially with the issue—concern should have been expressed about the crisis in social work and the inability to build the social work profession in a way that makes a difference. That was the burden of the speeches from Irene McGugan and Kay Ullrich, both of whom have considerable experience, and it should focus where we are going.

No; I shall finish what I have to say. The minister intervened on every speech and I do not doubt her genuineness for a moment, but her actions are lacking. We have to draw attention to that. The reality is that actions are lacking throughout the policy. The Parliament could have agreed to make major progress on the matter, but it has not. One of the problems is that we do not have the statistics. I do not regard it as sufficient for a Government to say that, four years into its term, it does not know the nature of the problem. Such a comment is, however, marginally better than what Mr Jenkins said. He seemed to think that it did not matter whether we had the statistics; he just agreed that we still do not know the nature of the problem. However, we know how awful the problem is because the statistics are in every report and statement. For example, we know that this Government said in its programme for government that it would reduce the take-up of residential accommodation by 10 per cent. However, we know that between 2000 and 2002 the figure fell by half of one per cent. In fact, the number of admissions actually rose. We know that two thirds of those leaving care had no standard grades, whereas the equivalent figure for those who are not in care is 4 per cent. We know that 83 per cent of looked-after children had experience of truancy and 71 per cent had experience of exclusion. We know that less than 1 per cent of looked-after children go to university. Finally, we know that 45  per cent of young offenders in custody in 2000 had spent some time in residential care. That is probably the most worrying statistic of all. Although we have known all those things for some time, apparently we do not know whether we are making any progress on them. We have some other figures. For example, the number of social work staff has fallen by 9.5 per cent since the Tories left office. As Colin Campbell pointed out, the number of day care staff is down by 15 per cent.

No.

The minister can explain it to the voters. We know that some child care teams have 50 per cent vacancy rates; that there are vacancy rates of 10 per cent in children's services; and that there are vacancy rates of 12 per cent in residential services. The minister has not just dropped in from Mars on this issue; in fact, she has a long and distinguished history of working on it. She has been an MSP since 1999; she was briefly a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee; she is the deputy leader of the Labour party; and she has been the Minister for Education and Young people since November 2001. Indeed, since 1997, she has been the fifth minister in this and the previous Administration with responsibility for this issue. However, we know that the statistics that I mentioned are true.

I will tell members what I will do. The pressure is on for us to take action, not to have words. The pressure is on for us to recognise the problem, which my colleagues have outlined. For example, we have problems with the existing social work situation and with retaining and recruiting social workers. The pressure is on for us to ensure that we get the statistics and that there is delivery. There is consensus in the chamber for something effective to be done.

No, I will not. Although I think that such consensus exists throughout the chamber, it is not enough to mistake concern for action. Unfortunately, most of the debate has centred on expressing legitimate and deeply felt concerns that I have no doubt exist and on highlighting the feelings of outrage that we  have such a situation in Scotland. However, we have still had no progress on this matter. We need that progress; after all, we have had five debates on this issue and people are depressed by the lack of progress. All we have are words. They might be warm words and they might be words of concern, but they simply fail those who have been failed for generations and are still being failed.

To ask the First Minister what arrangements the police and other agencies are making to ensure that convicted or suspected criminals from Northern Ireland are prevented from continuing illegal and sectarian activity if they choose to take up residence in Scotland. (S1F-2492)

There has clearly been a great deal of reporting on the links between some of those who have come to Scotland—not just in recent weeks, but before now—and organised crime in Scotland, specifically drug dealing. Certainly in Ayrshire, as in many other parts of Scotland, drug dealing is out of control and is causing an absolute disaster in many communities. Will the First Minister assure me, the chamber and Scotland that the police will be extra vigilant on this matter and will ensure that any money that comes into Scotland is not used to finance drug dealing and the death of our young people?

It shows what a varied life the members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee have that this morning we were all engaged in a battle of ideas and wills, and this afternoon we are agreeing—essentially—on a piece of legislation. The Official Report shows that during stage 2 of the bill, Brian Monteith noted that we voted in a variety of different ways. Column 3910 is the only recorded instance of Irene McGugan and I voting on different sides, but as I was supported only by Brian Monteith, I suspect that Irene was right in the circumstances—it is always wise to change one's mind. The bill is essentially the last brick in the wall, and results from the Cullen inquiry into the shootings in Dunblane. It has taken so long to put that brick into the wall because of the difficult issue at the heart of the bill. The difficulty is balancing the undoubted need to protect our children against the obvious need for natural justice for those who are accused. That has been the central difficulty for every member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee during the passage of the bill. It was a difficulty during stage 1 and it became an acute difficulty during stage 2, because we listened carefully to a variety of organisations that  had genuine fears about the balance being struck. In particular, I mention the STUC, which was concerned about some of the bill's implications for employment practices. A variety of others, such as the NHS Confederation, gave evidence to the committee, but we were most struck by the evidence from children's charities and parents. It has taken some time for me to be persuaded that the balance is right—I am not totally persuaded as yet. It is clearly the will of the committee and the chamber that the bill should pass, and do so without opposition. However, we should maintain concern about some of the key aspects of the bill. Ian Jenkins indicated that well in his speech. There is, for example, the issue of tribunals. The bill itself does not establish any independent tribunals; instead, it establishes a procedure for which the minister is responsible. She has said on more than one occasion that she will devolve responsibility for that to another group, which will presumably be made up of senior civil servants. I concur with the Justice 1 Committee, which said in its report on the bill that it would have been better to establish an independent tribunal system. However, that was not the will of the committee when it finally came to a vote. That said, we should bear the issue in mind, because in time it might be necessary to consider it. I am very glad that we have dealt with defamation and with one of the issues in connection with provisional listing, but we have not dealt with other issues in that regard. I return to the point that the bill might create a unique concept that might be known as being provisionally guilty. I accept the reason for doing so and that there is a need to protect our children. I also accept that, in the light of the Cullen inquiry into Dunblane, there might be a need to recognise that some people are guilty although they cannot be totally found out at a crucial time because of the nature of their actions. That said, I am still uncomfortable with some of the bill's detail—I see Ian Jenkins indicating his assent to that remark. We will have to move forward with the bill and examine carefully how it is implemented. Finally, I want to thank not only the individual committee members, the minister and others with whom we have worked, but the clerks to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, who bore the brunt of the work on the 81 amendments—a record total—that I lodged at stage 2. It is appropriate that one of those clerks is sitting in one of the hot seats today to watch what happens at the very end of the process.

I am grateful to the minister for her moving amendment 3. I moved a large number of amendments at stage 2 and the amendment to which she referred is the only one that was successful. I am glad that the minister has come back with a sensible wording. There was considerable concern—and concern remains in many quarters—about the scope of provisional listing and the fact that, in essence, it makes people provisionally guilty, a concept that is unknown in law. Even in the circumstances in which provisional listing might be justified, there needed to be a limit on an extended period. If there were no limit on the extended period, somebody could be in legal limbo indefinitely. As Irene McGugan said, we will  support all the Executive amendments. Amendment 3 will ensure that the committee's views are honoured in the bill.

During stage 2, in response to my moving of an amendment, the minister made a commitment to reconsider the issue. I am grateful that she has returned with a solution. The issue is particularly important in the context of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill. As the bill is based not on legal convictions, but on tribunals and decisions by employing authorities, it is possible that an allegation that is made might result in legal action against the person who makes the allegation. Amendment 9 moves us forward. I hope that amendment 9 also sets a legislative precedent for tackling the difficulties that have arisen in the case in Dumfries of Michael MacKinnon, whose appeal in relation to a complaint that he had made on a teaching matter failed yesterday. I do not want to go into the merits or otherwise of that case, which many people still believe in strongly. It is vital to ensure that young people and their parents who come forward do not become the subjects of legal action on the ground of malicious allegation if the accusations that they have made are believed by the organisation that goes on to take proceedings. That is the key issue. Malicious allegations should always be acted against but, if a body—in the case of Michael MacKinnon, a local authority—accepts certain allegations and, on the basis of those allegations, takes action, the individual who made the allegations should not find themselves in a difficult position. I am grateful that amendment 9 represents a small initial step on that general issue. I hope that the minister will consider returning to the issue. We will return to the issue of providing additional privilege in those very special cases. Although we do not want to protect people who make malicious allegations from the consequences of their actions, if allegations are believed by a body that  goes on to take action, the responsibility for those actions should devolve on that body, not on the individual who made the allegations. Amendment 9 takes us a step forward. In the context of the bill, it does exactly the right thing. I am grateful to the minister for lodging the amendment.

Will Elaine Murray give way?

I congratulate Robin Harper on achieving the debate. I declare an interest as a director of the board of the 2000 & 3 Estaites Ltd theatre company. Robin Harper has expressed well, eloquently and accurately some of the problems facing Scottish theatre and Scottish culture. Most disturbing is the Scottish Executive's response to all those questions. Time and again, the Scottish Executive attempts to make a virtue out of having created a crisis. The problems within Scottish theatre, as within Scottish culture, arise from that long-term failure to support Scottish culture, by the Executive and its predecessor Westminster Governments. The situation with Scottish theatre is particularly stark. I was struck by the Scottish Arts Council briefing, which I find somewhat disingenuous. We can juggle the figures, but any increases that are going into Scottish theatre, no matter how small, are going there only by sacrificing part of the whole. I do not regard the national theatre as an idea that has still to be achieved. I regard it as something to which there is an overwhelming commitment agreed by every party in the chamber, and endorsed by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. The national theatre exists; it simply has to be funded. The Executive made proposals to fund the national theatre. Each year between 2003 and 2006, it would get £1 million. However, the Executive knew that the steering group for the national theatre in Scotland—tremendously well chaired by Donald Smith—had proposed a different set of figures. Those figures are for the minimal requirement. However, the Executive made a financial commitment. It walked away from that commitment time after time. Any increases that are available to Scottish theatre next year—and they are minimal—are coming from money that should be used for the national theatre. It is not an either/or situation. The Executive has also forced good people from the theatre community to make that choice by putting them on either side of the debate. It is a choice between existing with the jobs that they have, and doing less, and welcoming something that would top out the provision of theatre in Scotland, which would deepen and enrich and  which would feed back new work and new activity. That is something that everyone in Scotland wants. It is particularly tragic that after the long debate leading up to publication of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report, we managed to get a consensus among the members of the Scottish theatre community for the first time ever. The national theatre should be funded as part of that complete and complex package. Having got that agreement, the Executive has sought to divide and rule ever since. It has told people that they cannot have money because it would not leave any money for the core work. I notice that Robin Harper is agreeing with me and the minister is disagreeing. I know what the members of the theatre community and the arts community are saying. Robin Harper will confirm it. The Executive has a policy of divide and rule and it is damaging in the short, medium and long term for theatre in Scotland. We need to make a commitment. After the mess that the Executive has made of cultural funding in the past four years, and of the ludicrous national cultural strategy, we need a fresh start. We need to make amends for the mistakes that have been made. We can do that quite easily. We can have an urgent baseline review of the arts in Scotland after 1 May. We can consider our nation's cultural requirements. We can debate the figures that Robin Harper has brought to the chamber and we can set our cultural priorities. Then we can plan properly for the future. A core part of those plans will be the national theatre with national companies being funded directly by the Government. We now need that national debate. After years of cutting, sparing and pinching pennies, after years of confusion from the Executive and its predecessors, the time is right for a fresh start in Scottish culture. Robin Harper's motion is correct, and although it will not be voted on, it should be supported by the chamber. We should no longer listen to the excuses and evasions of the Executive because, frankly, it has failed Scotland in these matters and in so many more.

Will the minister give way?

It is rich for the minister to talk about costing when he would not give me an answer about the costing of his class-size proposals. The proposals are in our policy and have been debated in Parliament and I would be happy to give him chapter and verse. The Executive could set a target in its school estate review, but it refuses to do so.

Can I ask the minister one question?

Why is it that although a class-size reduction programme has been put in place in Tennessee, California, Arkansas and most American states, such a programme is—according to some members—unachievable or impossible, which is nonsense? The Executive shows poverty of ambition.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Karen Gillon said something that is not true.

I want to add to the very impressive case that my colleague is making by giving one piece of information that I learned on Monday. Dumfries and Galloway Council asked whether it could use a not-for-profit scheme, but that was refused by the Scottish Executive. Despite the Executive's announcements on the issues, it is determined to keep putting 31 per cent profit into private companies.

Will the member give way?

The member has received no such commitment, even from his own minister.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that specific point?

Falkirk is not in Glasgow.

The member makes an interesting point, which the minister raised two weeks ago. Do we need pupils to sit exams every year? What is the Executive's official policy towards the schools that have already abandoned the standard grade? Is there a framework for change or is change happening piecemeal? What are the specific proposals to reduce the examination overload?

Mr Monteith anticipates my every move. There is no intention to abolish placing requests, which I support. In those circumstances, I find Mr Monteith's argument bizarre. I find it even more bizarre, although illuminating, that many of the Labour members nodded in agreement with him. Many parents will find it simply disgraceful that members are dancing on the head of a pin to stop smaller class sizes.

The minister is aware of the proposals that I mentioned—my colleagues will talk about specific proposals. Could he tell me the time scale for the reductions that he is talking about, where they will apply and what they will cost?

Two weeks ago in the chamber, the Minister for Education and Young People launched a glossy document called "Educating for Excellence: Choice and Opportunity"—I have a copy of it in my hand. I am sorry that the Minister for Education and Young People is not here today. Most people in Scottish education looked forward to the document. We are talking not about the great debate, but about the response to the great debate. Our motion finds the Executive's response to that debate wanting. We should consider what the great debate brought forward and what those who were encouraged to respond to the debate said. People had to be encouraged to respond, because many were obviously confused by the process. The team that was established to analyse the results of the great debate—Professor Pamela Munn and her colleagues at the University of Edinburgh—identified four key areas that required improved funding and support. The first area was more pupil choice. In the document, there is repetition in respect of further initiatives, further interventions and an overcrowded curriculum, but there is no indication that anything in the document will produce more pupil choice. People wanted smaller class sizes. There is a vague commitment to those in the document, but it is not backed up with any details or concrete proposals. People wanted more professionally qualified teachers, but the document and the minister's statement two weeks ago are heavy on matters such as adult to pupil ratios and light on the key issue of getting additional teachers into classrooms to make a difference. Indeed, the Executive's projections on teacher numbers show that it is intended that numbers will peak in 2007 and fall thereafter. People wanted better buildings. Many reports, including the Accounts Commission's report, say that the way to get better buildings is not through the current private finance initiative scheme. The Accounts Commission report, which was published in January 2003, showed that it was harder to get better-designed buildings under PFI procurement, particularly buildings with wider  corridors, enough social space, swimming pools and good equipment.

No—I have only just started. I will give way shortly. On the key requirements, there is an obvious mismatch between what people want and the Executive's responses. The most dramatic mismatch relates to a key requirement that came through in virtually every request in the great debate—a move away from performance measurement, tick boxes and meaningless statistics and towards actual achievement in education. The gap between achievement in education and what the Executive has proposed is as dramatic as the gap between the Executive's rhetoric over the past four years and the reality of Scottish education.

I am sure that some buildings are better than others and that, if the member believes that Balfron High School is among the best of those buildings, she will carry that belief, no matter what the evidence is to the contrary. However, the reality is that PFI contracts throughout Scotland are not delivering the buildings that are needed, particularly as they do not allow schools to be built in a way that will reduce class sizes. The gap between the Scottish Executive's rhetoric and the reality is absolutely stunning. One should consider what the Executive has promised and what it has delivered. To some extent, I am sorry that the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People is here, as he is not responsible for that gap. He did not write the Labour party's manifesto or other documents in the Labour party's name. However, he must take responsibility for them—that is one of the pitfalls of coalition. The gap between what was promised and what has been achieved is stark. One target in the Labour party's manifesto was for "80% of children to reach the appropriate standard in reading, writing and arithmetic by the time they leave primary school." The reality is that, in reading, 28 per cent of pupils, in writing, 41 per cent of pupils, and in maths, 32 per cent of pupils did not reach the basic minimum level expected of them by primary 7. That is a gap between rhetoric and reality. Another pledge was that there would be  "An e-mail address for every Scottish child and at least 4 modern computers per class." That has not been achieved. There are 2.2 computers per primary class and only 16 per cent of primary school children have an e-mail address; indeed, not even two-thirds of secondary school children have an e-mail address. There is a whole list of other examples. The Labour party's manifesto target was for "13,000 pupils to achieve higher standards at Standard and Higher grades." The gap in attainment at standard grade is now wider than when the Labour party took office. Another target was for "Every child in Scotland to have access to an After School Club." That process has hardly started. Another target was to "Reduce by half the number of 16/17 year olds who do not go on to education, training or a job" between 1999 and 2002. That gap grew. Another target was to reduce school exclusions and truancy by a third. Since 1999, unauthorised absence in primary schools has risen by 30 per cent and in secondary schools by 21 per cent. The statistics for violence in schools are off the chart. Another target was to recruit 5,000 extra classroom assistants by 2002. That is the target that Labour trumpeted most, but it has not been achieved. The target of 1,000 additional teachers by 2002 has not been achieved. Another target was to improve assessment by 2003 so that achievement could be measured effectively; the Executive has given up talking about that, such is the mess that it is in. Another target was the development by 2002 of a comprehensive building strategy. The school estates strategy that was published last week contained none of the promised information. It is empty rhetoric; all that it asks for is information by December 2003. I could go on with that list, but there is a longer list of the gap between rhetoric and reality in education. It is extremely important that that gap is closed, but "Educating for Excellence: Choice and Opportunity" does not close it. Within hours of the document being published, those who know something about education were complaining about it. An example is the proposals on inspection, which were very confused last week. Cathy Jamieson talked about stronger inspection and the document mentions "'proportionate' inspection." The following Friday, after the document was published, an article in The  Times Educational Supplement Scotland started:  "Education directors have told Cathy Jamieson there is no need for extra Scottish Executive powers to deal with schools or authorities deemed to be failing pupils." The directors of education state that there is no need for the extra powers. There is a gap between rhetoric and reality. We must close that gap in the coming Scottish Parliament elections. We must say to people in Scotland, "This is what can be achieved in Scottish education and this is how we are going to achieve it." I will focus on three issues that need to be addressed; they are listed in the SNP motion. The first of those issues is smaller class sizes. There is a desperate need for that throughout each school, but there is a particular need in primaries 1, 2 and 3, where investment in smaller class sizes produces the biggest results. That can be achieved and it will be achieved by an SNP-led Executive, because it has to be done. Sylvia Jackson finds that amusing; she finds anything that will bring forward real change in Scotland amusing. That is the problem with Labour in Scotland; it can only laugh at the reality of real change, because it is unable to achieve it. It is essential to have smaller class sizes in the early years in Scottish primary schools. The second issue is simplification of the five-to-14 curriculum, with a new emphasis on core skills. The minister talked two weeks ago about literacy and numeracy being among our most pressing problems, but the document states that the Executive will carry on with the present failed policies. We know that those policies have failed. We must simplify the core curriculum and introduce an emphasis on core skills. In secondary 1 and 2, where the problem is most pressing, we must not play around with ideas of a teacher here or a teacher there; we must refocus on core skills.

No thank you. It is impossible to have a modern and vibrant economy and a successful Scotland without an emphasis on core skills. We build on those core skills of thinking and learning. If they are not deeply embedded by S1 and S2—and, according to the figures, they are not—the prospects for Scotland and its economy are grim.

That shows about as much understanding of the process of simplifying the five-to-14 curriculum as does Mr Monteith's  amendment, which I find baffling. It is necessary to deconstruct the current curriculum and take it back to the core skills. The curriculum can then be rebuilt on the basis of all the things that we have talked about, which centre on the core skills. Any primary teacher in any classroom in Scotland understands that. It says something about the Conservatives' education spokesperson that he does not understand it. The start of this Parliament was seen as a time when people in Scotland might establish renewed faith in the delivery of public services in Scotland. They have spent four years looking for an opportunity to re-establish that faith. It is a cruel hoax on the people of Scotland, after a so-called great debate, to produce a document that is as empty of initiative and as empty of solutions as "Educating for Excellence". It is an even crueller hoax to come to the chamber and try to justify the document on the basis that it is what people want. In respect of the document, people have asked for bread and they have been given a stone. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry that a quotation from the scriptures makes Karen Gillon laugh.

No. People are being deceived in Scotland. It is time that we had honest politics that shows that it will deliver. The SNP is pledged to deliver real excellence in Scottish education; what it will not do is deceive the people. I move, That the Parliament notes Educating for Excellence: Choice and Opportunity , the Scottish Executive's response to the National Debate on Education and the statement by the Minister for Education and Young People on launching the document; further notes that in places the document is contradicted by the Minister's statement; expresses concern that the document contains little new despite the high quality of many responses to the consultation; is particularly concerned that, despite the Minister's admission in her statement that matters of literacy and numeracy "are among our most pressing problems" and that "we will not tolerate underperformance in literacy and numeracy", the document contains no clear and firm commitment to actions that will change the present situation in which the number of pupils failing to meet the required standards of literacy and numeracy by S2 is unacceptably high, and therefore supports the Scottish National Party's radical programme to reduce class sizes in the first three years of primary education to 18 or below and to re-focus teaching effort on core skills throughout the primary school and into the early secondary years.

I want to raise a point with the minister that I raised in my intervention on Robin Harper. It is very difficult for private members to introduce bills. Despite the help of the non-Executive bills unit, it is a long tortuous process. When members' bills come to the chamber, ministers tend to say that the bills are badly drafted or that they are not going to achieve their targets. Would it not have been possible for the Executive to have supported Robin Harper in the development of the bill so that the bill could have reflected the work not only of the leader of the Scottish Green Party but of the Executive and the whole chamber? Why was a publication sprung on us this week? Was it to take the wind out of Robin Harper's sails?

All of us have seen the courteous letters that were exchanged between Robin Harper and the Minister for Environment and Rural Development. I have difficulty in understanding why the Executive cannot work with and help the member to amend and develop his bill. In that way, the bill could be passed and could achieve the desired results. Robin Harper and the Executive seem to have the same aims. Even at this stage, is he prepared to adopt that co-operative approach? If so, the document that the Executive released this week could enhance what he is trying to do.

I am interested in this "unbalanced view" of PR and of STVPR in particular. Of the 316 written responses to the Scottish Executive's own consultation, 252, or 80 per cent, were in support of STVPR, while a further 25, or 8 per cent, were still in favour of PR. Only 39 supported the status quo. Is not it sufficient that, according to the Scottish Executive's own consultation, there is overwhelming support for STVPR, or do we have to consult for ever?

What about North Ayrshire?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I begin by indicating the SNP's unanimous and overwhelming support for the bill. As Margaret Ewing rightly pointed out, fair votes in Scottish local government is one of the SNP's long-standing principles. We will stick by our principles in the matter and go with the 76 per cent of Labour voters, the 81 per cent of Conservative voters, the 88 per cent of Liberal Democrat voters and the 78 per cent of SNP voters who in the latest poll indicated that they want PR in local government. We are honest with the people who vote in Scotland; alas, all the other parties appear not to be so. The minister's speech summed up well the reality of the situation. It would have been convincing had it not lacked one thing: the timeline for this issue and this debate. Let us remind ourselves of that timeline.

No, not yet. I know that Mr Brown is a keen enthusiast for PR and I hope that he will vote for the bill. The McIntosh report was commissioned almost exactly five years ago. The commission reported in June 1999. Indeed, the very first full debate in this chamber after the Parliament took its powers was on the report. At that stage, the Kerley committee was set up. The McIntosh report concluded that it was time for an immediate and urgent study, with a view to legislation that should take effect in time to govern the next council elections. At that time, the next council elections  were in 2002, not 2003. As a result, at the start of the Parliament, it was clear that the timetable for progress on PR was seen as something that should affect those elections. No matter what Iain Smith says, the reality is that the Liberals have failed to achieve the policy within the time scale that they themselves promised at the start of the Parliament. Such a failure is significant, because the matter is not just about politics; as the minister rightly said, it is about renewing local democracy. At the very heart of the issue is the relationship between the Parliament and local authorities. In that regard, I quote no less a source than Jim Wallace. In the House of Commons in June 1998, Mr Wallace very acutely said: "Without proportional representation for local government, there is a serious danger that a Scottish Parliament elected by proportional representation will not treat local government, if it is still elected under a distorting first-past-the-post system, with the respect that it should receive."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 16 June 1998; Vol 314, c 211.] In those circumstances, the root of the mismatch between Scottish local government and the Parliament lies in the Parliament's failure to help local government to reform. That is why the issue is urgent, and why it has to be resolved quickly instead of within the Liberal Democrats' bizarre time scales.

I know that the Liberal Democrat party is a party no longer of principle, but of pragmatism, but perhaps it should remember the Westminster maxim that the vote follows the voice. There are times when, if people believe in something strongly enough, they will vote for it. If, for as long as the Liberal Democrat party has existed, one of its abiding principles has been that PR is essential, I cannot understand how its members can fail to vote for it. If they do so, they are abandoning one of their key principles. In the brief amount of time that I have left, I want to point out why the issue is absolutely vital in Scotland. I take as an example the situation in North Ayrshire, which is an area that I know well. I know that I have told this story before, but it is always worth repeating.

Mr Wilson does not normally say that, but I will tell it again. In North Ayrshire, the Labour party gets 47 per cent of the vote and 83 per cent of the seats. Such an enormous mismatch leads to internecine warfare in the Labour group, local people being left unrepresented, communities crumbling, housing deteriorating, vandalism rising and jobs disappearing. Meanwhile, the local Labour group argues about important matters such as who should go to which reception and—as Mrs Ullrich knows—who gets a place next to Councillor Jack Carson at the Delta bar. That is the level of debate that finds its way into the local newspapers, because the Labour party in North Ayrshire does not care about the voters. As long as that continues to be the case, the people will suffer. The people who indicated to Fairshare that they would support PR are suffering. Under those circumstances, the Proportional Representation (Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Bill is essential. Labour has dragged its feet because the backwoodsmen are now in charge, and they hate democracy. The Liberals have walked away from principle. The opportunity exists today to do something different: to support PR in principle; to take the issue forward; and to be honest, not just to other members of the Parliament, and not just about the Labour councils that are misusing power, but to all the people I mentioned earlier—the 76 per cent of Labour voters, the 81 per cent of Conservative voters, the 88 per cent of Lib Dem voters and the 78 per cent of SNP voters. The vast majority of Scotland wants the bill. Not to vote for it through fear that people on another party's benches do not want it is to be dishonest to the Scottish voters, and members must not be that.

On 10 September the Education, Culture and Sport Committee considered the Executive's proposals on heritage in the bill. The three proposals were the abolition of the Historic Buildings Council for Scotland, the abolition of the Ancient Monuments Board for Scotland and the replacement of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland with the national survey. It is significant and astonishing that not one of those proposals has survived in the form in which it was put to the committee. That should be regarded partly as a tribute to all those who opposed the proposals, but it should also be regarded as a condemnation of the Executive. The Executive knew that the vast body of opinion in Scotland opposed the Executive's proposals—it is interesting that Mr Kerr is giggling at that, because he knew it, as did Elaine Murray and all the other ministers. Not just 51 per cent, but 91 per cent of the people who responded to the consultation opposed the proposals, yet the decision was made to proceed with them as they were. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee objected to the proposals and I pay tribute to all its members. As a result of the committee's intervention, the Executive decided to have a successor body to the two that were being abolished and the historic advisory committee is being set out today. However, the Executive carried on with the proposal to replace the RCAHMS, because it appeared non-controversial, only to discover at the 11 th hour—and it is fortunate for the Scottish taxpayer that it did discover this—that to do so would have cost an enormous amount of money. Something about the policy-making process in the Executive requires radical review. Perhaps it is simply that the Executive is utterly careless of the heritage of Scotland. It might well be that the Executive had plucked from the shelf a set of proposals about a group of bodies that it thought people cared nothing about, only to discover that people did care and that the proposals were so daft that they could not proceed. One good thing will come out of this. There is an agreement to review the role and functions of Historic Scotland. Historic Scotland is in the middle of this mess: it considered the responses and it appears to have given the bad advice. In the circumstances—and many of us know this from  our day-to-day dealings with the senior management of Historic Scotland—the body's time for change is rapidly approaching and indeed it may have passed. Enormous change is required. The biggest change would be to remove Historic Scotland's agency status, make it a non-departmental public body, hive off the royal palaces, as has been done south of the border, and ensure that another body can give independent advice on heritage. That is partially achieved in the bill with the establishment of the advisory service. The withdrawal of the sections proposed in this group of amendments will not be opposed, but it is important to note that, to use the Gaelic word, the Executive has made a complete bùrach of considering our natural heritage.

The member asked who applied for Bòrd Gàidhlig na h-Alba. I can tell him.

The minister is the evidence.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to address the issue of violence in schools. (S1O-6302)

Given that the number of reported incidents has risen from 783 in 1999 to 5,400 this year, does the minister accept that the actions that the Executive has taken appear to have made the situation considerably worse? Can she point to the part of the document that she published yesterday with great fanfare that contains anything to make the situation better?

The Deputy First Minister said that he was involved in influencing the "shape of any legislation". John Prescott said that he would discuss through the usual channels, including the devolved Administrations, the best way to introduce the legislation. The Deputy First Minister has refused to rule out the use of section 28(7) of the Scotland Act 1998, so there can be only one conclusion, which is that legislation is planned. Will the Deputy First Minister come clean with the Parliament and tell us what legislation and when?  It might also be useful for a Liberal minister to remember that he is a Liberal minister and that the task of a Liberal minister is to make things better rather than, as we and the firefighters have seen today, to take a stand that can only make things worse.

The only way the Deputy First Minister will make things better is by changing his statement.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During the course of his statement, the Deputy First Minister raised the issue of the dissolution of Parliament. John Swinney subsequently referred to that matter, and mentioned the powers that are available to Westminster under section 28(7) of the Scotland  Act 1998. I know that you cannot rule on this matter at the moment, but it is important that members are aware of the exact situation after Parliament's dissolution. Because the Sewel procedure is a convention only when there is an Executive, could legislation be passed by Westminster without reference to the Scottish Parliament, which will not, after all, exist during dissolution? I wonder whether, in such circumstances, what we have discussed today, and what will no doubt be discussed in the future, will be affected. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry that members are not interested in the importance—

I know that you are interested, Presiding Officer. What is going on is a discourtesy to you. We need a ruling on exactly what is possible; perhaps everything is possible in the circumstances. Westminster legislation might overrule anything that we do in that period, which might last not just five weeks, but six weeks or possibly more if we include the formation of a Government. We should have some detailed information on that question.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Are you saying that you will give a subsequent ruling?

But will you consider the matter?

Good.

I thank the minister for providing a copy of the statement and document. I know that the minister is one of the best known vegans in Scotland, but I am tempted to open the questioning by asking, "Where's the beef?" The document is vague and insubstantial. The minister's statement was vaguer and more insubstantial. It mixed the rhetoric of the past with opaque generalisations about the future. More cruelly, it is riddled with inconsistencies. In her statement, the minister said of literacy: "The current situation is simply not good enough." That is a statement with which everyone would agree. However, the document, which is meant to be the guidelines for education in Scotland, simply says that the Executive will "Continue to implement current strategies for literacy and numeracy". The current strategies have failed. The minister admits that, but the document does nothing about  it. Such inconsistencies run throughout the document, on inspection and on other issues. The most damaging thing in the Executive's response to the national debate is the complete refusal to accept the evidence from parents, all academics and all experiments world-wide that a reduction in class sizes in primary 1, 2 and 3 is the most significant investment. The refusal to acknowledge that, no matter how ideological the reason, is entirely wrong. The minister said that she "will not tolerate underperformance". In the past four years her Administration has consistently underperformed on education. She goes on to state: "schools which do not deliver ... will not be allowed to continue to fail their pupils". Is it not about time that the minister and the Administration who have failed Scotland's pupils are not allowed to continue? Fortunately, the opportunity to stop them comes on 1 May.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to reverse the overall increase in the percentage of school leavers from publicly funded schools who, since 1998-99, have not entered training, employment or full-time higher or further education. (S1O-6215)

The minister is not responsible for education so he might not be aware that that was a key social justice and education target in his party's previous manifesto. Given that the figure has now risen and is worse than when the Tories left power, what new initiatives are being taken to close the opportunity gap?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There is no doubt that you are 100 per cent correct about that, but there is a possibility of the Presiding Officers' accepting a manuscript amendment to the Liberal Democrats' amendment, which would still allow it to be taken. I think that a manuscript amendment of only a single word would be required to allow the amendment to be taken. Surely, on the point that Robert Brown has raised, and given the gravity of the situation, it would be within the competence of the Presiding Officer to accept that very small manuscript amendment.

Although I respect the member's views, I want to refer to the actual wording of the motion, as it has been misunderstood by a number of members. The SNP is not saying that war is inevitable; it is saying that the UK Government is "currently pursuing an inevitable path to war." It is important to make that distinction.

The debate is an important occasion for the Parliament because it provides an opportunity for us to speak for Scotland in different voices, giving different points of view. The debate provides us with an opportunity to speak for different strands of opinion in Scotland on a deeply serious matter. Some members have risen well to that challenge. I compliment Tavish Scott, who did not once question the Parliament's right to debate the matter. Even Phil Gallie raised that point only in passing. However, it was deeply depressing to listen to Tom McCabe's speech. It seems that the only valid argument that he can put is that we should not be talking about the issues. That is the weakest possible argument. Labour has a valid argument, which almost emerged in John Home Robertson's speech, although I profoundly disagree with it. As Karen Gillon said in her remarkable intervention during Tavish Scott's speech, Labour's argument is anti-democratic, but there is an argument to be put. Democracy consists of tolerance, dialogue and leadership. There has been scant tolerance from  Labour members for any other point of view. They have refused to listen and take part in dialogue. I was particularly shocked by the attacks of two Labour members on Alex Salmond's views on Kosovo. Those attacks were accompanied by grins, pointing and jeering from Labour members. Whatever members think of Alex Salmond's contribution on that issue, he spoke strongly and passionately about his principles on war and the problems of war. I respect people who have such views, even though I do not always agree with them, which is why I respect Tommy Sheridan's powerful comments.

I do not accept that in any sense. [ Interruption. ] Labour members are at it again. Most of the evidence on Kosovo that has emerged has indicated that the success of NATO's strategy is highly questionable. I respect Alex Salmond's right to make such comments and I will not condemn him. The key issue in the debate is simple, although it sometimes seems confused because of the complexities of United Nations resolutions and other matters. The simple issue is whether the solution to world problems at the start of the 21 st century is for the strongest to act without reference to the weakest. Is it right simply to send a gunboat, or should we listen to what the rest of the world says? The real problem is the old-fashioned concept of acting according to what one believes without reference to others. Tavish Scott introduced an important additional element when he talked about the reliance of modern states not only on saying, "We know best," but on pre-emption, which means saying, "We know best, no matter what the evidence is, and therefore we will act." The issue is whether in the 21 st century we have advanced sufficiently to recognise that, as citizens of the world, which could be destroyed by the actions of a single state, we must be protected from the actions of such single states by collective decision making. We must be protected from individual action by collective agreement. If any nation departs from that position, the whole world will be put in danger. The debate is about the contrast between the collective security of the UN and individual actions that might lead to dangerous anarchy; it is about the contrast between having the rule of law and having no rule of law. Choosing to have no rule of law will put the whole world in danger.

There has been no shortage of concern about the astonishing statistics that are contained in the report, although to people such as my colleague Irene McGugan, who has spent a great deal of her working life confronting such statistics, they are not astonishing. Of course, they are not just statistics; they involve individuals. One of the most remarkable features of the report is the case studies that are highlighted on page after page. There is no shortage of genuine concern, but concern is not enough. We need rigorous analysis  of why we are in such a situation and we need proposals to get out of it. The analysis divides into two parts. Is there something uniquely sick about Scottish society that we must change if the situation is to change or is there a fault in the process by which we deal with the situation? Of course, one of the purposes of the review was essentially to ask that question and to examine the process that existed. The review also arose out of a specific failure of process. Alasdair Morgan raised an important point about the image of social work and the attraction of social work as a profession. Indeed, some of the problems arise from that. Other problems arise from a wider difficulty in society and are related to the gap between the image of ourselves as a mature, responsible and wealthy society and the reality. An astonishing statistic in the report is that there are up to 20,000 children in Scotland who are living with a drug-abusing parent. That is an enormous number, which equates to 20 secondary schools full of young people who are living with a drug-abusing parent. There are many such statistics in the report. So, there are illnesses in society that need to be dealt with, perhaps in a way that transcends or overcomes politics. I address the Conservative amendment with the greatest respect for the Tories. I have a great fondness for Lyndsay McIntosh, in particular.

I am glad to hear it. Nonetheless, I have to say that the lack of analysis from the Tories is depressing. It is not enough simply to have a knee-jerk reaction and to call for more police and courts. We must go much further than that in our analysis of what we need to do to change society. Although I do not question the minister's commitment, I find her analysis defective as well. If we are to examine why the current situation exists and—more important—find ways in which to change it, we must look at the policy that successive Governments have followed and ask where that has gone wrong. The Scottish Executive has held office since 1 May 1999 and the Labour Government has been in office since 1 May 1997. We are talking about six years. We should analyse closely the lack of policy that has been followed and the lack of action that has been taken in crucial areas. For example, the crisis in recruitment in child social work did not arise this week or last week or last year; it has been a developing crisis over five years. In those circumstances, there should have been action, which there has not been. After analysing the policy failures, we must come up with some solutions—and there are solutions that we need to apply. As Irene  McGugan said, SNP members have been supportive—but supportive in a more urgent sense than the Executive has understood—of many of the things that need to be done. However, we are not quite so supportive of what appears to be a developing policy of ensuring that the resources that are applied go to the voluntary sector and do not stick to the central core service. That is a major problem.

I realise that, Presiding Officer. That was a revealing intervention by the minister. If there are additional resources, they should go both to core services and to the voluntary sector. However, the second part of her intervention indicated—as I had suggested—a preference for the voluntary sector. It is the weakness in the core service that is causing many of the problems. We need investment in the core service and must change the perception of the core service to overcome the difficulties. The SNP will continue to argue for a McCrone-style review of social work and a prioritisation of the core services. We are by no means against working with the voluntary sector. However, the minister's preference arises out of an analysis that is not rigorous enough in determining what has gone wrong.

rose—

rose—

It is clear that Iain Smith believes in the right of everyone to be consulted except the Scottish Parliament and the people who are involved in the issue. His was the most disgraceful speech today, apart from the minister's. I do not want to use unparliamentary language, but the minister's response to Alasdair Morgan was not economical with the truth; it was contrary to the truth. Because he is a former Deputy Minister for Children and Education, he knows that there is a procedure through which school closures must in certain circumstances be referred outwith a local authority area. That was the answer he should have given to Alasdair Morgan, but he gave an answer that did not mention that, which was wrong of him.  It was equally wrong of the minister to lodge amendment 59 in the way that he did. There are two issues—timing and process. I concur with what Tommy Sheridan and John McAllion said. The issue might well require to be attended to, but the moment to attend to it is not in the middle of sensitive negotiations. To do so—I concur with my friend Tricia Marwick—is a deliberately provocative action. No doubt the Scottish Executive was told to take such action, so it has taken it, but it is extremely foolish to take such action at this time and it is more foolish to take that action by breaking the established procedures of the Parliament. That was doubly wrong and it will be doubly felt in Scotland by the FBU. In the normal legislative process of the Parliament, the FBU expects, and has the right, to be consulted on such a change. As convener of the Public Petitions Committee, Mr McAllion was already receiving approaches from the FBU for the Parliament to consider the matter. Mr Peacock can still take the step of referring amendment 59 back to the Local Government Committee and allowing those who are directly involved to be consulted, as the Parliament must do, according to its procedures. All that the minister has to do at the end of the debate is agree that amendment 59 and the amendments that are consequential on it should go back to the Local Government Committee for consultation. We would then be able to hear from the FBU, from the fire officers, from local authorities and from those who are deeply concerned about their safety. We can hear from people like Iain Smith, who want power to be closer to the people. We can hear from those people properly by scrutinising the amendments, but the minister seeks to prevent that scrutiny. There has been a failure in respect of timing and there has been a failure of process.  To add insult to injury, the argument that was presented by the minister and parroted by Sylvia Jackson is, in a sense, that if someone does not notice sleight of hand, they deserve all that comes to them. That is an appalling way to treat the Parliament and it suggests that the job of ministers is to indulge in trickery so that the elected members of the Parliament do not notice what is going on. In such circumstances, ministers could get away with anything. Thank goodness there is an election on 1 May because—[ Interruption. ] I see that Jamie Stone is waving—he is the epitome of a turkey voting for an early Christmas. The reality of the situation is that a Government that believes that it can not only survive but flourish as a result of trickery is a Government whose time has run out.

On a related point of order, Presiding Officer. There is a procedure in the standing orders to cover what Tricia Marwick and Tommy Sheridan have rightly drawn to our attention—an unprecedented, major amendment being lodged at stage 3, which has not been considered by a committee. Rule 9.8.6 of the standing orders allows the member who is in charge of a bill to refer back a proportion of the bill, after the stage 3 debate in the chamber, for further committee consideration. In trying to find a way to make that manageable, I seek your permission to move the following motion without notice: "That the parliament calls upon the Member in Charge of the Local Government in Scotland Bill to propose that any sections relating to section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 which may be agreed at Stage 3 be referred back to the Local Government Committee for further Stage 2 consideration as permitted under Rule 9.8.6."

Thank you, Presiding Officer. You rightly draw attention to the founding principles of the Parliament, which are, of course, contained in the report of the consultative steering group, whose work was chaired by Henry McLeish. Section 3.5 of that report lays out the legislative process for the Parliament. As you said, Presiding Officer, there are three stages to that process: the initial consideration of the general  principles of a bill; the line-by-line consideration of the bill; and the final consideration of the bill, which can include line-by-line scrutiny, but which the CSG suggested should not include significant new material. Indeed, section 3.5, paragraph 15, of the report made a recommendation for stage 3: "Further amendments should be allowed at this stage. Standing Orders should specify tight criteria for what sort of amendments might be moved." The Procedures Committee might like to consider whether the time has come to act upon that recommendation. Such recommendations arose not out of thin air, but from a general concern that the process of legislation as practised at Westminster was alienating the public and giving legislation a bad name. The opportunity for committees to consider at length and in detail all the issues surrounding a bill was an important principle for the Scottish Parliament. To bring to the chamber at stage 3 a major proposal that was not considered by the Local Government Committee and on which no opportunity was given to any interested parties, whether that be the Fire Brigades Union or anybody else, to put their point of view is fundamentally wrong and counter to the founding principles as they operate in the Parliament. Today in The Herald newspaper there is a letter from Patricia Ferguson and Euan Robson, who know a great deal about the procedure of the Parliament. They say in their letter: "Each bill before the Parliament is, and will be, carefully scrutinised as part of the standard process." Unfortunately, within hours of that letter being written, a major legislative issue was proposed that could not, by definition, be carefully scrutinised as part of the legislative process. Amendment 59 proposes a major legislative change. I take no position on it in terms of the debate, although I know that my party is opposed to it. That major legislative change will go through at a crucial time during sensitive negotiations with the Fire Brigades Union with only 15 minutes of debate, as John McAllion indicated, and less than 48 hours after it was published in the business bulletin. That is not the way in which it was intended that this Parliament would legislate. Fortuitously, the standing orders of the Scottish Parliament contain a means by which this situation can be avoided, even at this late stage. Rule 9.8.6, which we referred to earlier, allows the minister in charge of the bill to take the issue away and to have it considered by a parliamentary committee, in this case, the Local Government Committee. That means that the proposal could be passed at a later stage—although, rightly, it will be opposed—but only after it has been subjected to the sort of scrutiny that was envisaged by the  CSG. That process is fundamental to the legislative process in this Parliament and should be endorsed by every member of this chamber—as it has been by you, Presiding Officer—and by the guardians of the business of this chamber, including the Minister for Parliamentary Business and her deputy, whose letter to The Herald I mentioned earlier. We have an opportunity to vote not on an issue of party politics but on an issue concerning the way in which political debate should take place in Scotland's democratic chamber. It should take place by careful consideration, democratic participation and consent. It was never intended that it would take place by diktat and fiat from an Executive that could steamroller through major legislative changes two days after publication with only 15 minutes of debate and no scrutiny whatever. That would be wrong and I urge the chamber to support the motion without notice and ensure that, while this debate can go ahead today, the minister has an opportunity to think again and give the legislative processes of the Parliament the chance to operate as they were intended to. I move, "That the parliament calls upon the Member in Charge of the Local Government in Scotland Bill to propose that any sections relating to section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 which may be agreed at Stage 3 be referred back to the Local Government Committee for further Stage 2 consideration as permitted under Rule 9.8.6."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During 20 minutes of First Minister's question time, the First Minister referred three times, including once at length, to quotations from SNP members. I believe that the standing orders say that questions and answers must relate to matters for which the First Minister is responsible. As he is not responsible for what SNP members have said, will the Presiding Officers advise the First Minister to remain in order during First Minister's question time and answer questions?

To ask the Scottish Executive what evidence it has on the effect of Roman Catholic schools on sectarian behaviour by adults. (S1O-6130)

May I then suggest to the minister that, in those circumstances, she should tell the First Minister, who is sitting next to her, that he would be wise not to seek a cheap headline in the Sunday newspapers by suggesting such a link? He would also be wise to ensure that the debate on the future of education in Scotland is not conducted in those terms.

Will Roseanna Cunningham confirm the truth of Sheriff Farrell's reported view? He directly blamed the lack of resources from the Executive for failures in the court system, which led to what happened last week. That answers the minister's point.

I accept that the Executive is undertaking a range of actions, as I acknowledged in my speech. However, according to the local authorities that Irene McGugan quoted, the situation is getting worse. That is the key issue. If all those mechanisms are in place and the work is being done, why are things getting worse?

But things are getting worse.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the developments in Tory thinking that the member has suggested. Mr McGrigor's heroine, Margaret Thatcher, said in this very assembly hall that there was no such thing as society. I welcome Mr McGrigor's recognition that there is such a thing and I hope that his thinking will continue to progress at least into the 20 th century and possibly into the 21 st .

Many of us are familiar with  the difficulties that are caused in schools by disruptive children and others. I hope that the member is not suggesting that, in some sense, expending resources on ensuring the future of those children is a waste of money that should be spent on other young people. If the member went down that road, she would be going back to a time when children were put up chimneys.

I say at the outset that nobody in this debate is asserting that nothing has been done. Of course things are being done, but the tremendously  authoritative and knowledgeable speech by my colleague Irene McGugan described the situation accurately. There has been serial failure on the key indicators, the areas that matter and how we measure what has been done. No matter what the minister says, things are not getting better. Indeed, the survey of social work departments that Irene McGugan and her colleagues undertook proves that. Let us focus on the reality of the situation. I am quite certain that in the best of all possible worlds, Mr Jenkins, the minister and many of their colleagues would want to wish things better. However, it is not enough to do that, nor is it enough simply to make announcements about making another bit of money available here or there. Those who are elected to govern and who are appointed with responsibility for certain areas must achieve what they set out to achieve, or they should not be in their posts. Since 1997, the Labour Government has had responsibility for taking on this task. Indeed, it even welcomed that responsibility; it saw it as one of the big aims that it had to achieve. However, the stark reality is that the Government has failed. As a result, we should be debating the ways in which we can succeed. Again and again, the minister used the word "challenging" in her speech. She said that she was setting a particular target, but it was challenging. Of course it is challenging, but it has to be achieved or we need to know why it has not been achieved. We do not want people simply to say, "Well, we did our best; we'll go on doing our best; and we all believe the same things anyway." Scotland's children deserve achievement in this area. Frankly, if the minister cannot achieve in this area, she should move out of her post and let someone else do it.

I am not giving way to Mr Fitzpatrick. Some hard things need to be said about the reality of the situation. The minister's speech contained promises, commitments and assertions, and references to reports and action plans. What we did not get—and must get at the very least—is an acknowledgement that things have not happened and targets have not been met. Instead, the reality lies in Irene McGugan's comments. As a result, whether to do or go needs to be determined. What lies at the heart of the difficulty of realising this important aim is the Executive's obsession with getting headlines and not actually telling us the reality of the situation. I will refer to one set of statistics—although almost any set of Government statistics would do—that indicates the problem with speaking the truth about what is happening.  Last week, the Executive issued statistics on truancy in schools with a press release entitled, "Minister welcomes improvement in attendance". The figures are important in this debate because, as the minister knows, issues such as failure to attend school and unauthorised absence are often symptomatic of considerable problems. Indeed, they are at the heart of some of the problems that are faced by the children we are talking about. The Executive press release goes on to state that things are getting better, but things are not getting better. If we break down the figures and analyse them without spinning them or changing the base year for measuring purposes, it becomes clear that between 1998-99—the base year set by the Executive—and 2001-02, the average unauthorised absence in primary schools has risen from 0.91 to 1.22 half-days per pupil, which is a 34 per cent increase. In secondary schools, the increase is 24 per cent. How can the minister welcome an "improvement in attendance" when there has been no such improvement?

The reality is that the improvement has not been good enough because there has been no improvement. The minister cannot get round the facts. The situation has got worse. Cathy Jamieson said in her speech that when we face a problem, it is better to face up to it—I thought the remark was a good one. It is better to say, "This is getting worse. We must do something about it," than to issue releases that state, "Minister welcomes improvement in attendance", when there has not been an improvement. The reality of the situation that faces the chamber and the Executive is that, in the key areas in which the Executive wanted to attain things—pupil attainment, eradicating poverty, youth justice and truancy—it has failed.

Mr McNulty is sitting in the front row as a minister for one of the first times. We look forward keenly to his summing up of the  debate. However, he has already fallen into the trap, because he is shouting out, "Rubbish." The figures prove what the situation is. I want to see honest Government in Scotland. I want to see Government that lives up to its responsibilities and which, when it has failed, accepts that it has failed and comes forward with ideas to overcome that failure. What none of us should tolerate in Scotland is dishonesty, because the victims of that are the children that Irene McGugan talked about.

I am interested in the member's remark that he agrees with the motion and the amendment. With a sweep of his hand, he has indicated that there is unity on the matter. Which will the member support? Irene McGugan has indicated very strongly that the Executive amendment is simply a rewording of what I think is a better statement of the situation. Will the member support the motion or the Executive's amendment?

So the member does not agree with them both.

I do not know in which parallel universe the member is living. Although we hope and expect to be in government, we are not in alliance at the moment. The Labour party and the Liberal Democrats are in alliance. Although I like the idea of being in government, I am not responsible. Cathy Jamieson is responsible.

Will the member give way?

I am sorry that Bill Aitken did not accept my intervention earlier because I frankly do not understand that last point, which was nonsensical. I am happy to refer—[ Interruption. ] There appear to be noises off. One would want them to remain off, so to speak, but I will go no further down that line of thinking. I would be happy to send to Mr Aitken voluminous copies of speeches that I have made even in this chamber on that matter. Those speeches give chapter and verse. I see that Mr Brown is indicating that he does not want them, but I know that Mr Aitken, being of a more inquiring mind, is sure to read them.

I take the minister back to the issue of child poverty. Given what she has said, the minister presumably rebuts entirely the report of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation "Monitoring poverty and social exclusion in Scotland", which concludes that, over the seven years from 1994 to 2000-01, "the overall sense is one of little change". She is therefore setting herself against the Joseph Rowntree Foundation on that matter. And before the minister starts on about absolute and relative poverty, she should perhaps also note the point made by the Scottish poverty information unit: "Debates about poverty should not obscure the fact that the distinctions between 'absolute' and 'relative' poverty are largely irrelevant".

I welcome the conversion of the minister and his party to plurality. Perhaps he will reflect on how welcome that conversion will be  to The Herald newspaper, which, as Murray Ritchie's book reveals, was threatened by the Labour party during the 1999 election. The Labour party withheld advertising to try to make the paper change its editorial position. The fact that things have changed is wonderful and I hope that the Labour party will continue to hold such views during the forthcoming election campaign.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is clear that Mr Monteith intended to take Dr Ewing and that she had started to speak.

That is not what Karen Gillon asked.

I pay tribute to Karen Gillon for securing the debate and for being an important voice in the discussions about the issue since the initial threat was revealed some months ago. At the outset, I should declare an interest as a columnist for The Herald . When media ownership in Scotland is considered, it is important to look not just at the specifics of one case but at the more general question of how ownership of the media should be approached in any country. Three criteria had to apply to the SMG situation; those three criteria should apply to all such situations. First, there should be more rather than fewer media owners in Scotland. Secondly, all newspapers are entitled to their editorial independence. That independence should be sacred—it should not be possible for passing owners to interfere with it. Thirdly, there is a great need for investment in newspapers in Scotland, rather than for a reduction in the number of jobs and in the scope of newspapers. There has been an increasing tendency to take money out of newspapers in Scotland to increase profitability, rather than to invest in them to increase their long-term profitability. It is some relief that the first criterion has been met—the number of owners after 10 March next year is likely to be no fewer than the number before the process started. However, we must put a slight caveat on that. Any large company—including that of the Barclay brothers—will still be able to make a hostile bid for the entire company and seek the Independent Television Commission's approval to sell the television interests. I hope that that will not happen, but the possibility remains. I understand that, if that  happened, the bid would be referred not only to the ITC, but to a body under competition legislation. The threat still exists, but it grows smaller with every day that passes. We must ensure that the other two criteria—editorial independence and investment in the newspapers—are also met. I hope that the chamber will send a message to Gannett as it considers its options for Scotland. The first message is a welcome to Scotland for a company that has not invested here before and that has a large international media empire worth several billion dollars. The second message should be that we expect the company to value our national press as we value it, which means investing in the Herald group— The Herald , the Sunday Herald , the Evening Times and the magazines—and ensuring that the quality of the papers is maintained and that editorial independence is preserved. We want to take a wider view than has been taken in recent weeks. I agree with Karen Gillon that it is right that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Parliament have spoken largely with one voice. The past few weeks have taught the Scottish Parliament a valuable lesson. We can speak with one voice on such issues, but we should be able to act with one voice and influence what is taking place with the Parliament's powers, instead of being bystanders. I know that I shall lose some support from members of other parties on that issue, but that is a profoundly important lesson to learn, because other battles are coming. I will give one example. Members might have seen that Trinity Mirror appointed a new chief executive today. As part of her strategy, she might consider whether the company's ownership of the Daily Record has a long-term future. That ties in with the circulation figures that were published in this week's media section of The Guardian , which showed a year-on-year circulation fall for the Daily Record . If the Daily Record were under threat from an existing tabloid in Scotland or an existing media owner—some of the arguments that applied in relation to the Barclay brothers might also apply here—the Parliament should be able to act on that, rather than sitting as a bystander and trying to influence others. I am certain that, if the circumstances that I described arose, the voices in the chamber would be unified, which would have an influence, but we could not make a difference. We must make that difference legislatively, as is happening at Westminster with the Communications Bill. The threats to the Scottish media—print and broadcast—are great. An American company such as Gannett could come into Scotland and buy television companies, but it would be impossible  for a Scottish company, such as a healthy SMG, to buy into television in America. That is wrong. We must protect the cultural market in Scotland as much as the media market, because they are inextricably linked. I am glad that Karen Gillon lodged the motion, which the SNP supports whole-heartedly. We want to ensure that the Scottish media flourish. For the long term, we must learn the important lessons for the Parliament. The Parliament has still to complete the powers that it needs in relation to the media, to culture and to most other matters.

To ask the First Minister when the appointment of a chairperson for the board of the national theatre will be announced. (S1F-2315)

One would not have to be Mystic Mike to be disappointed with that answer. The Executive's delay on the matter has landed it with two problems rather than one: under-resourcing in Scottish theatre leading to a drain of talent from Scotland, and endless delays in appointing a director for the national theatre. Would not the First Minister do better by funding Scottish theatre and the national theatre and by taking what the chairman of the Scottish Arts Council has suggested as a new baseline  approach to Scottish arts funding so that we can move the arts forward rather than driving them backwards as his Administration has done?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In your response to Duncan McNeil's point of order, you may have inadvertently indicated that there was some bar against talking about questions before they were lodged, and that you would be  prejudiced against questions that were talked about before they were lodged. Perhaps you could reflect upon that when you see the Official Report . If I am wrong about that, of course I shall apologise.

The analysis is interesting. However, I simply point out that, if we correlate the league tables that were published two days ago—which have not yet been distributed to members—with the percentage of school children who are recorded as entitled to free meals, we see that the correlation at the top and bottom of the table is almost exact. The answer is surely therefore to do something about poverty in Scotland. In what regard will the Tories help with poverty in Scotland, as they normally make it worse?

There are four members on the Conservative front bench. What about Bill Aitken?

Pardon?

rose  —

I welcome the opportunity to have this debate. Apparently, the motion represents—so journalists have been briefed—Mr Monteith's big ideas for Scottish education. I find it quite interesting that Mr Monteith's big ideas can be contained in seven lines, most of which are simply nonsense, but we will come to that in a moment. Let me begin my speech with a quotation from Bryce and Humes's "Scottish Secondary Education: Philosophy and Practice", which is one of the core works in education philosophy: "Scotland's national identity is defined partly in terms of communal solidarity, a belief in democratic processes and a commitment to social justice". Using that quotation as the bedrock of the debate today, we can see the woeful inadequacy of the motion and of Tory philosophy in general. Tory philosophy, of course, is not defined in terms of communal solidarity; it is about the cult of the individual, as Margaret Thatcher indicated in this very hall. It is not a belief in democratic processes. The Conservative party opposed the democratic process in Scotland and would not take part in a debate that led to this Parliament.

I have always argued for a Parliament for Scotland. I remember standing on  Calton hill on the night before the Scottish Parliament referendum, while Mr Monteith argued against me on television that this Parliament should not exist. I remember that; he should remember it, too. As the Tory motion shows, the Conservatives have no commitment to social justice. The reality is that Tory philosophy on education, as with all Tory philosophy, remains anti-Scottish. I cannot take the motion seriously.

Oh, I think that Mr Fraser should. If we want a debate on education in Scotland, let us have a real debate on education in Scotland. Let us have a debate about what Scotland's schools actually need and what Scottish education should be. Scottish education should be broad based, it should be inclusive and it should be diverse. It should be, in all the meanings of the word, comprehensive. My objection to what is happening in education in Scotland at the moment is not based on a desire on my part to move to what Mr Monteith calls a post-comprehensive era. I wonder what the pre-comprehensive era was. I think that it involved putting children up chimneys, which is probably what the Tories would like to continue to do.

There is not much point in arguing about what Mr Monteith said. I am quite happy to debate the history of Scottish education with him, but I am more interested in the future of Scottish education and what we are going to achieve in Scotland. I object strongly to some of the things that are happening at the moment. I do not doubt the Minister for Education and Young People's  personal commitment—I have to say this in every debate; she talks a good game on these matters—but there are huge gaps in what is being delivered. Moreover, the analysis of education in Scotland is deeply flawed. There are strong clues about the difficulties in Scottish education. Those clues come from two diverging sets of statistics, which the chamber knows well. One set tells us that more young people are passing examinations towards the end of their school careers, but the other set tells us that basic levels of numeracy and literacy are falling and that young people have difficulties with communication. We have to square that circle. I argue that we will do so by making sure that there is a strong emphasis on the core skills in the early years. That requires radical reform of the five-to-14 curriculum and much smaller classes in the early years of primary, which will enable us to build on established core skills to build higher-order skills—thinking skills—to continue to improve exam performance. I am critical of the Executive's failure to invest in that type of change. I look forward, when we replace the Executive next year, to being able to implement those key ideas. In closing, I say that Mr Monteith has nothing if not a sense of timing. Today, he introduces this debate in the chamber and lauds the idea of specialist schools, but I note that, yesterday, David Taylor, the director of inspection at the Office for Standards in Education—which, according to Brian Monteith, has all the ideas—gave evidence to the House of Commons, saying: "I don't think we would have the evidence to say going for diversity"— that is, diversity in specialist schools— "in itself necessarily drives up standards more than a single system." In one phrase, Ofsted's director of inspection has indicated the bankruptcy of the Tory motion. Let us have a debate about education in the chamber, but let us have a real debate. What Mr Monteith is proposing is not a real debate, but yet another display of Tory prejudice. I move amendment S1M-3650.1, to leave out from "should" to end and insert: "must be one which delivers the best for each child, is founded upon the broad and inclusive traditional strengths of Scottish education, is resourced and organised to help young people gain a secure grounding in the basic skills at an early age, gives various routes for entry into further education or skilled employment and which welcomes diversity and a variety of local delivery within a strong state sector, and therefore rejects any attempt to bring back from the political grave the divisive Tory educational philosophies of the past which proved so damaging to Scotland's young people during 18 years of undemocratic and unwanted Conservative Government in this country."

There is a God.

Can Brian Monteith explain how that would be different from the present system? What is there in the present system to prevent a school from offering Arabic, Chinese or a range of modern languages? What regulation does the minister enforce that would prevent that from happening?

Answer the question.

Will the member give way?

Brian Monteith raises an interesting point about placing requests. Had he considered the issue more closely—indeed, had he considered the issue of education more closely—he would have realised that one of the consistent themes of my arguments about education in rural Scotland and about the need for diversity in education is that placing requests are central. I have worked with members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to go against the view taken by some Tories that a high level of placing requests should call into question whether a school should stay open. I am in favour of placing requests; Mr Monteith's party appears to penalise them.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Today the Executive's latest league tables are published, but I have yet to see them. Copies of the league tables were distributed to the press on Monday. Although my office asked to see them yesterday, they were not provided. A member of the press—who will remain nameless—had to break the embargo to show the league tables to me, so that I could comment on them. Gross discourtesy has been shown to members, particularly members of opposition parties, who have not had a chance to see figures that were distributed to the press 48 hours ago.

Presiding Officer, will you consider this issue in the context of the general standing orders provisions relating to the courtesy that members should show to one another? If a member of the Parliament who is a minister publishes important information of which she intends to make much, it would be courteous for her to provide that information to members, especially those who shadow her.

In considering the guidance on school transport, will the minister confirm that communities should as far as possible be kept together for transport purposes rather than divided? The case to which I refer is in Ashgill in South Lanarkshire, where a small number of pupils are denied transport while the majority of the village has it. That is an important safety consideration, particularly on winter nights.

I shall be generous and say that there appears to be nothing in the bill to suggest that witch hunts are intended. The issue that I addressed earlier and which other members spoke about is that the balance is not yet quite right. There must be further debate in that regard. The possibility of errors in the bill exists and we must do our best to ensure that there are none, but this is not a witch hunting bill—at least, I hope it is not.

Mr Monteith has raised an important point, but some of my sympathy is with the evidence that the minister gave on that issue. She pointed out that any attempt to define such things could open up the potential for loopholes. One issue that concerns me, although it has nothing to do with abuse as such, is the example that Mr Jenkins gave to the committee. The teacher who takes a group of pupils out on an excursion may—perhaps for the only time in that teacher's career—have behaved irresponsibly because the children were put at risk of harm in a sporting venture or something of that nature. For those types of things, one would want to think more carefully about definitions. Like the minister, I worry that if the bill were to provide a complex list of risks and harms, it would create exclusions as well as offences.

I thank the minister for introducing the debate. I confirm that the SNP will support the general principles of the bill in this evening's vote. We support the bill and want it to be passed. The party's work on the bill in committee has been overwhelmingly positive. However, there are concerns about the bill, one of which I will articulate in a moment. At the outset, we must ask ourselves whether the bill is needed. Once one has listened to the evidence that has been given and heard some of the concerns that exist, one must agree that it is. The bill is the third lock in the system for protecting children and young people. The first lock is legal action. The second is the existing system of  checking and registers. The bill covers all the issues that may not be covered by the two other locks. However, with the bill we are moving on to awkward ground. Shorn of dressing, the reality is that the individuals with whom the bill deals are being described as potentially capable of committing criminal offences against children, regardless of whether they have been subject to a full disciplinary hearing by their employers. That is essentially what is being said about individuals who are listed, but they have not been charged with any such offence, which is where the difficulty lies with parts of the bill. The committee identified two areas of primary concern. The first, which my colleague Irene McGugan will deal with later, was the organisations that might be required to refer. I will deal with the other issue, which the Justice 1 Committee report also covered. I know that my colleague Christine Grahame will speak about it as well. In Illinois, a recent survey of capital convictions found that over the past 50 years, the error rate in capital convictions has been around 8 per cent. That means that 8 per cent of those who have been found guilty of capital offences did not commit them. That is a very scary figure. The documentation surrounding the bill suggests that around 30 people will be listed each year. That is a low total and I think that it is likely to be far higher. However, if we accept the figure and accept a failure rate of 8 per cent or so, we are talking about two individuals a year being listed wrongly. That might not happen, but it is possible that individuals will lose their employment because they have been listed wrongly. As the minister said, absolutely correctly, a balance has to be struck between the inevitability of error and the need to protect children. Whether the bill has struck that balance so far is the question in point. Most of the evidence that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee took was doubtful about whether that balance had been struck. Rosemarie McIlwhan of the Scottish Human Rights Centre said to the committee: "It is a difficult balancing act— and we can all agree with that— "particularly in the current climate of fear ... I suggest that the bill does not strike the right balance. It is essential that a right to a fair trial or hearing be provided."—[ Official Report, Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 24 September 2002; c 3720.] I have heard what the minister said and there are procedures for fair trials or hearings, but whether those procedures are robust enough to diminish the possibility of error is one of the key issues. One of the things that would help  substantially would be for the minister not to have a role in these matters. I have heard what the minister said about the involvement of a senior civil servant and a social work inspector. However, the process would be much more transparent if the minister did not have a role in making the decisions and if there was a role for a tribunal of some sort. Indeed there are examples of how that works elsewhere. The minister said in oral evidence that she recognised those problems. She said: "It is a serious matter for people to be put on the list and ministers will be held accountable for the decisions that they make."—[ Official Report, Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 8 October 2002; c 3800.] The issue here is not accountability; it is natural justice. There is no doubt that ministers will be accountable, but the question is whether it would be better to have a more robust system to protect natural justice.

I made it absolutely clear at the outset and I shall make it clear again, that of course that is a concern. I am raising points about the way in which we strike the balance. I certainly was not alone on the committee in having concerns about that and in feeling that the issue needed to be explored further at stage 2. The Justice 1 Committee raised the substantial point that having a tribunal make decisions might be better than involving ministers and, as the minister indicated, senior civil servants. That applies to the provisional and final listings. There is a substantial problem with provisional listing. I understand from the bill that provisional listing will not result automatically in the loss of a job, but it will be a considerable stigma for someone's career history. It will prevent any possibility of that person moving on to another position. Careful thought needs to be given to whether provisional listing, which is a good thing in the way that the bill puts it, is required. Would it be better to move simply to listing, because the status of provisional listing is a form of limbo in which people could languish for some time? It might be better not to have that state, even though not having it might seem to be less generous. In that  way, one would be listed or one would not be listed. We should acknowledge that there are also some issues that cause a few problems for employers. Although the minister referred to "substantiated" evidence from employers, the bill, particularly in sections 2(2)(c) and 2(3)(a)(iii), talks about transfer. Although that is a disciplinary matter, many organisations have correctly used the process of transfer to nip a problem in the bud. The NHS Confederation was worried that that might be made more difficult for employers. Hilary Robertson of The NHS Confederation said: "In NHS organisations, it would be good practice to move somebody out of a child care position if an allegation was made or if there was a suspicion that they had either harmed a child or put a child at risk. As the bill is drafted, that would trigger a referral to the list. ... The danger—apart from any subsequent action against the employer for unfair dismissal if an individual is dismissed rather than just transferred—is that employers might be deterred from moving people and, therefore, from referring them to the list if they do not have substantial evidence against them."—[ Official Report , Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 24 September 2002; c 3708.] That represents an area of difficulty for employers, which was also picked up by the Scottish Trades Union Congress.

I lean heavily on both of them in such matters. One might add that I could do nothing other than lean heavily. Although I accept the minister's point, I continue to emphasise that a balance has to be struck. The Parliament might pass the bill as it stands, but it is right to assess whether there are ways of improving the bill to ensure that we are fairer to everyone. That is what the process is about. The interests of children are paramount, but we must remember the interests of adults about whom false allegations might be made. My final point is about vexatious and frivolous complaints. The burden of making a decision on those lies with the minister. There is a problem. If  we are to have a better, tribunal system, as I suggest, we should also have a more robust system of deciding what is vexatious and frivolous. There is strong support for the bill. The work that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Justice 1 Committee have done has revealed many areas that we need to pin down firmly at stage 2. The SNP will support the bill, although we hope to see some improvements in it. We are devoted to ensuring that there is maximum protection for children. Along with the Executive and the other parties, we aim to achieve the best bill possible.

I am familiar with the funding structure. How does what the minister said tie in with the arm's-length funding approach to which the Government is devoted and which was a feature of two previous cultural strategy debates? Ministers cannot have their cake and eat it.

I understand the point about pounds per head—I think that that is what the minister was talking about; it is rather hard to hear her. However, the reality is that the percentage of gross domestic product that is spent on culture is dramatically lower in Scotland. Will the minister deal with that?

I am very glad that Ian Jenkins has mentioned Scots. I am happy to endorse the work of St Ninian's school in Stirling, which has asked us all to adopt a word. My word is clamjamfrie; I just wanted to put that on the record. Ian Jenkins has not mentioned Gaelic, however, and in light of the fact that the minister replied to a question on Gaelic and that Murdo Fraser and I have referred to it, I would be interested to know Mr Jenkins's view on secure status for the Gaelic language and the bill that was published today.

Although the debate is not exclusively about Gaelic, the minister will understand my great disappointment at what he has just said about the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced yesterday. I hope that there are steps that John Farquhar Munro and I can take to change the minister's mind. What he said is contrary to the hopes of many people in Scotland. I hope that the minister will enter into discussion about it. There is still time for him to change his mind. I will continue on a more positive note. When the Executive is thrown out next year, as it is bound to be, I shall miss this annual occasion. Indeed, Irene McGugan and I have come to look forward to the annual report on the national cultural strategy. We treat it a little like Christmas: for weeks in advance, we are constantly looking through our mail, trying to find out when the document will turn up and what it will look like. This year, I have to say that the minister has surpassed himself, and I congratulate him on the report. It is entirely fresh and new. For example, it has on its bill two guest artists. It is not enough to have an introduction from the minister and one from his deputy; it also features Margaret Curran and Cathy Jamieson saying how wonderful the Executive is. It also has a helpful directory of addresses at the end, which is surprising in a Government document. There are lists of lots of things that happened during the past year. The main problem is that few of them have anything to do with the national cultural strategy. However, I have to say that the report is entertaining. It is not a report, especially compared with last year's report, that includes lists of objectives and key priorities. If I remember correctly, there were 64 objectives and priorities in the original document. Another thing to note is that it keeps getting smaller—like the achievements. Last year's report was huge, but this year's  contains none of the key priorities. At least, we thought that when we first looked at it, but Irene McGugan, the sleuth of the Scottish National Party's culture team, found them. They are hidden at the bottom of the pages in light print and are no longer called objectives. Two years ago, the Executive set itself a policy with 64 objectives and announced them in great triumph. Last year it reported on how few it had done anything about, and this year it is hiding them away. Next year, the minister could write them in lemon juice, so that we have to hold the pages up against a candle to learn that something is happening. I should not complain too much, because despite the great disappointment on Gaelic, I think that this minister is the best arts minister we have had. He is looking embarrassed, and rightly so—I do enjoy finishing people's careers off for them. He is the best arts minister that we have had, but he is saddled with an impossible, daft policy, which is the problem with the national cultural strategy. The report is not about the strategy. It is a gazetteer or compendium of many things that happened in Scotland that would have happened anyway. Evidence of that can be found on every page, but I refer the chamber to page 24. The key policy is apparently to "investigate the feasibility of identifying national centres of excellence in traditional arts". The page includes information on prize winners at the Venice film festival, someone who writes detective fiction and an award to the Piping Centre, which has not been named as a centre of national excellence. In all those cases, trying to find out what the Executive, rather than everyone else, has done is impossible. It is dishonest for the Government to do that. It should have admitted that its policy is a failure but, having gone on reporting on what is taking place, it keeps changing the rules and how it talks about it. For example, last year's document included key priority 2.3, which said: "The Executive will publish its major events strategy ... in 2001". This year's document says that it will be published by the end of 2002. Publication keeps getting further away. Presumably, the next announcement will be that it will be in Labour's manifesto. However, there is a darker and more misleading side to the issue: it involves constantly moving goalposts and the Executive never saying what it is doing. There is a still darker side in the way some of it is undertaken. Page 37 of the report contains a very positive quotation from the journalist and broadcaster Ruth Wishart. It comes  from an article she wrote on 22 August 2002 in The Herald . If we read the whole article, we discover that the Executive has taken the good quotation and ignored all the others. That is misrepresentation. Two sentences further on from the quotation used in the report, she says: "It is a dismal fact that half the schools in this country charge for tuition with a musical instrument unless the pupil in question comes from a family which is seriously impoverished". That quotation is not in the report, which is highly selective, misleading and dishonest. There is a darker side still. Nothing in the report addresses the key question in the cultural sector: whether we can afford to go on doing what we are doing or whether it will suffer death by a thousand cuts, which is what the museums sector is experiencing. There have already been closures. The minister and I spoke at last week's museums conference and he knows the reality of the situation. The same is happening in other areas of the arts as well. Our amendment addresses that key fact. I have shown extraordinary self-restraint in its wording. As ever, I am deeply influenced by Ian Jenkins, who keeps getting up in the chamber and saying that he would love to support my amendments but objects to my rhetoric. This afternoon, Ian can simply ignore what I have said and vote for the text of our amendment, which says that we need to reassess the financing and organisation of the arts in Scotland. After all, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee—of which Ian Jenkins is a member—has heard a wide variety of individuals make the same point in this very chamber. Indeed, when Ruth Wishart wrote her newspaper article, she had already heard James Boyle, the chairman of the Scottish Arts Council, making exactly that point. In the constructive spirit for which I am well known, the SNP amendment does not take anything out of the motion, nor does it seek to alter a word of it: it merely adds the simple suggestion that, as many people in the arts in Scotland have advised, the Executive should look seriously at how the arts are financed and organised as a priority instead of spinning or hyping it, or simply pretending. The Executive can spin and bluster as much as it wishes and publish misleading documents. I allow it to do so. I will not change a word of its motion. If it wants to congratulate itself as it always has done—although Mr Watson does that somewhat less than his predecessors, including Rhona Brankin—it can do so. I want to get things moving again, and our amendment suggests a way of doing so.  I move amendment S1M-3571.1, to insert at end: "and therefore supports those who are calling for a new assessment of the actual financial and organisational needs of the arts in Scotland in order to achieve those objectives."

Name them.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to review the contents of guidance on the five-to-14 curriculum. (S1O-5865)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the contents of a written answer that he provided to me yesterday on the five-to-14 curriculum. In the light of his answer, what is he asking Learning and Teaching Scotland to do urgently about the fact that, Scotland-wide, 48.8 per cent of young people do not reach the required level at secondary 2 in mathematics, 54 per cent do not do so in writing and 43 per cent do not do so in reading? Does he realise that an enormous problem is emerging?

I will ask the minister specifically about schools. Have the floor plans of every school in Scotland been made available to the temporary personnel, as they are to fire services? What special training has been given to the people whom Ben Wallace mentioned, who will be dealing with young people in emergency situations? That training takes place for regular firefighters, some of whom I have met in Ayrshire and Lanarkshire and whom I think have been driven to strike action by the Government's intransigent attitude.

On such afternoons, when we are often mired in the arcana of drafting, we sometimes need to send a clear message to the people of Scotland. Many of our problems as a Parliament arise from the fact that we have been bad at sending clear messages. Amendment 69 sends the clearest possible message to Scotland: that, although many of us have huge reservations about the bill because it has not achieved what it should have achieved, something tangible and concrete is being offered to the poorest people in Scotland. That is a devastatingly simple message that the Parliament can send out. It would be a guarantee from the Executive and from each member that we had at least heard one plea and that we knew that the bill must be changed. Surprisingly, I echo what Donald Gorrie said. Whatever our voting instructions say, amendment 69 is a matter of conscience. We must send out the message that at least one part of what the Parliament wanted to achieve in abolishing  poindings and warrant sales—a part that, as Margo MacDonald said, causes misery for the poorest in Scotland and their families—has been done. I appeal to every member—no matter what the voting instructions in front of them say—to send that message.

Mr Harper makes an extremely important point about the creation of the ability to think and challenge. However, the skills that he talks about are required not only by businesses but by life. The frustration of the ability to challenge what people think and contribute to  democracy are often the factors that lead to crime and disillusionment. Would he care to comment on that?

Will the member take a helpful intervention?

Although I agree entirely with the member that the difficulties are created by the inadequate funding of the McCrone agreement, one of the consequences that he has not mentioned—but which is very real in the two areas that he has mentioned—is the knock-on effect of the possible closure of small primary schools, which would be a disaster for Scotland.

I am happy to confirm for Mr Rumbles that there is absolute unity and therefore not death in the SNP. I am sure that my friend and colleague Alex Neil will confirm his strong support for our policy.

A simple illustration might assist Mr Monteith in his confusion. It is highly unlikely that I would receive an offer to be educated at a sports academy, because my sporting prowess is probably not good enough. It is daft to suggest that schools that specialise in an area should not be allowed to select pupils who are specialists in that area. It is also daft to draw from the fact that they do so some sort of lesson for the rest of Scotland that is completely wrong.

I confirm at the outset that I also want the best for our young people, but the difference between the minister and me is that I do not believe that she has, as she said in her closing words, the programme to achieve that. I thank the minister for her speech and I do not doubt for a moment her genuine concern for the future of Scotland's young people, nor do I disagree in any way with her praise for the good work that is done in schools by teachers, parents and pupils, both individually and collectively. I stress that point, because in speaking to my amendment I will have much criticism to make of the minister and the First Minister. My appreciation of the minister's stance does not extend entirely to the First Minister. We all know that his aim, which is to be achieved at any price, is the retention of power for Labour and the development of an absolute hegemony for his brand of Scottish South Lanarkshire Labour. His contributions to the education debate must be seen in that political context.

I will come to that in a moment. What unites the First Minister and, alas, the Minister for Education and Young People are muddle-headed, micro-managing, process-obsessed, self-congratulatory contributions to the debate on education and to the management of education, which is their responsibility. That is well exemplified in the minister's speech and the motion. It was also on display yesterday in the First Minister's keynote speech. I will devote a moment to that speech, which was designed to lead into today's debate. It is disappointing that the First Minister is not here; he is prepared to give his thoughts outside the chamber, but not inside it.  Yesterday, the First Minister returned to the issue of education which, he thinks, made his name in Scotland. What tablets of stone did he carry down from the lofty eminence of Bute House to lay down the route ahead? The big idea, apparently, is to drive up standards. What standards? He did not say. Where were they to be driven? He did not say. In what way were standards slipping or falling? He did not say; he produced only some vague ideas about the role of the inspectorate in supporting failing schools—a role that it already has. What schools were failing? He did not say. He said that he wanted head teachers to have more power over the curriculum and the budgets. How much more power? He did not say.

I will come to that.

Jackie Baillie should not worry—I will not be short of ideas, even if the Labour party is. Among the many other things that Jack McConnell did not say was how his idea of giving more power to head teachers fits with the McCrone arrangement that is lauded in the motion. That arrangement looks to a collective, collegiate development of school communities and responsibility. How does that fit with the minister's view that there should be more power for school boards—an idea that was much lauded last year? Nobody will say. To listen to Jack McConnell yesterday was to listen to the endlessly spun Jack McConnell, whose contribution on these matters was leaked to the Sunday newspapers. [Interruption.] Labour members are shouting because they do not like what I am saying. They hate the truth—which is that the emperor has no clothes. Mr McConnell's speech was leaked to the Sunday newspapers, leaked again to the Monday press, featured on Tuesday morning and then reported today. One would have thought that—to use his favourite phrase—he had taken charge of an education system that had fallen into the hands of incompetents and failures. Hang on a minute, though. How many education ministers have there been in the past five years? There have been five, of which Cathy Jamieson is the fifth. She succeeded Mr McConnell, Mr Galbraith, Mrs Liddell and Mr Wilson, who were all Labour education ministers. Labour has had responsibility for the stewardship of Scottish education for five years, six months and five days. Where were these proposals during that period? Nowhere. Jack McConnell says nothing about the real issues in Scottish education because his  contributions are spin and bluster. They are directed at the electorate, not at the young people of Scotland. What he said came nowhere near addressing the real needs and priorities of Scottish education. I want the Parliament to be crystal clear about my attitude and the SNP's attitude towards the issues in the motion. We supported and continue to support the McCrone agreement. The main problems lie in the failure of the Executive to honour its part of the bargain. We believe in greater flexibility in schools, although the national priorities approach is a very vague way in which to achieve that. We want children to have help with transition at all the key stages in education, including the transition from nursery school to primary school. The Liberals are apparently so concerned about that issue that they have been unable to mention it in the two and a half years in which there has been a Liberal Deputy Minister for Education and Young People. We want new approaches to ICT, but we also want existing promises to be honoured, such as the promise to provide an e-mail address for every child, which is nowhere near delivery. In February 2002, only 16 per cent of primary pupils, 8 per cent of special educational needs pupils and less than two thirds of secondary school pupils had been provided with an e-mail address.

Of course I agree, but I was not the one who said in my election manifesto of 1999: "Every Scottish pupil will have an e-mail address".

It appears that that was a gimmick.

It was a gimmick that was not delivered. That was one of Labour's top five pledges on education. The manifesto also said: "We pledge to provide at least four modern computers for every class in Scottish primary and secondary schools." The reality is that the number of computers per class is no longer even measured for secondary schools, and the figure in primary schools stands at 2.2 per class. Labour members may talk about ICT if they want, but they should honour their promises. Of course every school has to be excellent, and  of course we have to close the opportunity gap; we can agree on the warm words, but we must get to the heart of the matter and produce the detailed policies that will do the job. Of course we have to achieve the best education for every child, but we must raise not vague standards, but a specific standard: we must raise the standard of education that has been achieved when each child leaves school. To do that we must use the best tools at our disposal in co-operation with parents, teachers and, indeed, with everyone; the tools are all around us. We know that smaller class sizes produce results. There is no doubt about that or about the international research on that.

Let me finish. The international research is comprehensive. If I am honestly being told that we are going back to the beginning of the issue, that is political evasion by the Executive to buy time and it has nothing to do with the needs of Scottish schoolchildren. We also know that we need a change in the power balance in education. We need more consensus and less local authority domination. However, to be specific, we want to establish an education convention that is coupled with the continued roll-out of devolved school management. However, what is equally important is clarity in the budget process, good annual planning and an end to tinkering with small sums of money for public relations purposes, which is so beloved of the Executive. It is clear that we need to help young people in transition periods, but it is particularly clear that we must find a way of guiding young people into vocational education whether they want to do that for positive reasons or because they get little from conventional schooling. However, we need a scheme for that, not just warm words. I will support Brian Monteith's amendment because it is right. However, we need a scheme that will do what he proposes.

I acknowledge that teachers and many of us welcome a great many things that are happening, but those things are not at the heart of the matter. I ask the Minister for Education and Young People to have vision and to lead, not to fiddle about constantly in process and micro-management, which is the hallmark of new Labour  and, in particular, of the minister. We need to simplify our exam system, especially now that many schools are choosing to do that themselves and abandon standard grades. We need national leadership and national innovation on the matter, not just platitudes. When the First Minister was elected a year ago he talked about wanting to do "less, better". As usual, that was a remark that was difficult to understand. However, if that actually means concentrating on the important issues and taking actions that will make a difference, then he has failed in education. We have heard much more, but we have not heard things that go to the heart of improvement. The SNP amendment is deliberately designed not to take anything out of the Executive's motion, but to add to it. Our amendment adds the big ideas and implores the Executive to start at last treating education as a vital area for investment and creative change, rather than just another topic for self-laudatory parliamentary motions, spun political speeches and the expression of vague concerns. Those do nothing to make our country a better place or to build a better future for our young people. Education does that, but the Executive—alas—is failing education and failing Scotland. I move amendment S1M-3536.1, to insert at end, "but regrets that the Executive seems unable to take on board ideas which will make a real difference in the medium and long term such as the need for a substantial lowering in class sizes, particularly in the early years of primary, the simplification of the Scottish exam system, the review of 5-14 with the aim of creating more flexibility and less pressure, the building and development of a collective and collegiate view of school management as envisaged in the McCrone agreement (which should also involve parents and young people), and other major topics, but instead seeks to apply spin and hype to a First Minister's vision of education that is lacking in vision and depth and does not constructively address the main issue of providing the best education possible for every child in Scotland."

As Mr Aitken pointed out, there has been some consensus in the debate. I want to address three issues, the first of which is the ageism that John Young mentioned. There is no doubt that paragraph 4(1)(c) of schedule 1 should be struck from the bill. It is completely outrageous to say that someone must retire at the age of 65, particularly someone who might be doing a very successful job. Having spent some days with Mr Young in Quebec, I can bear witness to the fact that at whatever age he is—it would be equally ungallant to say that in the chamber—he is well able to keep up with the best of us in all activities that we choose to undertake. I leave those activities to people's imagination. Another point that was debated concerned the duty of the commissioner. I find it strange that although some of the commissioner's duties, such as the duty to promote diversity, are instructed in the bill, the basic duty of enforcing the integrity and honesty of the structure is not. That is the point at which we should examine carefully the bill's wording. Mr Rumbles and Tricia Marwick are right: the change of one word would make all the difference, and Trish Godman's point, which was that there might be minor breaches that required no action, can be taken care of by that, too. Changing "may" to "shall" at the beginning of section 2(8)(a) does not force the commissioner to take any action after reporting it. After a breach, action would still be discretionary, but reporting would not. That answers objections on both sides. It would not insist that action is taken in the case of what Trish Godman called a minor breach, but it would mean that Parliament would know if ministers had breached the regulations. That change should be made, or at least debated extensively, as the bill goes through Parliament. The Scottish National Party offers its support to the legislation, but only with the sense that it does not go nearly far enough. Alex Neil's influence on pushing the issue in Parliament has rightly been acknowledged. There has been general concern in Scotland that the process of public appointment must be transparent and open in the sense that the Parliament is transparent and open. It is to be regretted that the Executive was pushed or pulled into introducing the bill. It is to be regretted that the bill does not yet have the total openness that Alex Neil was seeking, in a bill that I supported. However, the minister and his colleagues are to be commended for the fact that, at least, we have the bill now and we can progress. The bill will be supported, but it will be changed and developed as time goes on. As a member of the Education, Culture and  Sport Committee, I have been most concerned about the Ancient Monuments Board and the Historic Buildings Council for Scotland. There is no doubt that, as the evidence session progressed when we examined the matters, there was mounting incredulity in the committee. The points that were made by Sandra White and echoed by Karen Gillon are true—we had an open and accountable discussion with Professor Michael Lynch of the Ancient Monuments Board. We had an open and accountable discussion with Pat Chalmers—who is here today—who spoke on behalf of the Historic Buildings Council. We had a completely closed and unaccountable discussion with Graham Munro, the chief executive of Historic Scotland. He was unable—I say unable because it was not his fault entirely—to tell us about certain aspects of his work because, as he represented an Executive agency, his advice to ministers could not be discussed. That presented a problem for members of the committee. I am surprised that Iain Smith did not understand the report because it was crystal clear. The problem is that the process of listing can be difficult for those people whose buildings are subject to it. There must be an independent review and some scrutiny. There must be a level of expertise and judgment in the Historic Buildings Council, which does not come from Historic Scotland. This morning, I was interested to note a message about today's debate from the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland, which was sent to some members. First, it says that an independent representative body is needed because of the problems that exist. Secondly, it says that ministers need the help of such a body so that they understand some of the wider issues. Thirdly, it says that such a body must be accountable to Parliament. Alas, Historic Scotland is not directly accountable in many ways. That message concludes, as I will conclude, with the words "This implies a structural review of the role of Historic Scotland." I hope that the minister will say in his summing up that we will not simply tinker with some of the bill, but that we will examine closely the role of Historic Scotland and other bodies to try to get it right. Presently, the role of Historic Scotland is the main obstacle to getting it right.

I will be sorry to miss Mr Harding if he is not here after the next election. I point out to him that, at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, Brian Monteith—although it is always difficult to remember whether Brian Monteith was at the committee—did not dissent from the committee's view that although removal of some of the bodies listed in the bill might be welcome, serious issues arose with at least two of them and those issues required to be addressed. The minister mentioned those issues and I welcome that mention. Therefore, Mr Harding's unqualified attack on quangos might not be entirely accurate with regard to two of the bodies, even from the point of view of the Conservative party.

This has been an interesting debate for a variety of reasons, not all of them positive. It is always entertaining to see the other parties doing their head-of-a-pin dancing, which they require to do to justify the unjustifiable. We have seen it in three particular ways today. The most entertaining way is the Tory way. There has  been a lot of debate about the possibility of the Disney corporation buying into Scottish television. It is clear that the Disney corporation has bought the Scottish Tory party, because it is a Mickey Mouse party. It has Mickey Mouse arguments and it puts itself in a completely indefensible position in terms of Scottish culture and the Scottish economy. I will come back to that position in a moment, because although it does not deserve to be taken seriously, there are points that Mr Monteith in particular made that require a rebuttal. The Liberal position is, as usual, refreshing—or it would be refreshing if we had not heard it so many times before. The reality is that the Liberals will not rock the boat; they are, after all, part of the Executive. At some unspecified date in the future they may return to the issue of whether the devolution settlement is good for Scotland. I am reminded of the remark: "They make a desert and they call it peace." There will be nothing left in Scotland. Everything will have been finished. We will have no media, because they will have been taken over, our culture will have been destroyed and there will be no economy, but the Liberals will be scratching their heads saying, "I wonder whether the moment has arrived to reconsider the devolution settlement." The Labour position is profoundly depressing, because Labour members know perfectly well that some of the things that they are trying to defend today are indefensible.

No. Rhona Brankin has only just entered the chamber and already she wishes to denounce the SNP. She will no doubt be doing it in the High Street shortly, so enthusiastic is she about her mission, but she will not do it in my time. The reality is that ministers have secured a position—on which I congratulate them, although it is very little—that is, as I said in my opening speech, ex post facto with regard to regulation. The consumer panel and the content board will comment on what has happened; they will not take part in the decision-making process of regulation. That is the problem. At the moment, Scotland is represented on the ITC. The core of the problem, which the minister indicated in her summing up, is that the position of the DCMS in London is solid because it has chosen, and is pushing through, a model of regulation that it has imported from the United States, which is based on a federal state and which deliberately excludes representations from other parts. That is what the American structure does.  The trouble is that that structure cannot be imported into the type of country that we live in at present. We live in a country where our regulatory structure has to represent the other parts, because we have a broadcasting structure that exists distinctly in other parts of the United Kingdom. The wrong model was chosen, the wrong model is being defended and the wrong model will exclude Scotland. That is the problem. Although the Executive has achieved something, it has achieved little and, unless it achieves a presence on the board, it will have virtually no effect. A Scottish committee, supporting individuals on the consumer panel and content board, is also largely—although not entirely—irrelevant. I want to talk about two Labour speeches in particular. First, I was disappointed by Pauline McNeill's speech, because she defended the absolutely indefensible in terms of the Scottish Six. We know from John Birt's autobiography that he worked with senior members of the Labour party to prevent the Scottish Six from happening. There is no doubt about that; he made that admission. In those circumstances, if she is defending what happened with the Scottish Six, she is defending an absolutely abnormal use of powers by the director-general of the BBC and Government ministers.

No, I want to finish this point. Pauline McNeill had her opportunity to debate the matter and she misrepresented it profoundly. There has been an abnormal use of powers by the director-general of the BBC and by senior Labour ministers, and that is utterly wrong. Such things used to take place in Ceausescu's Romania; now they take place in Tony Blair's Britain—and there are other similarities. Finally, I return to the question of the Tories' position.

I turn to the Tory position. Brian Monteith's opening speech was remarkable, because the argument was that monopolies are good, competition is bad. If he had ever attended a first-year economics class, he would have heard of antitrust legislation. He would have learned of the need for competitive markets. People are arguing, and Karen Gillon argued—I commend her speech, although I know that that will not help her—that the proper position in Scotland is, rightly, to oppose anticompetitive, monopolistic, predatory business practices. If any member believes that any of the current bids for SMG fall into that  category, they have a duty to oppose those bids; therefore we have a duty to oppose what appears to me and to many others in this chamber to be such a bid from a company that is owned by the Barclay brothers. Finally, I have been disappointed by parts of this debate, because there is a great deal about the media that needs to be discussed intelligently and with knowledge of the media. To take the head-of-a-pin position that the unionist parties have taken denies the reality of what is happening and, unfortunately, makes the situation worse.

The SNP's broadcasting policy does not include a proposal to introduce jamming of signals, which would mean that people in Carlisle would be unable to receive Scottish broadcasting and vice versa. On that basis, the member's argument falls.

Will the member take an intervention?

That was the scary one.

Will the minister make it clear whether the position that he has described gives us more or less influence than there was in the Independent Television Commission structure? How can there be more influence with no presence on the main board? By definition, there must be less influence.

At the outset, I declare an interest in journalism and broadcasting, as outlined in my entry in the register of members' interests. That includes working for The Herald  newspaper. This morning's debate gives an unusual opportunity for the chamber to consider media and broadcasting issues. I anticipate that, once again, there will be the regular complaints from members on the variety of unionist benches that are always arrayed against us that the SNP is concentrating on matters that do not and should not concern us. Indeed, that is part of the burden of the ideological amendment lodged by Mr Monteith. However, it is worth noting that there has not been a full-scale debate on media and broadcasting issues in the chamber since the Parliament was established. Taken together, those industries employ tens of thousands of people in Scotland, and they are key forces in shaping our society. They inform and influence everyone who lives in the nation, and they carry forward many aspects of our shared cultures. They are, in short, central to our economic, cultural and social well-being as a nation. Not only is it appropriate that we discuss those issues in the chamber; it is essential. It is particularly essential at the moment, because a variety of problems and possibilities need resolution and can be helped to a resolution by the intelligent interest of this chamber. The SNP motion expresses a frustration that we in this Parliament cannot yet legislate to help and support our media industries. I say "yet" because it will come. Although we are deprived of power— [Interruption.] I can see that Mr Monteith is excited already. Although we are deprived of power, quite  deliberately, we can use our influence. Accordingly, I hope that this morning's debate will influence in the interests of Scottish culture, Scottish society and the Scottish economy. I want to address three specific issues that require resolution. The first is the present situation concerning the Scottish Media Group. We are all familiar with the bidding process, which is now under way, but we may not be familiar with the rules in relation to the public interest under which the process will be conducted. Those rules are laid out in fair trading legislation, but unless a total circulation of 500,000 newspapers is involved in any bid—on the side of the bidder and the purchaser—there is no automatic referral under the newspapers section of the legislation. However, under normal competition powers there can be a referral if there is an issue of overdominance in the market. As anyone who purchases The Herald , the Evening Times and the Sunday Herald will have a considerable slice of the quality market in Scotland, there would be considerable overdominance if the final purchaser already had a strong stake in that market.  The Herald has justifiable claims to be the oldest continuously published daily newspaper in the English-speaking world. It carries the date 1783 on its masthead. The claim is historical, but the paper has strong present-day claims to be a distinctive and authoritative voice on Scottish and international affairs. Anything that is done to weaken or distort that voice must be avoided. The responsibility for avoiding that lies in several places. It lies, first of all, with the present owners. They cannot just abrogate their responsibilities in return for the largest, fattest cheque that they can attract. They must realise that they have a duty of care to the papers, the staff, the readers and the respective future of all those groupings. That duty of care extends to ensuring that the papers are sold not to an organisation that will asset strip and run them down, but to an organisation that will build them up. Responsibility also lies with the purchasers. We need to know what they intend and how they intend to operate. Responsibility lies with the United Kingdom Government, which can inquire into that purchase and, if it chooses to do so, block it. Responsibility also lies here. The people of Scotland expect us to show an interest. I renew my call for an inquiry by a Scottish Parliament committee, preferably the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, to take place as soon as the shortlist of the three final candidates is known. I commend the work that Karen Gillon and others have done on the issue. I know that a lot of work has been done, particularly in making it clear to Westminster that there must be an inquiry. I hope that Karen and other members of the committee— several of whom are here this morning, including me—will go the extra mile to allow the committee to act on behalf of the people of Scotland. We must allow the people to hear in open session from those who are selling the titles and those who want to buy them. We must hear the reality of the situation, so that, even though the people of Scotland may not decide, they may judge. We have rules about the care of precious national assets and we forbid demolition of parts of our heritage that are valuable. How much more important to us are assets such as The Herald ? We need to show equal care and extend our effort equally for their future. The second issue that I want to touch on is the Scottish Six, about which there is a new urgency. We know that the BBC is considering the future of its news and current affairs plans in the run-up to the Scottish Parliament election. We also now know that, when the issue was considered before, Scotland was lied to. We know that, because John Birt has confirmed it in his memoirs. I take that personally, because the then chairman of the BBC board of governors, Sir Christopher Bland, told Alex Salmond and me at a meeting in London in October 1998, without any doubt or equivocation, that the decision on the Scottish Six would be taken for broadcasting reasons and broadcasting reasons alone. Sir Christopher may have been a dupe. He may have known nothing about what was going on behind the scenes, although I would find that surprising. However, we now know that John Birt was working with Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and others to stop the Scottish Six. That fact has tarnished the BBC, just as it has tarnished the new Labour Government. As usual, the less subtle members of the Parliament have put it in less subtle ways. In a radio interview, Kenneth Macintosh described the Scottish Six as a nationalist plot. We need action on the matter. A Scottish Six is overdue. In fact, all news and current affairs for Scotland that reflect on the world should come from Scotland. That is the norm in every other country and it should be the norm here. The BBC has it in its hands to rectify the situation. It could apologise for what has taken place and for the actions of its former director general, and it could announce the intention to repatriate the scheduling powers for news and current affairs that should exist and to create the production abilities. To introduce with early effect a Scottish news service that comes from Scotland but covers the world would be a fine act in the run-up to the Scottish Parliament elections. We have an influence on that and we should make that influence felt. Finally, I want to turn to a third issue: the communications bill. Scotland's powerlessness in  the face of the changes that the world is undergoing in media and communications is shown by the Westminster communications bill. That issue will not even be addressed in this chamber by the much-loved device of a Sewel motion, which the Executive uses at the drop of a hat. The whole matter of broadcasting and media ownership and regulation will be decided at Westminster without reference to this Parliament. Unlike the situation in Wales, where the National Assembly for Wales has already spoken on the issue, it looks as if the Scottish Executive does not even intend to consult the members of this Parliament. The communications bill as drafted is, to put it simply, an inappropriate approach to broadcasting and media regulation for a small nation of 5 million people that has a distinctive culture and media ecology. As even the joint Westminster committee under Lord Puttnam saw, the communications bill is a naked attempt to allow the big business media friends of new Labour to dominate the increasingly profitable communications market. It will lead to a dumbing down of broadcasting in Scotland and to the pursuit of short-term profit at the expense of long-term cultural development, and it will damage attempts to build production and media skills in our country. Worst of all, it will take away from Scotland the ability to be heard at the top level of the regulatory process. The sops of a presence on the content and consumer boards of the Office of Communications are meaningless if they are not accompanied by membership of the main board itself. They are ex post facto positions, commenting on what has happened rather than making things happen. No Scottish Government, even one of Mr Monteith's hue—fortunately we shall all be spared that—would choose to regulate the media in the way that the communications bill proposes. No Scottish Government would want to regulate in such a way that cultural issues are ignored and the Scottish media is sold to the highest bidder. However, that is what the communications bill will mean and so it will damage Scotland. Key decisions are about to be made about newspaper ownership, television news and current affairs and regulation of the media and such decisions should be taken in the chamber. Until the chamber has the right to make such decisions, they will be made for reasons that do not take into account Scotland's interests and they will have effects that can only be harmful to Scotland. All of us should support the transfer of full media and broadcasting regulatory powers to the chamber rather than the mealy-mouthed, second-best solution that is repeated in the Executive's amendment.  We should not support the rampant ideology in Brian Monteith's amendment. I am glad to see that he is enjoying what I am saying—I did not enjoy reading his amendment. Both amendments are based on the know-your-place attitude of the unionist parties. The attitude is that there are matters about which Scots cannot speak. However, it is vital that we discuss our media and the way in which our media works for us. Without a transfer of powers, all that we will be able to do is to pick up the pieces after every difficulty and job loss and bemoan what is happening from the sidelines. If there is a transfer, we can make a difference. Pending that transfer, we should be active in opening up the secrecy and potential damage that could be caused by the sale of the Scottish Media Group titles. For the avoidance of doubt, the Barclay brothers and their destructive Svengali, Andrew Neil, are some of the wrong bidders—in fact, they are the really wrong bidders. We should campaign for BBC news and current affairs in Scotland to be controlled and run by BBC Scotland and we should expose the disgraceful actions of Labour figures and the former director general, which have made progress so difficult. We should be steadfast in our determination to ensure that any communications bill in the immediate future includes rather than excludes Scotland. The motion expresses the majority view of Scots on such matters. I commend it to the chamber and to those who are not too blind to see its truth. I move, That the Parliament recognises the vital importance of broadcasting and the print media to the cultural, social and economic life of Scotland and expresses its concern that the present devolution settlement prevents it from legislating in order to secure diversity of ownership and appropriate modern broadcasting regulation in Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. [Interruption.]

No. My point of order follows on from the point that Sandra White has just made. If the parliamentary record of a vote that was taken is misrepresented in the chamber, surely that is a matter for the Presiding Officer. The record shows that what was said was not true.

I am always more hopeful than most that that standing order should exist. However, the reality is that a reference was made to a vote that was taken that was on the record. That vote was misrepresented. Surely the Presiding Officer as the defender of the Parliament should correct the impression that was given.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Of course it is a genuine one, Presiding Officer—I would not do anything else. I know that you are not responsible for what the First Minister says—

You are, however, responsible for facts being used in the chamber. The First Minister said that the Scottish National Party made no submission on the draft communications bill, and that was simply not true. I know that Mr McConnell believes in more facts and less spin. To have some facts would be acceptable. I hope that the First Minister will withdraw what he said.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With the greatest respect—and I mean that—if a minister, or indeed any other member, misleads the chamber, that is a matter for the chair. There is no doubt about that in terms of standing orders. All that members are asking for is the protection of the chair in such matters.

I declare an interest, in that I am a contributor to The Herald . I associate myself with Tavish Scott's question. Given the vital cultural and democratic interest that relates to the ownership of newspapers and a diverse press, does the First Minister agree that it is not enough simply to talk about a referral to Westminster? Would he encourage an appropriate body in Scotland—for example, a Scottish Parliament committee—to inquire into the matter when appropriate and to come to conclusions on behalf of the people of Scotland so that the Scottish voice can be heard on this essential matter?

This has, by and large, been a positive debate.

It is nice to be applauded by the minister before I have properly started. Clearly, he is excited at the prospect of hearing from me. It is very comforting to know that he is in my fan club. Although it has been a positive debate, there have been one or two difficulties with it. I return to the difficulty with the Tory amendment. I still do not know what the Tories are arguing for. The amendment reads entirely well, and is worthy of support for that reason alone, but I do not quite understand why they are trying to make a difference when they should be trying to support and encourage change. I do not think that the Executive has gone nearly far enough. It is worth pushing it a little to ensure that it keeps moving along the road. There has been only one exception to this being a positive debate: I am sorry that Rhona Brankin could not resist her visceral hatred of the Scottish National Party. It was unfortunate. It was a tiresome ending to her speech, the first two thirds of which were positive, constructive and contained a useful analysis. If she could overcome that visceral hatred, perhaps she would no longer be an ex-minister. Other contributions to the debate contained strong, positive points. I wish to pick up on two or three of them. The key question is the assessment or monitoring of cultural activity or progress. The key word—Donald Gorrie used it and I think that he used it properly—is "assessing" the impact of cultural education. It is not about monitoring or evaluating and it is certainly not about tick boxing; it is about assisting young children in building, developing and improving their activities and their lives through education and culture. The most recent academic survey into the effectiveness of arts in education shows that 10 clear positive outcomes are attributable to arts education. As Cathy Peattie indicated, those outcomes cannot be measured on a scale of one to 10. One such positive outcome is improved creativity and thinking skills. I know that all the members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee have talked a lot about developing thinking skills in schools. Other positive outcomes include the enrichment of communication and expressive skills and the general effects that the positive nature of cultural education and culture in education have on the school and community. None of those are matters that we can number one to 10 or for which we can draw up a list of boxes and mark them "pass" or "fail". Let us  assess the impact; let us not go down the road of destructive tick-box government, which ruins so much. Let us also remember one other matter, which has not been mentioned in the debate and which should have been. The reality is that the arts produce £5 billion for the Scottish economy and provide something like 100,000 jobs. Sometimes those jobs are precarious but there are jobs in the arts. One of the biggest barriers to growing and developing the arts is parents' feeling that employment in the arts will not be worthwhile. Introducing culture and arts education at an early stage in schools helps young people to see the potential of the arts as a career and as a future life path. In those circumstances, there are positive benefits to be had from the type of thing that the Executive is talking about. Many interesting speeches have been made. Jamie McGrigor took us from football to prostitution by way of potato chips. That was an unusual journey. The one point that will stick in my mind is the fact that there is good will throughout the chamber for ensuring that culture is at the heart of education. That can unite us rather than divide us, but only if strong and positive progress is made. It must be progress that we can feel and understand and not necessarily progress that we can measure in the way that the minister wants to do. We must feel, understand and know that the ultimate effect of what we are talking about is that Scotland will be a better place. That seems to be a modest ambition, but I am sure that it is one to which we could all sign up. I am sorry that Rhona Brankin is still shaking her head and is unable to agree across the chamber in the interests of education and young people in Scotland. She still wants to go back to visceral dislike.

John Farquhar Munro makes an important point. One place in Scotland where I saw that happening is Plockton High School, which John Farquhar Munro knows well. Thanks to the school's combination of Gaelic and debating—as the member knows, the school won the Gaelic debating contest—and its specialist centre in traditional music, Plockton High School has a general ethos that brings together culture and art. I am sure that John Farquhar Munro and I  can celebrate that achievement, but the question is, how do we replicate it?

As the chamber may have noticed, I did not lodge an amendment to the motion. That may have surprised the Executive parties, but, having listened to Brian Monteith, I am glad that I did not. His amendment is the usual Trojan horse, which allows him to talk about private education and his other obsessions.

Not yet, Mr Monteith. Your voice has only just stopped echoing around the chamber. Let me make a little bit of progress. The reality of the situation is that, instead of condemning—as ever—the Executive for the vagueness of its motion, we should encourage the Executive to do better. I will treat the debate as one in which the Executive should receive encouragement. I will also ask questions about what is taking place, but I will do so in as supportive a way as I can from my position across the chamber. Elaine Murray is right to laugh at that point, as will become obvious. I repeat that I am genuine in my attempt to be supportive. I am pleased to see the minister leading the debate. He is the first minister with responsibility  for culture that we have had since Sam Galbraith. I am pleased to see a minister with a portfolio in the Cabinet actively leading a debate on culture in the Scottish Parliament. Culture should be at the heart of Government, politics and education. If having a minister with responsibility for culture means that the Government is moving in that direction, I am happy to keep on giving the Government a little shove. It is no accident that today I am wearing a small piece of tartan. It is the tartan of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta. I had the pleasure of having dinner last night with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta, who joined us in the public gallery earlier today. It was intriguing to hear that Alberta has not one, but two tartans, which are symbols of Alberta. Tartan is a Scottish symbol: it is a Scottish fabric, which is woven to Scottish designs. It is a Scottish idea. Even in Alberta, tartan is used as a state symbol. That is done for conscious reasons. If members read the story of this Alberta tartan, they will learn that it contains what its designers thought are the colours of Alberta—its forest, skies and lakes. How many Scottish children know anything about tartan? How many know where it came from, how it was developed and what its meaning is? Today, a delegation from a Canadian province came to the Scottish Parliament and gave MSPs bits of tartan. That should make us stop and think. We have been given a bit of our own fabric back. Perhaps we should tell our children a great deal more about the importance of their culture. There is potential in Scotland to deepen our understanding of Scotland and what it has given to the world. How do we do that? I have always been sceptical about the plan for cultural co-ordinators in the national culture strategy. The plan was long delayed, but I accept that it is now going ahead. Let us see what comes of it. My first concern is about putting all the eggs in one basket. The minister said in his speech that there would be four cultural co-ordinators in Edinburgh. That may or may not be necessary, but there is only one piping tutor in the whole of Edinburgh for all Edinburgh schools. I have no objection to developing culture, even in a scheme that has the potential to ghettoise culture, but let us look at the balance that is being struck. If we have four cultural co-ordinators, but only one person to teach the bagpipes to all schoolchildren in Edinburgh—and for whom there is a huge demand—then perhaps our balance is wrong. Let us see if we can invest a little more.

I do not want to catch the minister not listening to me or me not listening to him. I referred to the potential to ghettoise culture. That has been my objection since the beginning. Further down the road, when I am sitting in his present seat and he is sitting in mine, if it turns out that that potential has not been realised, then I shall accept that he was right. Let us wait and see what happens. The second problem that I have comes from something that the deputy minister for tourism, culture and sport, Dr Elaine Murray, said earlier this year. She announced at the recent art of learning conference in Glasgow that the Executive is developing performance measures for creativity. That sends a shiver down my spine. I know that there are performance measures for creativity. They could be plucked out of the air. The Oscars, the Emmys and the Grammys are perhaps performance measures for creativity. I am worried, however, that we will keep reducing everything that we do to tick boxes. Performance measures for creativity are almost impossible to find. Ian Jenkins—

Just one moment, please. I was talking about Ian Jenkins. Ian Jenkins spoke some time ago at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee about educating the soul as well as the body. I remember that, because much creativity is about educating the soul. I find it difficult to understand how we can apply performance measures to that. The minister may tell me now.

There are many ways of measuring things. For example, applause for artistic performance is a way of measuring, as is growth, satisfaction and the development of understanding. The minister's fallacy is that everything can be measured and written down on a sheet of paper. Many of the great things, the numinous things in life, cannot be measured in  that way. That is what worries me about the performance measures. I am glad that Mr Harper is indicating strong agreement with me. My third problem with what has been said and written on the matter of culture is the vagueness of many of the Executive's proposals. For example, the document "Scotland's National Cultural Strategy" raises vagueness to an art form. Key priority 3.1 of the document has eight action points, six of which are so vague as to be meaningless. For example, the document uses phrases such as "recognise", "identify" and "ensure that the value". It is continually vague. I am glad that flesh is being put on those bones, but those bones are not new; they are old and they still require a great deal of fleshing out. We must take culture into the heart of education and make teachers and young people feel alive with creativity. We must open them to all sorts of influences and ensure that education is about releasing the potential of young people, not just to achieve, but to feel, experience and understand. I did not lodge an amendment because many things are happening that need to be pushed further, faster and with more resources. To that end, I am happy to support the motion. In an even-handed spirit, I shall also support the Tories' amendment, although I am confident that it will fail and that we will end up supporting the Executive motion. I hope that it will honour what it says.

I agree entirely with the minister that contact with creativity is essential. Can the minister indicate whether he is going to progress the ambition of the SNP and of other parties to ensure that music lessons in school are more freely available? Will he also ensure that all young people have contact with music and can learn a musical instrument at some stage in their school careers?

She was probably too busy reading e-mails.

Verdant Works has applied.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Mr Davidson makes a very sensible point, but does he accept that we have to act with what we are given? A number of projects need support now. Does he also accept that, because of the proliferation of projects with millennium funding, we may, unless we do something now, have problems that recur year after year after year, as has happened in Irvine with The Big Idea?

I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing the debate. I was delighted to hear from John McAllion that when he received the e-mail from the minister he sent it straight back. He is no kettle biler—he is not standing behind, but coming forward on this matter. As a former business manager, I have to say that the e-mail is disgraceful and I hope that attention will be paid to it.

Well, no doubt some people will believe that. Verdant Works is extremely important and I was pleased to go there with Irene McGugan and Shona Robison last year. Verdant Works is not unique in Scotland by any means. Yesterday I was at the Scottish Maritime Museum in Irvine, which has laid off a substantial number of staff and faces a bleak future—yet it is one of the industrial museums that has apparently been saved. I heard Ian Jenkins's eloquent plea for more time and more debate. The problem with that is that with every day and month that passes we lose parts of Scotland's heritage, because the process has taken so long. We are now in yet another consultation process leading to a conference in November. In the accidentally sent e-mail, the minister says: "It is highly unlikely that a positive response can be made to the central demand for reasons which will become clearer tomorrow." The e-mail was sent the day before the comprehensive spending review announcement. We knew then and we know now that there is no  more money for this task. The problem is that the situation cannot be resolved without more resources. I have slight sympathy for the minister, because an accidental set of circumstances has come together. Individual enterprise put together the successful package in Dundee, just as individual enterprise put together something very important in the mining museum at Wanlockhead. Now we require a national approach to the issue of what is valuable within our heritage and how we sustain it nationally. We have to find the line that we can draw between local provision, which local authorities and others support, and national provision. That line has not been drawn and consequently museums such as Verdant Works and attractions such as Discovery are suffering, because they are getting neither one thing nor the other. They are not getting enough local authority funding, because local authorities are tight for funding, and they are not getting enough national funding, because we have not got a national structure in place. The minister can take the position that her predecessors have taken—they are thinking about the problem and they will eventually come back with a solution. With every day that they think about it, we have more problems. They could accept that it is not a perfect solution to say, "Let's take what we have and build on it." We should take the things of national importance that exist, such as Verdant Works and Discovery and a variety of other attractions, stabilise them and make them part of a national structure. I suggest to the minister that that should be tied in closely with the Royal Museum of Scotland and National Museums of Scotland structure, which seems to be the right basis on which to build. Having done that, we should proceed. Of course there will be losers in that. Some of the smaller museums in local authority control will be problematic. There will be issues to discuss, such as the great collections in Glasgow. The minister must commit herself to a national structure now. In the minister's response I do not want to hear the words, "feasibility studies", "consultants' reports", "more time", "more debate" and "marketing assistance". The reality is that there is a real need now. We have had three years of debate on museums. Why do we not have action?

We all agree that the key issue is the protection of children. The only difference between my contribution and what the minister says is that if we change parents' behaviour first, we might benefit.

I will speak entirely about section 43, given my interest in education, my concern as a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and my role as the SNP's spokesperson on education. The Justice 2 Committee got it right and I will support its position. There is no doubt that there is a consensus in Scotland—Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to a quote from The Guardian —about ensuring that the maximum penalties exist and that maximum legislative protection is given, particularly concerning striking children on the head, shaking them and undertaking acts of violence that, even if they are already illegal, can be reinforced by legislation. The debate centres around one issue: the somewhat arbitrary age limit that is set in section 43(3)(a). That debate has been extensive. If the minister is to be criticised—my colleague  Roseanna Cunningham criticised him—it is because the way in which the matter was handled in the early stages polarised the debate in Scotland, and the debate should not be polarised. The debate was polarised again this afternoon, when Mr McLetchie made the inflammatory comment that the proposal was "politically correct nonsense." To be fair, the debate has also been polarised in some of the propaganda from the charities involved and it was polarised in the chamber on 13 September last year by Richard Simpson, who I am sorry is not currently in the chamber. He attacked Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for, among other things, believing that the issue was "one of ownership" and that "a child is in fact a possession".— [ Official Report, 13 September 2001 ; c 2511]  I do not think that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton believes that in any sense, and I see that he is nodding in agreement with me. The debate is polarised. We should dig underneath that debate and ask what we wish to achieve in Scotland. That is very simple. We wish to ensure that the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is operated within Scotland. It is not a casual document to be thrown away. The Conservative party believes that it is a valuable document, as does the entire chamber. How do we achieve what the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out? My friend Fiona McLeod quoted from the document, but she quoted slightly subjectively. I will read the first line of article 19.1: "States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures". Therefore, the argument is how we move towards a situation in which parents feel supported in such a way that the concept of striking children does not even enter their minds. I am not talking about the light tap on a hand to stop a child putting his hand in the fire; I am talking about the concept of physical punishment of children. How can we move to a situation in which the idea of punishing children physically does not enter people's heads? The minister, along with others, initially argued, in a manner that was far too inflammatory, that unless we follow his way—a crude, legislative way—violence in Scotland would worsen. I quoted Richard Simpson's comments of 13 September 2001 to show that even he made that argument. Others make a different argument: that we should support and help parents in Scotland by investing in them and putting into their minds the idea that there are other ways of behaving. Most parents know that automatically.

I have welcomed the fact that the Executive will not proceed with the provisions on the age limit. Pauline McNeill would not want me to go further than that by naming individuals who might be praised. Instead, let me praise the committee for the work that it has done. As I said, we must get into parents' minds and change their behaviour. I believe that a great deal of the violent behaviour that takes place is already covered by the law and leads to convictions. We must take a step-by-step approach, but that means that we must put in the resources. The minister is shaking his head. When he was not in the chamber, I quoted from the comments that he made on 13 September 2001. If the only remedy to the use of the implements that he listed on 13 September 2001 is a legal one—

I am sorry—I will finish on this point. The minister has just proved two points. First, he has not listened to the committee or read its report properly. I thought that the Executive had said that it was not going to proceed with the provisions, but the minister seems to be going against that. Secondly, the Executive does not have the right programmes. Dr Simpson should look at what is happening in Sweden and elsewhere and introduce those programmes in Scotland. As I am over time, I will conclude by saying that the SNP is now broadly content with the provisions in section 43 on the physical chastisement of children. I am sorry that it has taken so long to get here. I hope that the day will come when no one in Scotland smacks their child, but that will happen only because behaviour has changed, not because the Executive wanted to legislate.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I do not want to devalue future points of order by saying that mine is genuine, but it is. I therefore hope that what I say is not taken as a criticism of Pauline McNeill's very good speech. Two weeks ago I raised the issue of committee conveners speaking on behalf of their parties. Pauline McNeill spoke as the opening speaker for the Labour party and there is no harm in her doing so. I hope, however, that you will consider the possibility of giving conveners the time they need to speak in a debate so that they do not have to fulfil both roles. Both roles cannot properly be fulfilled and it is damaging to the debate, as you will see when you read the speech as published.

Further to that point of order—I realise that whether it is a point of order will be your judgment—the point that I was making is that I hope that you and your fellow Presiding Officers will consider whether standing orders need to be clarified. I am not criticising Pauline McNeill or her speech. I am simply concerned that there is confusion. If you read her speech in the Official Report , I am sure that you and members will conclude that that confusion is a problem for the chamber, not just for Pauline McNeill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Members who first heard of the matter when Mr Quinan raised it would be concerned if you made a ruling after committee deliberations started. He seems to have raised a substantive point, particularly in respect of the European convention on human rights. Will you issue a ruling either before committee work starts on the bill or ensure that work on the bill is not started until your ruling has been issued?

rose—

It is fascinating that we hear contradictory messages from Labour members and from Iain Smith. Even though they claim that the SNP will never be in power, they spend all their time worrying about that prospect. They have talked about it all afternoon. Let me remind John Home Robertson and Iain Smith of a basic fact of life. They are not spending Labour's or the Liberals' money on schools—they are spending Scotland's money. We will match that expenditure penny for penny, pound for pound, and brick for brick. In fact, we will do more with the money, because will spend it through trusts and public investment, instead of stuffing the pockets of the friends of Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Let me address the extraordinary document that is before us.

Oh dear. I want to address three issues that are discussed in the spending plans. The first is education. No one could object to the broad terms of the objectives that are set for education. The trouble is that there is no word about how they should be achieved. I am sorry to agree with Mr Davidson, but he is absolutely right about that. The reality is that many teachers will worry about the terms of the spending proposals. Targets 8 and 9 on page 23 are specific, but they have no resources linked to them so that they can be achieved. I suspect that what will happen—this is what always happens—is that the pressure will be on the poor classroom teacher to achieve the targets without any resources. That is very worrying. Nobody could object—I see that John Farquhar Munro is in the chamber—to the broad thrust of Gaelic policy in the spending proposals. I pay  tribute to Mike Watson, who has taken the issue more seriously than others have, but there is nothing specific that tells us how much the new Bòrd na Gàidhlig will cost, for example. That is a major weakness. The largest weakness is in the area of heritage and culture. The Scottish Arts Council has recently made appointments that bring it foolishly close to the Labour Executive, but today it will be bitterly disappointed because the spending proposals contain nothing for the future of Scottish culture. The small increase that is set out is tied to terms and conditions that do nothing to make culture more accessible to all. In the crucial area of heritage, the document is extremely defective. The reality is that the little increases in that area will go into the maw of Historic Scotland, a body about which more and more people worry. I am glad to hear that John Home Robertson agrees—I must be right. The reality is that Historic Scotland will get more and more money and others will get nothing, even though they are making the difference. I noticed that Mr Stone was behaving like a performing seal this morning when he applauded the minister—the missing minister who is addressing the nation on television from this building just now, rather than in the chamber. But that minister said nothing about museums. Mr Stone knows Tain and Tain museum well. A letter that I have from the curator of the Tain and District Museum Trust says: "Unless a system for applying museum policy and funding can be established nationally, small independent museums, which care for a wealth of national treasures and irreplaceable local knowledge, will continue to face an uncertain, and in some cases, non-existent, future." The spending proposals document is deeply defective, but it is most defective of all in that respect and it will damage Scotland.

That is not true.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Members will find it astonishing that the minister who gave the statement this morning is not present in the chamber even to listen to the debate, let alone to respond to the scrutiny. Will the Presiding Officer consider the implications of that for this Parliament?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I raised a point of order about the Minister for Finance and Public Services, who obviously does not take his own spending review seriously—therefore, how could the people of Scotland? I seek your permission to move a motion without notice to suspend the meeting until the Minister for Finance and Public Services appears at this finance debate.

All of us, I am sure, can remember where we were when we first heard the news of the attack on the twin towers. I was with Karen Gillon, Cathy Peattie, Irene McGugan, Brian Monteith and Ian Jenkins at an Education, Culture and Sport Committee event in New Lanark. Cathy Peattie received a call on her mobile from her daughter outside our hotel and we all rushed in to watch the television. New Lanark was an appropriate place—if any place can be called that—to start to reflect on a different world. In contrast to what we saw that day, New Lanark is founded on vision and hope. It was there that Robert Owen, in his new year's day address to the inhabitants, in 1816, wrote: "I know that society may be formed so as to exist without crime, without poverty, with health greatly improved, with little, if any misery, and with intelligence and happiness increased a hundredfold; and no obstacle whatsoever intervenes at this moment except ignorance to prevent such a state of society from becoming universal". Robert Owen tried to put into practice those utopian ideals and that utopian vision in New Lanark, but we should also recall that he tried to build a utopian community in America at New Harmony. The state in which New Harmony is situated is built on a utopian ideal. Indeed, all the states of the United States of America are built on a utopian ideal. The tragedy of 11 September showed us how far we are from utopia. To be far from utopia means feeling the pain and hurt of being a human being. We felt—and we still feel—the pain and hurt of the entire American people. Every member has friends in the United States. All of us spoke to them by phone or e-mailed them in the hours and days after the events. We are duty-bound as friends as well as human beings to help them to recover their fine attributes—innocence, outgoing confidence, generosity, freedom of spirit. That is the purpose of showing solidarity in the Parliament today. We are also duty-bound to think of other friends. My mother, who is dead now, left Edinburgh in  1948 to teach in Iraq. That was quite an adventure for a 27-year-old woman. When she was in Mosul, she needed to get her passport renewed. She went to the British consulate and met a 28-year-old man from Troon, who was working as a consul following war service in Egypt and time as a Reuters correspondent, when he had learnt Arabic. That man was my father. I am the product of a passport renewal. I was brought up in Scotland hearing and knowing much about the poor, suffering people of Iraq, who labour under oppression and violence by a leader who seized and has held on to power with unimagined brutality. Just as we as human beings want to heal the pain of our many friends in America, we want also to heal the pain of the Iraqi people. We should not be afraid of saying in the Parliament of all places that we want to create a utopia for them and for us, even if it is the hardest of tasks. We can do so only by underpinning that with the rule of law—Robert Owen knew that. We can do so only if we all accept that we cannot run off as individuals or individual states to follow individual causes or avenge individual or collective loss. We must work together. That means working together through the United Nations. We cannot do any of what I have suggested except by considered and co-operative action with all nations, taken for overwhelming reasons of the greatest good. That is what a utopia is. Those conditions are not yet in place. I believe—as do many in the Parliament—that their lack makes the present stance of the United Kingdom Government and the Government of the USA untenable. It is right that the Parliament can say so in friendship with the American people.

This has been an important debate, but I want to cut through a little of the warm words and mushiness that we have heard, in particular in the past 10 minutes. It is a cause for some anger—the minister will accept that, and we certainly heard anger in Scott Barrie's speech, among others—that we are in this position. The reality of the position that we are in cannot be overstated. We see in front of us an alarming set of circumstances. We see the failure not just of a system, but the failure of us collectively. The minister referred to corporate parenting in her introduction. We see the failure of us as a society, and the failure of us as the people who are responsible for guiding and moving society forward in Scotland. The statistics are terrifying. We are not talking about a large number of young people. The report's estimate is 11,000 people, of whom 1,300 are over 16, but we are dealing, for example, with a set of young people, almost two-thirds of whom have no standard grade exams, most of whom—83 per cent—have experience of truancy, and 71 per cent of whom have experience of exclusion. Think about those numbers. Within that small group of people, there was that level of experience. But it gets worse. Less than 1 per cent of that number go to university, so about 110 people out of that group go to university—a tiny proportion compared to the average in Scotland. If we compare those children with Scottish children in general, there is one statistic that sticks out like a sore thumb: 45 per cent of young offenders held in  custody in 2000 had been in residential care at some time. Just think about that. We are talking about 11,000 young people, which probably represents much less than 1 per cent of Scotland's young people, but 45 per cent of young offenders who were held in custody in 2000 had been in residential care at some time. Many of us react with horror when we see such figures applying to ethnic minorities in other countries or to groups of people, but in our own country there is a group of people, the proportion of which exhibiting offending behaviour is vastly in excess of the proportion in society. We should not lose sight of those figures. It is possible to have warm words, and it is possible to be cuddly in this debate, but there are hard, raw facts at the centre of it.

I have no difficulty in accepting that point. That is the context in which we have to examine the issue. Indeed, Mr MacAskill made those points in his speech. The group is not a static group; it is a group of people who move on, and when we fail them once, we fail them forever. We cannot go back and change that failure. I want to say one or two things directly to the minister, and I say them while acknowledging her personal commitment to these matters, and the personal commitment that we have seen across the chamber today. There will be no division along political lines on this matter. First, the minister should beware the siren voices that talk all the time about the voluntary sector. There is a statutory service and it is vital that we have it. Kay Ullrich illustrated the purpose of that. That is our responsibility and we must exercise it. There is much room for voluntary effort, but the responsibility starts here. Secondly, we need to take action, rather than just talk about the issue. That was the point of the SNP's amendment. I am sorry that the minister does not accept that. Our amendment accepts that a problem exists and says that we must go ahead on the basis of the working group's report. We are accepting an Executive report, because what we have identified is clear. We all know and acknowledge that the need exists and the reports show that. A statutory framework is in place. Phil Gallie is right that it could be improved, but it does exist. The individual, caring will exists in the caring professions and in the chamber, so what is absent?  I suggest that two requirements are absent. One is resources. Local authorities have difficulty with resources and say so. Oversight is also absent. We should begin to talk about the carrot and stick approach. Extra resources are undoubtedly required, but we should also have a cast-iron method of checking and inspection. As all the voluntary agencies say, that should start with the provision of data. We do not know the totality of the problem. The minister will have total support if she is going into battle with the civil service and others who are failing on the matter. If she can return to the chamber—perhaps as early as next week, with the budget consequentials—and tell us that the log-jam is cleared, that the carrot and stick are in place and that the situation will improve, she will have support. All of us want to make certain—[ Interruption ]—I am sorry that Mr Stone is not taking the matter seriously. I am taking it seriously.

All of us want to make a difference. We will support anyone who makes that difference, but we will not willingly return to the chamber to debate the matter once more in abstract without seeing progress.

The point that Cathy Peattie made needs to be emphasised strongly. From my reading of the report of the working group and a report by the University of York, I understand that the real issue that we are addressing is the failure to deliver a statutory service that must be delivered. That statutory service was well outlined by Kay Ullrich: it can be caring, but it is a statutory service on behalf of the state, which everything adds on to. That is the failure that we are addressing today.

I pay tribute to my front-bench colleagues, particularly Bruce Crawford and Fiona McLeod, for their tireless work on the issue during the summer when they were involved with a particular incident and its consequences. I hope that the minister will listen as I address the serious, long-term issue of lead in Scotland's water. Lead is a pernicious and cumulative poison. It is found in Scottish water for two reasons: through the use of lead solder and through the use of lead pipe or fittings. Even in the 21 st century, people in Scotland are still being poisoned by lead in their water supply. Last year, a young girl in Larkhall was hospitalised as a result of lead poisoning. The fact that lead is a poison that has a cumulative effect over the long term makes lead poisoning difficult to diagnose. Many potential diagnoses are tried before one discovers, through extensive testing, that one is literally being killed by the water that one drinks. Many people in the chamber will think that the problem is long past or is of small consequence and concerns only a handful of properties. However, the report by the drinking water quality regulator that was provided to us today tells the truth: at least 400,000 properties—possibly more—are affected. As the minister knows, the regulations that regulate the amount of lead in the water supply lead towards a cumulative reduction in the amount of lead in the supply. However, that could mean that the situation will worsen—in terms of numbers—over the next 10 years. When I was alerted to the Larkhall case—largely through the actions of the SNP's north Clydesdale branch, which has been working hard on the issue—I wrote to every local authority in Scotland to seek information about the situation in their areas. Some authorities were opaque, some refused to give detailed answers, but some, to which I pay tribute and which come from across the political spectrum, indicated that they had severe problems. I will quote briefly from one or two of the answers that I received. East Ayrshire Council estimates that it has problems with approximately 12,500 houses—that is an awful lot of houses. Given the money that the council can make available to do anything about those problems, it estimates that its lead replacement works will be completed by 2072. East Ayrshire is an exception, as most local authorities have solved the problems that existed in their housing stock. However, there are still huge problems in private  housing stock. Changes to regulations in 1998 meant that grants to replace lead are now means tested and the changes that are to be made to that grant scheme over the coming year will make it even more difficult for people to get resources. Argyll and Bute has 2,906 affected houses, almost all of which are private. The grant that the council can give means it will be 290 years before it can eliminate lead in private housing. There is a grave problem of persistent poisoning and it is a problem of which most people are unaware. Although water authorities replace lead piping on the supply into the house free of charge, piping within the house is the responsibility of the householder. The problem is not visible. People might have replaced a vast amount of the piping that they can see, but they might not have replaced all tanks or pipes that have lead solder, which they cannot see. There is a problem with resources in each local authority. There is a problem with drinking water quality. It is a public health problem about which we have known for more than half a century. We now know that some of the explorers of the north-west passage were killed by lead solder in the food that they took. We must eliminate lead in Scotland. We know that it is damaging people and making them ill. There must be a campaign and resources must be provided. It is the minister's job to provide them. I ask him to respond to that demand today.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not know whether there has been a mistake, but Mr Muldoon is the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee and appears to be opening for the Labour party. Given that our amendment supports referral of an issue to that committee, is it in order for Mr Muldoon to open?

On the same point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Muldoon has already responded in terms of his view as the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee as to whether there should be an inquiry, without the committee being consulted on the matter. I am sorry that Mr Muldoon has been put in this position, but we are in a very serious situation. A member who is speaking on behalf of the Labour party is also convener of a parliamentary committee. He cannot ride both horses at once. Some thinking should be given to that and whoever encouraged him to do so should think again.

Further to my earlier point of  order, I think that the Official Report will show—you might wish to check it, Presiding Officer—that Mr Muldoon did not mention the Labour party once, although he mentioned the Transport and the Environment Committee half a dozen times. The matter must be considered carefully.

As the member has just done.

Will the member give way?

We should say at the outset what the bill is about and what it is not about. It is about children's health, it is about eliminating poverty and it is about social progress in Scotland. It is not about the reputation of the Scottish Executive or Tommy Sheridan's wounded feelings. If we could take both of those out of the way, we might have a real debate. I am sorry that Nicol Stephen is in the chamber not because I do not like him, but because members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee know him as the minister for hopeless causes. Whenever there is a problem in the Executive or a difficulty to be overcome, he is the one who is sent out to bat.

Indeed, he is a Liberal Democrat and Liberal Democrats are, by definition, champions of hopeless causes and hopeless clauses. The situation is serious. I am a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, which considered the bill. I want to begin by paying tribute to members of that committee. I do not accept that there were closed minds on that committee, as Mr Sheridan claimed. There were issues to be discussed and considerable evidence was taken. The committee's eventual decision, from which I dissented, that the bill should not proceed was the wrong decision, but I do not attribute that to malice on the part of any member of the committee. We should make that clear at the outset. The committee was presented with a badly flawed and badly drafted bill. The bill is not, as Mr Sheridan at times tried to make it during the committee's consideration of it, a battering ram for his views. It simply does not yet measure up to the standards of a piece of legislation that would require detailed implementation. I do not want to sound like Wittgenstein by just going in for linguistic analysis. However, the bill seeks to have a nutritious free meal served to all children in the middle of the day, but it fails to define nutrition,  meals, children or free. The only binding definition that is to be found in the bill is of "the middle of the day". That means that if the bill were to be implemented, schools who served the meal one minute late would break the law. A bill that does that is a badly drafted bill. We should have had a better-drafted bill to debate in the Parliament. No attempt was made to address some of the cost implications of the bill, a fact that was mentioned in all the evidence that was taken on the bill. The cost implications are there and they cannot be taken away by magic. The costs do not simply have revenue implications; capital implications are also involved. No one has talked about the capital implications, but people will realise, after thinking for even a moment on the subject, that it would be impossible to serve the number of meals that would be required in Scotland without very substantial changes to the infrastructure of Scotland's schools. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee were presented with a bill that was difficult to take forward. I understand those who, at the end of the day, sympathetic as they are of the need to change Scotland's health and improve the health of its children, felt that they could not support the bill. However, my colleagues and I have reached a different decision. We have decided that it is possible to build on the bill to do some important things. I will list five of them, some of which are recommendations in the report that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee made to the Executive. We will need legislation to achieve them. First, we need to do something about the provision of water and milk. Mr Sheridan has a strong point in that respect. His argument is that, when children cannot have access to free water in schools in the 21 st century, we have to ask ourselves what sort of society we live in. Although some schools provide water, many do not. Secondly, the SNP has a long-standing policy of ensuring that fruit and berries are provided in schools. The policy is based on good practice elsewhere and it would be possible to build on it. Thirdly, we are desperately in need of a definition of nutrition in schools. Scotland is vastly out of step with other European countries in failing to define nutrition. Fourthly, those who listened to "Good Morning Scotland" this morning would have heard that free school meals are provided in Finland partly because of the communal experience that they provide schools to sit down and eat together as a community. We can learn from that and it is something that we could put into legislation. Finally, we could use the bill to ban some bad practices such as the reliance of schools on  revenue from fizzy-drink machines to sponsor school cafeterias and canteens. I am sorry that the minister rejected that proposal on the radio this morning. The bill could be used to move forward. The SNP has addressed the question in terms that are similar to those that the church and nation committee of the Church of Scotland addressed it. I assure the Presiding Officer that I am concluding on this point. The church—

No. I am about to finish, otherwise I would take the member's point. The church and nation committee wrote that it believes "that the Bill currently before the Scottish Parliament is seeking laudable objectives and should be supported - and certainly it should be given the consideration that moving to Stage 2 would allow." I ask the chamber to do just that. Let us do the job that Scotland sent us here to do. Let us consider in detail what we could do with the raw material of the bill. Let us move to stage 2. The SNP will support Mr Sheridan's motion in those terms.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The speech that we have just heard gives the lie to the myth that the Liberals are the honest and interesting people of Scottish politics. We have heard a dishonest misrepresentation of the SNP's position. Robert Brown's speech echoed the position of Mr Davidson and Mr Kerr.

Please sit down.  The SNP is committed to public services in Scotland. We want the best that we can provide and we could provide many more services under the plans that the SNP proposes. The Tory party began to do so and the Labour party has continued to pour excess profits into the pockets of developers, rather than put it into books, equipment and the future of our children. That is the simple fact.

The same people would build the schools as are building them now, but they would not build them for excess profits. [ Laughter. ] This is fascinating: the huge laugh is that the parties that are sitting across the chamber are locked into a private sector model that makes prisoners of them. They cannot think their way through the difficulty that they are in. However, it is fortunate that there is a party that can.

I do not think that Mr Brown should be inflicted on members again. There are two considerable problems that we have to address today. Indeed, there are many more problems. Mr Morgan's masterful approach to the issue outlined all those problems. I am always happy to come second to Mr Morgan because he is a man who knows what he is talking about. [MEMBERS: "You are fourth."] Members must take my words at face value. There are two key problems. One is the attrition of education budgets. One of the most fascinating figures in the Audit Commission report shows that 24 per cent of the non-staff education budget in Glasgow is being spent on the cost of PFI projects. That means that the amount of money that is available for education in Glasgow is declining and will continue to decline.

No. We will listen to Mr McNulty when he speaks later. Later in the debate, Fiona Hyslop will go into the decline in the amount of money that is available, but the reality is that the money that is available for education is being squeezed not just in Glasgow, but in councils throughout Scotland. The inevitable result of PFI is that less money, rather than more, is available for education, which leads to school closures and poorer education. There is also an extraordinary policy constraint within PPP and PFI projects. That is illustrated on page 52 of the Audit Commission's report. There  are many complex issues around risk, but the real risk in education is being taken by the councils. PFI/PPP contracts tie the councils to issues of demand for service and volume usage, and to changes to requirements and service specifications. That sounds very technical and does not sound very interesting. However, it means that for 25 years, councils that are involved in PFI/PPP projects cannot improve education through their policies because their policy options are constrained solidly by contract. We are not just mortgaging our future; we are closing down the options for improving public services in Scotland. The Parliament must think imaginatively. We have to think creatively about the future. I noticed that there has been praise for the Argyll and Bute model. It is interesting that there has been praise for a model that has been developed, although we have not yet heard an announcement from the Scottish Executive about when that model will be implemented. I hope that we might hear about that later today.

No thank you. I believe that everyone in the chamber wants better public services. The SNP is saying—others should listen—that we could get even better public services if, in the words of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, we are prudent in how we go about it. Prudence will give Scotland more than will the incompetence of the current administration and its ideological masters.

Let us hear from the minister.

Will the minister give way?

Let me first of all welcome the important proposal for children's legislation that the First Minister outlined. However, I hope that, when the Deputy First Minister sums up, he will indicate how the Executive plans to allocate resources to tackle the crisis in child social work. The bill cannot work unless there is a sufficient number of child social workers, which there is not. As my friend Irene McGugan has pointed out again and again, there is now a grave recruitment crisis in social work. Without sufficient resourcing, the bill will not work. I suspect that much of the legislation in the programme will not work because the mechanisms to put the legislation into practice have simply not been resourced. Presiding Officer, you and I are old enough—as are others, I am sure—to remember watching the men on the Kremlin wall at events during the Soviet Union's annual celebrations. There grew up a whole industry of people who could tell who was in and who was out just by looking at the photographs. In fact, the entire history of the Soviet Union can now be analysed by examining the extent to which the photographs were doctored. That is what is done in an excellent book, "The Commissar Vanishes". Having decided to apply that technique to the Scottish Executive, I got hold of "Working together for Scotland: A Programme for Government". Indeed, how the ministers have vanished. Look at the sad picture of the Scottish Cabinet: Wendy Alexander, gone; Henry McLeish, gone; Sarah Boyack, gone; Angus MacKay, gone; Susan Deacon, gone; Jackie Baillie [MEMBERS: "Gone."];  Tom McCabe [MEMBERS: "Gone."]—gone, but not forgotten, of course. Only one Labour person in the picture has survived and he has survived in various incarnations. We saw why in his statement today. He is an arch-juggler and manipulator; he can make something out of virtually nothing. That is what he did today. However, there is a problem with that, because without vision there can be no progress, and Mr McConnell's statement was completely without vision.

No. I am talking about the leader of Mr Jenkins's coalition, so it is important that he listen. That leader is a man whom even Mr Jenkins is prepared to follow to the barricades. That is an unlikely idea, I know, but there we are. There was no vision, particularly on education and culture. I want to address both those issues. There was an announcement of possible legislation on special educational needs—the words were that the Executive was "developing proposals". The Education, Culture and Sport Committee considered that issue more than two years ago. There has been consultation, the results of which the Executive has had for six months. However, only now is the Executive "developing proposals". That does not show much urgency.

No, I am sorry, I have only four minutes. I am interested in action, not words. I will not give way. We need to consider what else has to be done in education. A vast range of things has to be done. On discipline in schools and on the rights and responsibilities of young people, we have heard nothing at all; on the five-to-14 action plan, nothing at all; on class sizes, nothing at all; and on teacher training—which has to be sorted out—nothing at all. In fact, there is no vision on education whatever. Education, education, education has become nothing, nothing, nothing. There is also a huge problem in culture. Incredibly, the statement that we heard today was the fourth occasion on which no announcement has been made on any legislation relating to culture in Scotland. From the start right through to the end of the parliamentary session, the Parliament will have considered not one piece of legislation on culture. Many people who spent years campaigning for this Parliament because they thought that it would make a difference to the culture and values of Scotland are bitterly disappointed in the lack of action. There are whole  areas that require action—including the outmoded national institutions and the outmoded and creaking bureaucracy of culture—but nothing has been done. Most important of all is Gaelic. Last week, the ministerial advisory group reported. It criticised the paralysis of consultation since 1999 and it called for urgent action. Its number 1 recommendation was for a secure-status bill for Gaelic—something that the Labour party promised in 1999. However, the word "Gaelic" did not appear in Mr McConnell's statement—not a mention of it. Mr Iain Smith, who fortunately has left the chamber, talked about not getting Tricia Marwick's bill. Tricia Marwick and I face the same difficulty: the Parliament has inadequate resources for drafting members' bills. However, the non-Executive bills unit is drafting a bill on Gaelic. If the Executive wants to take that bill on, it may—I am not precious about it. Mr McConnell promised that there was a new way of doing things. I say to him today that, if he is committed to Gaelic, let him offer to take on the bill to give the language secure status. In that way, we would at least have one bill in the first four years of the first Scottish Parliament in 300 years that dealt with the precious aspects of our culture.

This debate is quite extraordinary. The application of technology, which Tom Wolfe has described as humanity's new nervous system, is an exciting subject. However, new Labour manages to make it exceedingly dull and uninteresting. New Labour talks about it all the time, because it has so little else to talk about—it is reduced to trumpeting comparatively minor changes that it is making badly. New Labour members do not like criticism, but they are going to get it. Even the Tories managed to something in respect of modernising government. They did not do a great deal, but they started to do something. The Tories started down that path because any Government in the 21 st century would have had to do the sort of things that have been listed in today's briefings. Those things are necessary simply to confront the world as it is; to start trumpeting such action as achievements—

I tell Mr Kerr that we must analyse what new Labour is doing. The only point of analysis that we can use is comparison with what is happening in other countries. The reality is that new Labour is doing not very much, not very well—the real work is being done by the people on the ground who are committed and enthusiastic about new technology. Mr Davidson was almost right about that.  Those committed and enthusiastic people find that the endless competition for small amounts of funding is counterproductive—it wastes time and resources. They also find the vast amount of bureaucracy that they must deal with in order to get money and micromanagement of money through ring fencing to be extremely counterproductive. All those things must change. Allow me ask a question, Presiding Officer: What would be the true hallmarks of a modernised Government? That is a point that Mr Kerr wanted to make and that new Labour always wants to make. I will suggest four hallmarks in addition to the obvious one, which is that its leader would not process with a ceremonial purse. Other things would happen in an open and accessible Government. First, it would not be crony-driven. As we have seen once again in the past week, the reality is that the only way to get ahead in Scottish public life is to have a Labour party membership card. Secondly, a modernised Government would prove itself to be worthy of trust. In time for reflection today, we heard that trust is difficult to hold because it can slip through the fingers. If there is a Government that has allowed the people's trust to slip through its fingers during its term of office, it is the new Labour Government. Nobody thought it could be worse than the Tories, but its reputation is at rock bottom. Thirdly, a modernised Government would deliver high quality services without a song and dance such as we have heard today. It is all talk and very little action. Finally, a modernised Government would have real ambition. Its real ambition would be an independent nation, working hard within the world, having something to talk about—[ Interruption. ] The Labour members do not like the truth. An independent nation would have something to talk about and boast about and would make sure that the people of Scotland got good Government, not the pathetic Government about which Andy Kerr talked.

I welcome your statement, Presiding Officer, and the co-operation that you have given in this matter. I regret that we are now at this moment. I accept that there is a requirement within the Scotland Act 1998 to have a sub judice rule. The question is whether the Parliament's sub judice rule is an appropriate one or whether it goes too far, as do other parts of our standing orders, in preventing appropriate debate and action within the chamber. I object to the removal of the motion regarding Shirley McKie because it is obvious to common sense that the Parliament's sub judice rule goes too far. The common sense rule that should be applied is to ask whether the issue is being discussed in any detail elsewhere. The answer is yes. The issue is debated in the newspapers and on the radio. It was debated last night on "Newsnight Scotland" and will be debated this week on "Panorama". [Interruption.] I am trying to make serious points, despite interruptions. It is obvious that if the debate on the Shirley McKie case can take place in the media and elsewhere, members must ask why it cannot take place in Scotland's Parliament. It seems ludicrous to the public at large and to the media that we are forbidden from raising the case in Parliament. The speech that I provided you with, Presiding  Officer, introduced no new material and made no new revelations or assertions. However, it went through the detail of the case and indicated not only the concerns of the community in Scotland to issues arising from the case, but those of the world forensic community. My speech could raise such concerns only on the basis of the previous case, which was concluded three years and one day ago today, in which Shirley McKie, who is present in the public gallery, was found not guilty of perjury. In those circumstances, I was endeavouring to see what answer the Executive would give to the concerns of the international community. Despite the fact that a letter from world fingerprint experts, a copy of which I hold in my hand, was delivered to the Minister for Justice two weeks ago, I have not yet had a response from him. Presiding Officer, I accept that your ruling is within the standing orders and I will not press the issue to a vote, particularly as another Scottish National Party member has a members' business motion for today. However, I ask you and the Procedures Committee to reflect on the fact that the sub judice rule is damaging debate in the Parliament and, indeed, is damaging the Parliament. It appears that in the very place where we should be—

Again, instead of trying to enter into debate, Labour members are interrupting. Instead of having a sub judice rule that can command respect within the chamber and from the media, we have a sub judice rule that is suppressing debate and making Parliament look silly.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will be represented at the meeting of education ministers from European Union countries and applicant states, which is to be held in Bratislava in June. (S1O-5137)

Perhaps the minister could remind the delegation that Scotland has a different educational system. The minister could also get out a bit more—for example, she could learn from a delegation from the parliament in Bremen, which is visiting the Scottish Parliament today. The delegation is here to look at the experience of Scotland and the European city of culture work that has been undertaken in Glasgow. Would the minister not find it appropriate to go to Europe to talk and learn about education, rather than to be spoken for?

I thank the First Minister for that assurance. However, people who are presently working on probationary contracts have been told that they will lose their posts so that new teachers can be brought in during the induction year. I would like to ask again the question that I think Cathy Peattie asked. Is there a guarantee that those individuals will be allowed to finish their probationary period and qualify instead of being turfed out to make room for teachers on the induction scheme? It would be absolutely wrong for them to be turfed out.

I thank the minister for her statement, which is in the way of a progress report on the normalisation of the Scottish exams system. It is incredible that, having had a consultation exercise, the minister can come up with the conclusion that "we need to find a solution that significantly reduces the burden of assessment while maintaining standards of both internal and external assessment." That was the conclusion of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report on the SQA two years ago. We did not need to have another consultation in order to reach that conclusion. I welcome the fact that progress is being made, but some key questions need to be addressed, three of which I will ask. First, as Ian Jenkins pointed out several times in the inquiry, one of the key problems with introducing the new exams was that teachers' fears about a range of difficulties were not addressed. Given that, how are we making sure that parents, teachers and young people are fully involved in the changes? Previously, changes took place despite the views of individuals in consultation exercises. Secondly, given that we need to see the benefits of the changes rapidly—because, as the minister's statement admits, we still have an examination system that over-assesses and is not properly attuned to the needs of young people—when will that process be concluded? When will the Scottish exams system do what it should do? Thirdly, on the question of the standard grade qualification, does the minister accept that one of the key issues in examinations is to make absolutely certain that employers, parents and young people understand what the certificates mean? The variation in the type of certificate that young people get is now wider than ever, so it must be right to ensure that we have a standardised approach. If experimentation is taking place in a number of schools, we need a national examination of the way in which that can move forward. Simply to say that we propose to do nothing means that the confusion will get worse. Will the minister consider examining the Scottish examination system closely to ensure that the present confusion about what results mean is not  made worse?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to the point that Mr Canavan raised, will you confirm whether you have had a request from Wendy Alexander to make a personal statement? That would appear to be the right way to proceed as it seems strange that the chamber has been told nothing about the circumstances of her resignation.

We should be able to keep well ahead of programme. Mr McConnell is encouraging me to speak for longer than I intended—I will be happy to speak longer if Mr McConnell wants to hear me. I will start with a reference to Mr McConnell. When he was Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, he introduced the bill. To my mind, the one big issue that had to be considered was whether the organisation should be a non-departmental public body or an agency. Given the difficulties that had existed, my feeling was that an agency structure was more appropriate. I was not convinced otherwise by Mr McConnell's arguments, but by those of John Ward, who is the chairman of the SQA. He made the fair point that the number of changes required to make the body an agency would have been unduly disruptive. I was happy to accept John Ward's argument and to work with the present ministerial team to ensure that the bill was the best that it could be. That is not a personal comment about Jack McConnell; I would have worked with the previous ministerial team had it still been there. In his evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, the director of education for North Lanarkshire Council made an interesting comment about the SQA. He said that the structure of the SQA was not that of a normal non-departmental public body. The differences are important. The aims of restructuring the SQA are twofold. One is to ensure that the SQA never again gets into the difficulties that it got into two years ago. The second is to provide a platform for changes in the examination system, which will undoubtedly continue to be made. There was a laudable desire to ensure that the SQA is up to its  current task, but there was an equally strong desire to ensure that it was up to other tasks that might fall to it as the examination system changes. The bill ends one period for the SQA and starts another. I pay tribute to the ministers, particularly to Nicol Stephen, who has been flexible. The changes that have been made to the bill increase the likelihood that the SQA will be able to move forward and reduce the chances that the body might revert to the difficult situation that it was in. That was the aim when the process began. The bill has been improved by interaction between the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the ministerial team. The SNP members are happy to support the bill as the start of something new. There are big challenges for the Scottish education system and for the examination system, as has been shown in some of the debates that took place last week, for example, on the future of the standard grade exam. With a new and properly functioning SQA we should be able, by collaboration, co-operation and discussion to make changes that will benefit the real consumers, who are the young people of Scotland. I am happy to support the bill.

Jackie Baillie and the minister have said virtually all that there is to say. The proposal was supported right across the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, with the exception of Mr Monteith. I am grateful that the Executive has moved on it. It sets a useful precedent. The Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 led to the proposal and I hope that it, in turn, will lead to other things, including employee representation on the boards of the national arts companies, which the committee has previously requested. That has not yet happened. However, amendments 4 to 10 move us into a situation in which consultation within the SQA will not be replaced, but will be added to. We are pleased to support amendments 4 to 10.

I will be as brief as the minister. The two big issues at stage 2 of the bill were the question of employee participation and the question of the relationship between the advisory council and the SQA board. The minister undertook to produce suggestions. I have seen his memorandum and his proposals. They do not go as far I want, but they go about 90 per cent of the way. It would be churlish to do other than thank the minister for that. He is a model of his sort. I doubt whether his memoirs will be a prose model, but his ministerial work on the bill is to be commended because he listened to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. In that light, there is no reason for me to move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 not moved.

Speak for yourself.

I welcome the debate. We move our amendment in the same spirit as the minister did not accept it. In other words, we believe that it is somewhat better than the Executive's motion and that, if it was accepted, it would improve the motion. First, our amendment mentions active consultation and, secondly, it encourages a wide view of the world. Neither of those proposals run contrary to the spirit of the debate or to what the minister has said. Our amendment is, of course, substantially better than Murdo Fraser's amendment, so the chamber should accept it. Presiding Officer—I see that we now have a different Presiding Officer; it is like buses, there will be another one along in a minute.

At the start of the debate at least, I thought that it would be sensible to apply the techniques outlined in something that is referred to in the motion—the splendid re:action consultation toolkit. I have taken the basic section on "Knowing where you are going" as the template for judging the debate and where it will go. The section starts with a splendid quote from "Alice in Wonderland": "'Would you tell me please, which way I ought to go from here?' said Alice." I presume that that is the minister. The cat responds: "That depends a good deal on where you want to get to." That is one of the wisest statements that we have heard in the chamber for a long time. The section lists useful tips and hints on developing a policy. It states that it is necessary to "Start the planning stage of the consultation by writing out the objectives" and to "Make sure the objectives are clear, specific, jargon-free and realistic". In addition, it is necessary to "Ask yourself 'Have I chosen the best approach to achieve  the objectives?'" and to "Constantly return to your objectives" and ask whether the approach is working. At the end of the day, it is necessary to ask whether the objectives have been achieved. Another objective must be "to have a fun/enjoyable time for all involved". Unfortunately and uncommendably, that objective is missing from the motion. I must say that the rest is almost there. The issue is not only for the Executive; it is a profound issue for the whole Parliament, particularly for the parliamentary committees. I want to reflect a little on my experience of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's successes and failures. Nearly all members are committed to consultation with, and participation by, young people. I do not want to run the risk of appearing too self-interested—

That would be unlikely. [Laughter.] I knew that that would get a laugh. Each and every one of us, as politicians, must be worried about the low level of participation in conventional politics by young people.

Not at the moment. I am sure that Mr Sheridan intends to contradict me. All political parties have more older people than younger people. No political party that is represented in the chamber appeals directly to the idealism of young people any longer. Some parties appeal to young people more than others, but there is a shortage of young people who participate in politics. Added to that, there is a shortage of young people who participate in community events. However, there is no shortage of interest among young people in such events and in—to use the biggest words—how to change the world. We must find a bridge between the idealism and enthusiasm of young people and the day-to-day work and objectives of the Parliament and its committees. Today, we should consider that interface. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee has worked hard to consider it. I pay particular tribute to my friend Fiona McLeod, who, from the beginning of the Parliament's work—as members of the committee will know—has been a persistent advocate of considering young people. That has  been a surprisingly difficult thing to do. Members of the committee are almost embarrassed because we do not know how to do it. Rather interestingly, the minister mentioned that young people are keen to participate but do not believe that they are listened to. That fact comes out in all the research. Equally, young people do not believe that what they say is acted upon. That issue is not a simple one for a parliamentary committee or legislature to address, because simple demands cannot quickly be converted into action; there is a process in between. We must try to engage young people in that process to make them understand not only that they are listened to, but that, over time, their views, representations and ideas make it through into the legislative process. There are simple matters that we must overcome. Members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee will remember a consultation session with young people on the proposed children's commissioner bill, which took place in the chamber. That was absolutely the wrong place to have the consultation and it was done in the wrong way. The members sat in one row and the young people sat facing them in another row. When another member and I tried to break the convention by going over to talk to the young people, we were told that we were not being picked up by the microphones and that we could not be recorded.

I agree absolutely with that point. Tommy Sheridan raises one of the major problems in our democracy, but we cannot do everything in an afternoon, so we should stick to talking about young people. Alienation from the political process is a severe problem not only in Scotland, but—to our cost—in Europe. We must examine and address certain key issues. One is non-participation; another is representation. It is not enough for adults to choose young people as typical or representative. We must have the mechanisms to allow young people to elect or select their own representatives, and probably a range of such representatives. The Scottish youth parliament is undoubtedly an important innovation, and I am glad that the Executive is now funding it, but we need a range of youth organisations, so that we will see different  young people coming forward for different purposes. We must also have a commitment to integrate the views of young people in formal structures. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee has worked hard on that issue. It is equally important that other committees work on it and that the work that has been done is deepened and broadened. We should find ourselves under an obligation—even a self-imposed one—to consult, listen and act. One of the issues that we have not yet tackled in the Parliament is the fact that we have done nothing about bringing people into the parliamentary structure. That applies across the board. Tommy Sheridan is right about the situation, for example, in relation to ethnic community participation. At the beginning of the Parliament, my friend Alex Salmond suggested strongly that some committees should bring in outside representatives as non-voting members. The idea was rejected by the Procedures Committee for valid reasons; however, it was at least an attempt to address the issue. We must continue to address it, to find ways of bringing people in. Funding is another issue. The Scottish youth parliament receives £80,000. That is a significant grant, but it is not enough to allow all the young people in Scotland to be heard regularly. We cannot undertake consultation, or get young people involved, on the cheap. We must address that. There are also issues about feedback. The frustration of young people in Scotland at constantly being asked to provide views and receiving no feedback on the result is a real issue. Attention has been drawn to that in several recent reports. Young people must be made to feel not only that there is a place for them in consultation, but that their views are being reflected on and that the system is undergoing perpetual improvement. Perhaps the largest issue is the willingness of individual members of the Parliament to develop and change their political styles. Politics is a combative business. It is still about the survival of the fittest, despite the fact that, in 1999, we talked grandly and at length about a new Scottish politics.

Of course. I agree entirely. If Cathy Peattie had allowed me to finish my point, she would have heard that I was about to agree with her completely—as usual—just as I agreed  with Tommy Sheridan. Members are jumping in early this afternoon, instead of allowing the debate to develop. We must change the type of politics in which we are engaged. The process is not easy or consistent. Sometimes we are not very good at it; sometimes the provocation to return to the old styles is nearly overwhelming. However, young people and many others find the political process off-putting. The underpinning issues in this debate concern our democracy and the way in which it develops. A healthy democracy is one that involves the widest range of people, from young to old—this debate on young people will be followed by a debate on agism—and from across all barriers and in all sectors. A healthy democracy is one in which people believe that it is worth while to be involved because their participation counts. There is a commitment in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child to involve young people in public life and to listen to them. The Parliament has passed legislation, including the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, that demands that children be listened to. However, unless that cuts into everything that we do—every piece of legislation, every committee inquiry and everything that we consider in this chamber—and unless there is a realisation by the members of the Scottish youth parliament and others that a difference has been made by the participation of young people, we will go on having debates, but we will not involve people. I move amendment S1M-3048.1, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "encourages all of Scotland's young people to have open and enquiring minds about the future of their country, their continent and their world, in order that they might take an active part in the widest range of national and international affairs, and therefore requests that the Executive consult widely with Scotland's young people as well as with other devolved administrations and other European governments in order that there can be a positive and informed Scottish response to the European Union white paper on youth."

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria govern its use of advertising. (S1O-5044)

I thank the minister for his reply, but it is a pity that good sense and sensitivity to public opinion are not among those criteria. Does the minister honestly believe that extensive radio and billboard advertising for the Executive's great debate on education can be justified, given that the number of places for teachers and budgets for books are being cut?

I begin by praising two speeches, although it might not help the members to be praised by me. Trish Godman's speech was reasoned, passionate about the work that she did and still believes in and passionate about the profession of which she was a member. I also praise the speech of Irene McGugan, who, like Trish Godman, was a professional social worker. I wish that I could extend that praise to the third professional social worker who spoke, but unfortunately I cannot, because—alas—Scott Barrie's blind loyalty to new Labour overcame his loyalty to his profession. I would also like to be able to praise Sylvia Jackson's speech, but she seemed to think that she was in an academic seminar, rather than in a legislative forum. We are not here to speculate; we are here to consider proposals and to debate them. The problem this afternoon is that we do not have proposals to debate. I have heard the smear—Alex Johnstone referred to it, we heard it from Scott Barrie and the minister, and others will repeat it—that in arguing about what has taken place we are talking down social workers or criticising the profession. That is not true. We are strongly committed to the social care work force and to getting the issues that are the subject of today's debate right. The person who has damaged social work in Scotland this afternoon is the Minister for Education and Young People—of that there is no doubt. This afternoon, instead of providing a document to discuss or a set of proposals that might be improved by genuine debate, she showed contempt for the chamber and the parliamentary process.

No. This is not Stalinist Russia; this is the new Scottish democracy. This afternoon, the principles of the CSG were set at naught. The Labour party does not like to hear such things, because it regards itself as the guardian of Scottish democracy. However, by its actions this afternoon, Labour has shown that it is the party that is destroying Scottish democracy. We cannot have a debate without a document. Robert Brown is right—we cannot have a debate  without the Executive trying to help the whole chamber to understand what its proposals are. The point of the Parliament is to scrutinise the work of the Executive and, if possible, to improve the actions of the Executive. The point is not to act, as so many Labour members do, as mere rubber stamps for whatever the minister wishes to do or say, but that is what we have seen this afternoon. I believe that what has happened is a disgrace to the chamber and damaging to social work and to Scotland.

It is not outrageous. It is what has taken place this afternoon. The minister might not like it, but it is what has taken place.

I have always found that, when the Labour party is in real trouble, it asks what our proposals are. The reality is that the minister's actions today have damaged social work because she has created an unnecessary debate.

In deference to the Presiding Officer, I shall move on to the question of where we go from here. Alex Johnstone raised the issue when he summed up. The minister should return to the chamber at a suitable time—after considerably more work has been done—and produce a document to distribute to members. Perhaps that could go through the committee system. At the end of that process, let us have an informed debate. That is what the Parliament is here to do. The more one looks at the document, the less there is in it. Any document that has—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sorry that the Minister for Parliamentary Business regards votes in the chamber as spurious. That proves what I have said throughout my speech. The Labour Administration cares little for democracy. It cares less for the Parliament. It does not even care for its partners, the Liberal Democrats, who did not get to see the document. The SNP will press its amendment and abstain on the motion.

I recall the remarks that the member's colleague Margaret Smith made. She made it clear that she was not able to comment on the detail because she had not seen the document. When did Mr Jenkins see the document? How long has he had to study it? He is referring in detail to aspects of the plan. Did he obtain the plan before Margaret Smith?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If, as we have now discovered, even the partners in the coalition were not told of the existence of the document that we have received this afternoon, would it not be sensible for the minister—even at this stage—to cease this farce and to allow us to read the document properly, to reflect on it and to return to this debate in, say, seven days' time?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

There is one thing that I do not understand—of course, we have not been given enough information to understand it. Looking at the Executive's document, which we received about 15 seconds before the debate, I am struck by the fact that the minister is rushing at the situation, having done nothing since she came to office. Her predecessor did nothing when he was in office and his predecessor did nothing when he was in office. Indeed, the base document for the action plan was signed off by Donald Dewar as the Secretary of State for Scotland, in March 1999. This crisis has been allowed to happen and we are now hearing the usual platitudes from the Executive when it realises that it has been caught out.

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. The motion specifically asks the chamber to endorse the strategy, which was made available to the  Opposition parties at 11 minutes to 2. There has been no opportunity for us to consider the strategy, let alone to endorse it. Lodging a motion in respect of a document that it has not been possible for us to consider is an insult to the chamber and to the people of Scotland. Would it not be wise to ask the Executive to withdraw its motion until we have had an opportunity to consider the strategy—or at least to read it?

With the greatest respect, with reference to the point that Alex Neil made, I know that you are aware that the role of the Presiding Officer is to protect members and to ensure equality of treatment. Surely it is impossible for members to take part in a debate on a strategy that they have not had time to read. Would it not be protecting the chamber, members and the people of Scotland to persuade the Executive to withdraw the motion at least until we have read the strategy?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to meet the target for the provision of extra teachers in the classroom that is envisaged in the McCrone settlement. (S1O-5016)

It will be rather difficult for the minister to meet that target date, considering the cut in teacher training over which his Executive is presiding. I quote the First Minister, from when he was Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs. In a reply in the chamber, he said: "We are dramatically increasing the number of primary teachers who will be in the system in the next few years. That increase will require an increase in the number of students who train to become primary teachers."— [ Official Report , 4 October 2001; c 3141.]  Is it not true that 177 primary teaching places have been lost in the coming year? How will it be possible to meet the target that the minister is talking about?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, there is a feeling in several parts of the chamber that we are inadequately prepared for the debate. [Interruption.] I wonder whether it would be possible to speak without Mr Fitzpatrick behaving as if he were going to be thrown a fish like a performing seal—not a very good performing seal, or an underperforming seal, as Mr Hamilton has said. There is a feeling across the chamber that we are not adequately prepared for the debate. In addition, Presiding Officer, the letter that you have just referred to indicates something incredible. Would you permit me, under rule 8.15.1, to move a motion for the adjournment of the debate, on the grounds that we have not had an opportunity to consider the document that is the subject of the debate? That would require a motion without notice to be accepted by you.

So you are prepared to accept a motion without notice and a debate on the motion.

Thank you. The case has been made several times this afternoon, but let me repeat it again. The motion before us this afternoon says clearly that we are considering a strategy from the Executive on social care work force development. The motion states that the Parliament "endorses the Executive's strategy". The document that contains that strategy was not notified to any of us in the chamber—certainly not those of us on the Opposition benches—until 10 to 2 this afternoon, when the document in photocopied format was delivered to my office and, I think, Mary Scanlon's office.

That was 10 minutes before the meeting began in the chamber. It was impossible to distribute the document to other members. Indeed, given the terms regarding access to documents under which the business managers operate, its distribution to members would be discouraged. As a result, unless members have had an opportunity to get the document from elsewhere, they are going into a  debate at half-past 3 this afternoon to endorse a strategy that they have not seen. That strategy may or not be good, but it is not possible for the chamber to debate it sensibly. I say to the minister that it would be courteous to withdraw the debate to allow us to consider the document and debate it later. The amendments to the motion were lodged on the basis of what we knew had been said by the Executive over many months. We were unaware that there was something else to be said. If it was said in the debate, that would be fine. If there was a news release, well, we are used to government by news release. However, there is a document that is meant to be the subject of the debate, which we have not been able to consider. That is not democratic. It is not what Scotland expected from the Parliament. It is contrary to the consultative steering group principles. I ask the chamber to make sure that the debate does not happen. I move, That, under Rule 8.15.1, the debate on motion S1M-2994 be adjourned.

Things are being thrown at Brian Monteith now.

Often in stage 3 debates, one gets to the point where the only thing that is left to do is to thank the priest for the hire of the hall. Frankly, we have had all the appreciation that we need, although everyone has worked very hard. I was alarmed by Brian Monteith's compliments to the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People. I suspect that being complimented by Brian Monteith is a very bad thing—I have never experienced it.

Thank you, Mr McAveety, I am reassured by that comment.

Mr Monteith may well be  tempted, but he is not getting in. The important point that I want to make is not a whinge, but a reality. The briefing that Capability Scotland provided to members for the debate, which urges us to support the bill, points out the figures that are at the heart of the issue. It states that the Westminster Government, under "the Schools Access Initiative ... has allocated £220 million for 2002-02005; and £100 million for 1999-2002". Capability Scotland estimates that the proper figure for Scotland for 1999-2005 would be at least £32 million, which does not approach the amount that has been allocated. If we want the policy to succeed, we will have to resource it. The simple fact is that we must find the right amount of resources to back the policy. In the stage 1 debate, I said that I thought that there would be huge demand and that when people realised what things could be done, they would want them to be done quickly. It is a similar problem to that faced by the Scottish Parliament: there is huge demand and expectations that have not been fulfilled. It would be sad if the expectations of the bill—an important piece of legislation—were not fulfilled, simply for financial reasons. I point out to Mr Jenkins that that is not a whinge but simply reflects what the bodies that know what is happening are saying about the bill. I hope that the minister will think on the matter and if possible indicate during his summing-up speech that some movement will be made on resources. If that is not possible, I hope that the minister will keep thinking about the matter and will issue proposals to resource the policy. The bill is an example of the way in which members can work together in the Parliament. Ian Jenkins is right to point out that in a difficult week—our 1000 th day ringing in our ears—it is important to show what the Parliament can do in co-operation with the Executive. The Parliament has co-operated with the Executive on the bill, but there have also been useful tensions and arguments. We have created legislation to help children in Scotland—that is what the Parliament is here to do and that is what we have done.

Who writes this?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's current position is on streaming in schools. (S1F-1810)

I am sorry that the First Minister is not as clear as he was on 15 February last year. He said: "There is no place in the Scottish education system for privatisation, selection or streaming." — [ Official Report , 15 February 2001; Vol 10, c 1315.]  That is consistent with the advice that he has received from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and it is consistent with all independent research. Why does not he just say it again?

The minister made an important point about what poetry is and about how people should feel that it belongs to them. I will make a point that has yet to be raised in the chamber. Will she join me in hoping that the new Scottish Parliament building will be a place not only where we can we celebrate poetry but where we can celebrate Hamish Henderson and others? I offer the caution that we should remember Norman MacCaig's remark about commemorating Hugh MacDiarmid, when he said that we needed two minutes of pandemonium.

Like other members, I congratulate Cathy Peattie on securing this debate. I, too, lodged a motion on Hamish Henderson and I am delighted to take part in the debate. I want to put on record—because otherwise the Official Report will not show it—the presence of the Lord Advocate in the chamber. Hamish was a man who had run-ins with the law from time to time. It will be appreciated immensely that the Lord Advocate is here to commemorate him. Every mention of Hamish Henderson since his death on 8 March has been prefaced or followed by an anecdote. There is no doubt that he was, if not larger than life, then radically different from most of the people whom one has ever met. He wore his convictions, his passions and his appetites on the outside of his large and gangling frame. That meant that one got from him a very direct experience of a unique, great man. In 1990, Hamish Henderson was invited to speak at the Celtic film and television festival in Douarnenez, a body of which I used to be the director. The festival was due to be held in a brand new hotel, but the hotel was never built—a lesson  for the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. As a result, it was held in a very old hotel on the beach at Tréboul, which is the twin town with Douarnenez, just across the river. The hotel's last big booking had been during the second world war when the German officers stayed there. It had been decaying ever since. The way to the rooms was from a boardwalk. On the first evening of the festival, crossing the boardwalk in the dark, I found Hamish slumped against the sand dune. I brushed him down and took him into the bar, which was probably a foolish idea, only for him to turn on me viciously within 10 minutes because I suggested in our conversation that "The Freedom Come All Ye" should be the national anthem of an independent Scotland. There was not much gratitude for the drink or for my having picked him up. He was determined to make the point. I have discussed the point with Cathy Peattie, because the wording of her motion says that "The Freedom Come All Ye" is an international anthem. That is fine; I still think that it would make a great national anthem, but he did not want it to be. Hamish's presence at the festival was long term, because there were only two flights a week from the UK to Rennes. One was on a Monday and one was on a Thursday. He was due to speak on the Tuesday, but when I left on the Friday he was still there. He was apparently still there the following Friday. He missed the weather window no less than four times before they finally got him back on the plane. I suspect that Hamish is still being talked about in Breton fishing villages. The reality is that he is still being talked about in Scotland, which is the important thing. He was a fixture in Edinburgh when I was a student of Scottish history and literature in the early 1970s. He had a reputation not just for extraordinary scholarship, but for his strong and constant advocacy, to which John McAllion referred, for those who could not speak for themselves or who could not be heard in the clamour of the capitalist 20 th century. He was first and foremost a poet. He did not just agitate and campaign as a politician; he thought and he felt. I always got the sense that the rawness of his feelings for the men and women around him drove him on. There are still elitist enclaves in Scotland in which the study of folk song and tradition is regarded as a minor matter. However, Hamish Henderson was the greatest of a generation—and it was a great generation; one thinks of others such as Calum MacLean—who proved them wrong. His interest in travelling people, working people and people from the linguistic and cultural minorities of Scotland led to a huge body of recorded work and a huge development in  understanding our mongrel nation and its cultures. Scotland is a different place as a result of those people. Like all cultural nationalists—in the best sense of the term—Hamish Henderson was also an internationalist. The two stances are indivisible. They both arise from a curiosity about and identification with the question of our humanity and our relationships with one another. Hamish Henderson wrote the "Elegies for the Dead in Cyrenaica", which have been referred to and which are a remarkable and astonishing statement of humanity from a soldier. The first elegy starts with the line that rings in the mind, which is: "There are many dead in the brutish desert". That sets the scene. The poem goes on to say: "There were no gods and precious few heroes. What they regretted when they died had nothing to do with race and leader". That was an anti-fascist statement, but it was a statement of enormous humanity. There are more accessible writings from Hamish Henderson, but it is sometimes possible to overlook and forget those early poems and their great impact.  The Times Literary Supplement in its review in January 1949 wrote about the former soldier's poems, reflecting upon his experience. It noted: "Mr Henderson's compassion ... gives his poetry a rough humanity, a sincerity and an emotional truth that make it valuable." Compassion, rough humanity, sincerity and emotional truth were words that defined Hamish's whole life and Scotland still has need of them.

When the minister reflects on the debate, will he check the record of Mr Monteith's attendance at meetings of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee? I think that the minister will find that Mr Monteith has not attended often enough to know what the committee has done.

I note from today's newspapers that the First Minister is calling on MSPs to work harder to gain Scotland's confidence. If I can borrow a mantra from his Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, we need not only to work harder, but to work smarter. In other words, we need to think about why the Parliament has not lived up to the expectations of the people of Scotland and to do that in a positive and constructive way, not in the traditional carping Tory way that has been demonstrated again today by David McLetchie. Thatcher might be silenced but her anti-Scottish rhetoric lives on. A clue to the problem might lie in this debate. There is no need for this discussion, which has been exploited not just by the Tories, but by the Parliament's traditional enemies. The Scotland Act 1998 was flawed. That flaw should have been put right quickly, without giving Labour dog-in-the-manger backwoodsmen such as Brian Donohoe, Jimmy Hood and Jimmy Wray the opportunity to attack this institution because they are unable to contribute positively to their institution. Nor should opportunity have been given to some sections of the press that have always argued against constitutional change but are being used as so-called impartial spokesman. That was most notable in the BBC this week, which used Katie Grant and Alan Cochrane. We want to hear from people who want Scotland to succeed. I do not blame the First Minister or Patricia Ferguson, but their party has brought us to today's  debate and yet more navel gazing. We should be looking and aiming at the stars. When I was a student, I had a Pan Am poster on the wall in my room in halls of residence. It featured a cartoon figure looking over his shoulder, saying, "The real world isn't in here—it's out there." Every member of the Parliament must remember that. The real world is not in here. It is out there. The real world is tired of internal debates about salaries and allowances and the number of MSPs. The real world wants to see an ambitious Parliament with a vision of a better Scotland and the ability to get it. There are big questions to be asked by politicians in the chamber: questions about our ability—and the Executive's ability—to live up to the consultative steering group principles not just as a Parliament, but as political parties. However, to be fair—and we must be fair—the majority of members work hard. Throughout every party, they help ordinary people and they serve the communities they know. The problems with confidence in democracy that we face in Scotland are common throughout Europe and the rest of the world. We in a new Parliament could contribute uniquely to solving those problems if we engaged with the people and excited them with a programme and a purpose that aimed to change their lives and country. As a nationalist, I espouse that programme—but I accept that others believe it is their programme too. Whatever we disagree on, this afternoon we have to agree that the size of the Parliament has nothing whatsoever to do with the debate. Let us keep what we have got and tackle the real job of making a Scotland and a Parliament fit for the people we are here to serve.

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what financial or other assistance it is giving to local authorities to ensure that all those seeking a probationary year under the teachers induction scheme are able to secure such a position without the cessation of any existing temporary contracts for teachers already in post. (S1O-4901)

The minister's reply will not satisfy many of the young teachers already in temporary posts who are being told that their jobs might well not last beyond the summer. Everyone supports the teachers induction scheme but, as the father of a young female teacher in Glasgow said to me yesterday, it would be unacceptable if that scheme were to be implemented at the expense of existing teachers. Will the minister ensure that local authorities have the additional assistance that is necessary to ensure that experienced teachers and teachers who are already in post do not suffer as a result of the introduction of the induction posts?

The First Minister knows that the Scottish National Party strongly supports the concept of community schools. It is crucial that each element of the mix of disciplines is adequately funded in the roll-out programme for such schools. Will the First Minister undertake to consult the Minister for Education and Young People to ensure that, as the second phase of community schools is rolled out, there are adequate resources? Some schools claim that they cannot do their job because the resources are not adequate.

I at least partially welcome the statement. However, I cannot help but remember that when the SNP called for a debate on education in 1998, the then minister with responsibility for education—Helen Liddell—attacked us on the grounds that such a debate would be "a diversionary tactic to avoid answering questions about" our "education policies". There is an element of such tactics in the Executive's announcement. However, let me be generous. There is a need for a debate in Scotland, although I feel that its proper place is in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I am sorry that the Executive is duplicating that committee's work, but I hope that the evidence that the Executive receives will be made available to the committee, as we will make our evidence available to the Executive. There are some key questions about Scottish education to which we need answers, not more questions. For example, we need to know whether the Executive is really in favour of streaming. I will quote Helen Liddell again, this time with some approval. When Michael Forsyth introduced the debate on streaming in the mid-1990s, Helen Liddell said that to bring in such a policy would be "flying in the face of everything that we have learned in Scotland over the last 30 years". Is there a serious intention to debate streaming? I hope not. Will serious attention be paid to the problems with the McCrone agreement, which is unravelling before our eyes? Will we receive any answers about the huge difficulties that have arisen, particularly in relation to probationary teachers? Furthermore, will we receive any answers about the difficulties that young people face owing to the pressure of exams? We are in a position to ask questions about education. It is the Government's role to provide answers and I would be more relieved if we received some of those answers now, instead of more questions. I look forward to the minister's comments.

I am grateful for that remark, as it moves the debate to a position where supervision of what is, at this stage, a slightly hybrid body can return to normal over time. Part of the essential nature of that process is the operation of the SQA as a public sector organisation. The minister will recall that I raised the matter in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee with him and with Professor John Ward. I told Professor Ward: "The service should be delivered by a public sector organisation." He replied: "Absolutely."—[ Official Report, Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 26 February 2002; c 3089.] In the light of Murdo Fraser's comments—Murdo Fraser was not at any of those meetings—will the minister confirm that privatisation is not on the agenda?

Privatisation was ruled out by the minister.

Well done.

My colleague Alex Neil will confirm—as will the minister—that responsibility for the SQA was taken away from the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning shortly after the crisis broke. Therefore, Cathy Jamieson is responsible, as was her predecessor and even his predecessor—education ministers come and go more often than Edinburgh buses.

rose—

The bill has a simple purpose, which is to recreate the confidence in the SQA that is necessary for it to operate effectively and deliver to young people in Scotland—and to a wider group of older people in Scotland who are exam clients of the SQA—the type of service that they have the right to expect. To use a term that I used in the chamber at the start of the debate on the SQA crisis, the bill's purpose is to restore the gold standard to Scottish education. That is a big task to undertake. When the then Minister for Children and Education announced the options for consultation, I felt that, given the problems that existed and how they had been dealt with—direct intervention by the minister's representative and a drawing in of the SQA's functions to much more direct ministerial supervision and control—that it would be more suitable to establish the SQA as an Executive agency. I made that point when the announcement was made.

Can I just get started, Mr Monteith?  I also agreed to a shorter period of consultation—both Opposition parties were asked to agree to that—so that we could progress the matter. As a result of that consultation, I was persuaded that the non-departmental public body route is probably the best one. I was not so persuaded by Mr McConnell, the former Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs who, in his usual flippant manner, claimed that agencies would be subject to intervention and interference by ministers. In so saying, perhaps he was admitting to what he had been doing with Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education for a long time. The reality is that the SQA and most of its clients do not want the major shifts that would be required to change that non-departmental public body into an agency because they believe that that would be too difficult at this stage. I pay tribute not to Jack McConnell but to John Ward, who persuaded me that that is the right approach. We must recognise what the representative of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, Michael O'Neill, said in evidence at stage 1. Mr O'Neill said: "until a body of evidence is available to demonstrate that the SQA operates effectively and efficiently and with stakeholder and public confidence, the Executive will require to be more involved with the SQA than it is with normal non-departmental public bodies."—[ Official Report, Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 26 February 2002; c 3074-75.] His evidence is quoted in our report because it was important and because it points to what we should realistically look forward to. I rather regret that when the minister talked about the presence of a ministerial representative at board meetings, she did not say that that would be the norm until the SQA is up and running in such a way that there can be confidence in its operation, year on year. I hope that the minister will reflect on that point. The bill will give ministers the appropriate power; that power should be exercised—certainly in the first couple of years—to make it absolutely certain that the SQA is delivering. The SQA is not an ordinary non-departmental public body. Members should think back to the events of two yeas ago, some of which were reflected in the evidence to the committee from young people from the Scottish youth parliament. What happened in the SQA came as a body blow to an entire generation of young people who were badly let down by a system that went badly wrong. The Parliament must restore confidence in a way that guarantees—as far as guarantees can be given in life—that the system will not go wrong again. We must build on that by establishing the right structures and we must ensure that suitable  finance is in place and that nothing that we do makes the organisation too inflexible. Many changes are coming to education and examinations, just as many changes come in life. We must join those steps together. Some of the points that Alex Neil raised are germane to the debate. I am concerned that the advisory council is not yet well worked out. There are big issues about the way in which it will operate and, in particular, over the way in which the board of the SQA will respond to the advisory council. I suspect that Jackie Baillie will refer to that issue later in the debate, because she raised it in committee. A duty must be put on the board of the SQA to respond formally to the advisory council and a mechanism must be put in place to let us know, openly and accessibly, what advice the advisory council gives the board and what the board does about that advice. Those checks and balances are not usual for a non-departmental public body, but I return to the fact that, because of its history, the SQA is not a usual non-departmental public body. We must address a number of other issues. We must be absolutely sure that the system that we establish does not set some of the present operating activities of the SQA in tablets of stone. I do not want to anticipate what the minister will say next week when she launches her great debate on education, in which the Education, Culture and Sport Committee will participate constructively. However, examinations will come up during that debate, as will the amount of assessment that young people must go through. We should not build those issues into the legislation—we should have in the SQA an organisation that is flexible enough to change. The SQA has indicated that it wants to be free to be able to develop and change in two other areas. Rhona Brankin referred to the work that the SQA does in Dalkeith. That is good work, but no one would say that it is at the cutting edge of technology. Members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee who have been to Dalkeith will recall the shed. It is the size of two football fields and is lined with shelves that have papers on them, which people have to run around to find.

I will let Brian Monteith in presently. Both the SQA and I think that there is a great need to bring in information technology in order to reduce the danger of losing material; that is, in order not to lose the results, unlike the technology that was in place two years ago.

The paper copies are destroyed some time after the exam diet—they do not stay forever. I still think that we should examine the possibility of returning papers. I know that the minister is still considering that. It is an issue, but there are difficulties on both sides of the argument. However, information technology has advanced sufficiently for us not to be too afraid about not having a piece of paper to wave in our hands. The paperless office has not come to the Parliament, but it has arrived elsewhere. I will make a final point on the SQA's role. A genuine debate is needed on what the SQA's function should be. That matter is part of the greater debate, as well as being part of the debate on the bill. Should the SQA physically provide an examination system, physically intervene to get the results of that system and physically mark every paper?

If Mr Stone wishes to intervene, I say no. If he wishes to go to the toilet, that is nothing to do with me. There is a model of operating an examination system in which there is not the active intervention that I have mentioned. Under that model, an examination body would validate the work on examinations that is done in classrooms. It becomes a franchised business. I see that Mr Jenkins is nervous about that. I am not saying that it should happen. However, we must be open to new possibilities. We know from the events of two years ago that the size of the system, the way in which it operates and the sheer volume of data that go through the system are very difficult to manage. One must ask whether we have to manage it in the way that we do. The SNP supports and will vote for the bill, but many issues are still to be teased out. Some are in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report and some will emerge at stage 2. I will make one point to the ministers: I am disappointed that the committee's enthusiasm for a board member to be appointed from the SQA staff has already had cold water poured on it. That is regrettable. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee's recent experience is that good ideas that come from the committee tend to have cold  water poured on them, particularly in the drafting of bills. As I said the last time that we debated an Education, Culture and Sport Committee stage 1 report, I hope that the Executive will enter a genuine partnership with that committee in order to improve and develop the bill. I hope also that the Executive will not stand on its dignity and the fine print of its drafting, which often turns out to be defective. That would make it more difficult to come to an accommodation about the bill. There is a willingness among members to work together to help the SQA into the final stages of its recovery. That will has existed from the beginning. As a member who was involved in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's inquiry into the SQA, I know how much we worked together on that matter. Let us hope that that partnership will continue through stage 2 into stage 3 of the bill and that it will not be turned off by an approach from ministers or civil servants that is too picky or stands too much on their dignity. It would be nice to think that we could all make the bill a bit better than it is.

The minister said that the Executive is minded to appoint existing board members to the new board. However, a substantial matter for debate during the stage 1 discussion was the possibility of having an employee of the organisation on the board. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee's stage 1 report states that, with the exception of Mr Monteith, the committee was unanimously of the view that that possibility should be considered seriously. Has the minister ruled that out in what she said? The committee would be disappointed if that were the case.

Will the member answer a question that was asked by Mr Alan Reid, a Liberal colleague of his, in a House of Commons debate? The member seems to want to have his cake and eat it. Mr Reid said: "If an application to build a nuclear power station in Scotland was turned down by the Scottish Executive, but the Government promoted legislation in this House to overturn that decision"— the Alex Neil point— "and grant planning permission, would the hon. Gentleman support that legislation?"— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 5 March 2002; Vol 381, c 239.]  Alan Reid asked that question of Mr Bill Tynan, who, as usual, had no answer. What is the Liberal answer in Scotland to that key point? On Alex Neil's question, do the Liberals support the Scottish Parliament or Westminster?

Jamie Stone has made an allegation that the SNP candidate in the constituency that he represents would change party policy and say something different. Could I  have chapter and verse, please? I want quotes: when they were said, who said them and what the issue was.

Give us the remarks.

Will the member give way?

The debate so far has illustrated how tortuous it is and the level of mental gymnastics that is required to be a unionist. Unionists have to put all the impossibles together and, as Lewis Carroll said, believe them all at once.

Not yet, Nora—I am just recovering from the past few minutes. In reality, this is a very simple question with a very simple answer. The very simple question is, does Scotland have the power to say no to nuclear power? Members will remember the old symbols that used to be on 2CVs throughout Scotland, with the slogan "Say no to nuclear power" usually repeated in many languages.

I can certainly believe that, and it probably ran on cheese.

Phil Gallie certainly speaks with enough energy. We could power a whole station with Phil alone. The question is, can we say no to nuclear power? The question is very easy, but the tortuous answers that we hear in the chamber are quite remarkable and illustrate the problem with the devolved settlement. They illustrate the fact that the only clear and sensible settlement is independence. John Home Robertson finds the idea of independence very amusing, but he has not thought about it. He has not thought about it because it terrifies him. He is too frightened to  think about it, and he is quite used to taking orders from elsewhere.

Not just now, Rhona Brankin. No. John Home Robertson is so used to taking orders from elsewhere, and so used to nodding all the time when he is told to do things, that he cannot think for himself. That is the problem in this debate. We see clearly that the Tories want to wreck the Scottish Parliament. We saw that yesterday.

I will come to Rhona Brankin's role in wrecking the Parliament in a moment. We saw yesterday that the Tories want to cut the size of the Parliament, limit its powers and forget that there has been a constitutional change in politics in Scotland.

No, I do not accept that at all. There has been no evidence of that whatever—and, if Mr Scott doubts that, he should read his speech from this morning. The position of the Liberals is, as usual, fascinating. It, too, is tortuous. When this issue was debated at Westminster, every Liberal MP who voted, voted for the SNP motion. It is clear that the Liberals simply must support our motion today, but they cannot do so and not support the Executive amendment, because to do that would be disloyal to their coalition colleagues.

I will take an intervention in a second. Coalition politics is destroying the clear thinking of the Liberal Democrats.

I do not know what "as intended" means. The motion is in the business bulletin—vote for it or do not vote for it. The Labour position in the debate is the most interesting one. Labour members in Scotland must constantly look over their shoulders to ensure that they are allowed to say something and to ensure that we are allowed to implement the existing  Scotland Act 1998. But there is no question about this: the power lies in Scotland. This Parliament has the power to say no to nuclear power.

No thank you, Mr McNulty—life is too short. We can say no, and the powers of this Parliament are all that the debate is about. Anybody watching the debate would have to conclude that the simplest and clearest way to run Scotland is as an independent nation in which this chamber can make decisions for the people of Scotland. The debate has again illustrated that what we need is independence.

I pay tribute to James Douglas-Hamilton for having secured the debate on behalf of the executive committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. The first four speakers are—by accident of course—members of that executive committee; indeed, its president is the Presiding Officer and its vice-presidents are Jack McConnell and John Swinney. Before I start my speech, I pay tribute to the officers of the group in the Parliament—Roy Devon, Grahame Wear and Margaret Neal, two of whom are in the public gallery. They are looking rather lonely, actually. I would like to give two snapshots of the work of the CPA and to explain why I think that its work is valuable. I know that some people in the Parliament consider the CPA to be a charter for junketing and that being a member of the CPA will get you anywhere in the world. In reality, that is not true—although I am going to talk about New Delhi and Canada, both of which I have visited in the past two years. I came to the CPA and to the idea of the Commonwealth from a fairly hostile standpoint, as many nationalists do, but I look forward to the day when Scotland is an independent member of the Commonwealth. While it is not, there is a great deal to be gained by the Parliament and all the parties from participating fully in the CPA. We have a great deal to learn from one another.  Let me give two examples. The first is a conference on Parliaments and the media that was held in New Delhi in February 2000. I represented the Parliament at that conference. Sixty delegates—half from Parliaments and half from the media—debated common problems in the perception of Parliaments within the media. If members of the Parliament cast their minds back to February 2000, they will agree that, my goodness, we needed help with those problems. The conference showed that there were common problems in putting across ideas of parliamentary democracy and of how Parliaments work to a media that works in soundbites and tabloid headlines. There were also problems in taking ideas of privacy and the protection of members into places where the rule of law was not well established and where such laws, if implemented, might actually have damaged press freedom. A wide-ranging debate was held on those issues. I wrote a report on the conference when I came back; it is still available through the Scottish Parliament information centre. The debate introduced me to the idea that members of Parliaments in the Commonwealth had much to learn from one another. Just last week, we saw an example of that here. Members of the Canadian federal Parliament, from many parties, visited for a week to discuss a range of issues, such as drugs and equal opportunities. Those are vital matters for both countries and for many other nations in the Commonwealth. However, they also discussed matters of practice and procedure, and the fact that the committee system that this Parliament has developed is more active and vibrant than that which exists in many older Parliaments in the Commonwealth, which is a plus. They also discussed the fact that the question times that one witnesses in the Canadian Parliament and the Quebec Parliament are a great deal more exciting and probing than anything that the Deputy First Minister has to put up with here. Mr Wallace looks doubtful, but—

No. The quality of the Opposition is high, as Mr Wallace knows, and I am happy to take him outside at any time. In the Parliaments that I mentioned, members can ask any question, on any day and on any topic, in that 45-minute period. Questions are not given in advance. Mr Wallace's book of answers would be of no use to him in those circumstances. I am sorry that some Labour members—

No, Presiding Officer, I am  not—I am illustrating the fact that we can learn from one another. We can learn how to have a vibrant democracy in each Commonwealth country. That links to what Trish Godman said about protecting democracy. Parliamentary democracy—with all its flaws, difficulties and problems, even in this country—is so precious that we need to learn from one another and to strengthen one another. That is the purpose of the CPA.

I congratulate Colin Campbell on having his motion accepted for debate. The motion is fortunately not entirely about Inverclyde, otherwise I would not feel qualified to contribute to the debate. I pass through Inverclyde, but I do not spend any time there, fine place as it is. My experiences are of further down the Clyde coast in North Ayrshire, particularly in the Irvine, Stevenston and Kilwinning areas. I have two distinct points to make. First, I do not think that anyone can deny that historical imperatives have been a great source of problems for Scottish heavy industry and have caused the devastation of our traditional industrial communities. As Jamie Stone said, that situation applies not only to Inverclyde, but to the central belt, most of the south of Scotland and many other places in Scotland. That is a globalisation force that cannot be resisted. However, more recent forces might have been resisted. The judgment on any Government or  Executive is how it responds to such forces. In recent years, for example, in the closure of the Volvo plant in Irvine, the Executive's response has been woeful and inadequate. A challenge to the Executive and any government, not just the Government to which Lewis Macdonald is an adornment, is to ensure that it can respond to pressures that come in from outside. It is also a challenge to have not only a short-term view but a long-term view of the potential of, and possibilities in, each of our communities. The debate is about more than infrastructure. I was struck by some of Duncan McNeil's remarks. I thought that Annabel Goldie was coming on to the point when she tempted us by asking what the main hope of regeneration was, but I do not think that she adequately answered that point. The main hope of regeneration is people. The issue that Duncan McNeil raised was an issue of people. One can invest in almost anything in Scotland, but it will be hopeless without people. If one looks at North Ayrshire, and Cunninghame South in particular, the difficulties that arise are not necessarily about infrastructure, although that is problematic. There are difficulties that concern education, social inclusion, giving young people purpose and hope in society, drugs and housing. Regeneration is about far more than things; it is about human beings. One of the areas where this Parliament is least effective is in making the link between people, the landscape in which they live and the culture that surrounds them—everything that goes towards making up human beings in our society. That is the regeneration that we need in Scotland. That might sound unduly Messianic but it is not. It simply means that people matter more than anything else. A Government that is obsessed with ticking boxes and with targets and indicators forgets the importance of people. There will be no regeneration in Scotland until we remember that.

The minister has highlighted the link between the bill and the record of needs legislation, of which he has acknowledged that radical reform is needed. Can he indicate the Executive's time scale for reforming the record of needs legislation?

I also shall be brief. There is overwhelming unanimity in the chamber about the bill. We are now into discussions about the detail of how the bill will proceed through stages 2 and 3. I am glad to have the support of Frank McAveety on the issue of Sewel motions. It was quite a relief to have his support, although that was an unusual event. The bill is an example of why Sewel motions should be used sparingly, although the subject matter could have been dealt with through the use of a Sewel motion. By introducing the bill, not only has the Executive given the chamber an opportunity to debate the issues and members an opportunity to lodge amendments, but it has given civic Scotland and individuals an opportunity to make representations and to be heard. That could not have happened if the matter had been dealt with through the use of a Sewel motion. The bill is a good example of legislation that should go through the parliamentary process, although that may take time and effort. The Executive should not deal with such matters by giving away our right to legislate. Three key issues in the bill have clearly emerged during the debate: demand; will and intention to meet that demand; and resources to underpin the ability to meet that demand. I  commend the minister on her speech, much of which I agree with. However, I believe that she underestimates the demand that will exist. By definition, parents of children who have special educational needs are usually very involved in their children's education and acutely aware of the difficulties that their children have. I suspect that the bill, which will be warmly welcomed, will also mean that parents have very high expectations from early on. Although it will be necessary to phase in the support that is available, let us not alienate parents by doing so in a way that appears to be penny-pinching. I am glad that the detail of the finance indicates that money that is additional to the £9 million is available. There will be significant financial demands on the public purse for schools. Mr Jenkins has indicated some of those. A considerable amount of work is required to make a building or buildings suitable once a strategy has been produced. I mentioned a lift in a primary school that I know. Many other schools—perhaps those that have old buildings—will require considerable adaptation. I hope that when the deputy minister responds, he will take on board the fact that demand will be considerable. Teachers and those who run the schools must have the will to make sure that the bill works. By and large, that will is there. The minister was absolutely right to say that mainstreaming cannot be imposed on schools. I was a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee that undertook a report on special educational needs. Mainstreaming is a hope, an encouragement and a way in which we want people to look at education. However, it cannot be a demand, because children are all different and schools are all different. Teachers must be helped to understand how mainstreaming works. For some children it will never work; for others it will work very well. We must proselytise for the bill within schools, to persuade teachers to take the chances and make the extra effort that will enable children to go into schools, to mainstream and to have the facilities in those schools that they need. If we can understand the demand, if we can recognise the need to create the will within schools and if we can provide the resources, the bill will make a huge difference over a period of time. Unfortunately, the issue of pupil records represents another example of bad drafting somewhere else producing a problem that requires resolution by the Parliament. That has become something of a hobby-horse of mine, and the deputy minister has suffered as a result of that in committee. We must look seriously at drafting.  The fact that we can legislate does not mean that we have to do so. When we legislate, we must do it properly. In the primary legislation that we pass and, increasingly, in Scottish statutory instruments, problems are becoming legion. The case of a statutory instrument that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee recently considered has become almost farcical. We must examine drafting, which is not a party-political issue, but one of good governance. We must have the ability to draft bills properly. The bill represents an ideal opportunity for the Parliament and its committees—Kate Maclean referred to her committee—to work together for the good of people in Scotland who have a real need. That has been the nature of the debate and I am sure that it will be the nature of the stage 2 proceedings. I ask the Executive to keep it that way. Let us be constructive about the bill and let us not stand on our dignity on the drafting of amendments. I support the bill.

Mr Jenkins made a valid point about small rural schools. Some authorities might regard those rural schools as too expensive to continue in operation if the authorities cannot meet the bill's requirements. We must consider that matter. There is also the issue of the large cost of adaptations for particular children. For example, if an old primary school—even one that has many pupils—needs a lift, that can sometimes be an enormous cost and can lead to a need to change the building. Consideration of that issue should make us realise that money is at the root of the issue.

On pupils' records, which form a minor part of the bill, there are two key issues. One issue is confidentiality, which is important, and the other issue is to do with correcting yet another drafting mistake, of which there have been far too many. However, if Mr Monteith has evidence about local authorities that are refusing to give information, even during this interregnum, will he name them so that we can consider why they are doing that?

I shall be brief. Like my friend Christine Grahame, I started out by supporting the bill, but by the time that it had reached stage 1, I had decided to vote against it. Even if I had not voted against it at stage 1, I would definitely have decided to vote against the bill this afternoon. I am not entirely happy with some of the company that I keep. I am certainly not happy with the orange loons in the public gallery, whose behaviour has been anti-democratic and disgraceful. I am not happy that I am on the same side as The Daily Telegraph . I am happy that each of us has the right to decide what we will do, but this afternoon has been a tragedy and a farce. I want to address my remarks to those members who think that they have struck a blow for progress—the word "civilisation" was used—and for animal welfare. I am afraid that that is not the case. What will happen is that the legitimate activities of gamekeeping and conservation will be damaged possibly beyond repair. Members will have deprived people of their livelihoods without compensation. That is unforgivable and will, I am afraid, come back to haunt the chamber and haunt Scotland. Most important, we have refused to show a tolerant and inclusive face, which we should show even to those whom we dislike and disapprove of. We have taken the idea that the best is the enemy of the good. As a result, certain people have forced issues that, with a moment's thought, they would have realised could only be damaging. The attitude in some parts of the chamber has been, "We are the masters now." That has no place in a new Scotland. That applies to the left and to the right. If we are trying to build a new Scotland, the attitude that there should be no compensation for some because we did not get it is not an attitude on which we can base a new democracy or a new nation.  This has been a bad afternoon for the Parliament. I regret having been here. I hope—despite the babbling that is coming from the Labour benches—that the Parliament may learn, over time, how to tolerate even those whom we dislike.

I have apologised to the minister because I shall not be able to stay for the entire debate. I also apologise to members. I am speaking in Stonehouse this evening with Karen Gillon. As we are likely to be agreeing on the same platform, it may be standing room only. I congratulate Donald Gorrie on the motion, which is exactly what is required to address the issue. If we were voting this evening, I would have no hesitation in voting whole-heartedly for the motion, not just on behalf of my party, but as an individual, because Mr Gorrie has got to the heart of the matter. Music is not an add-on to the school curriculum; it is not an optional extra. It is regrettable that in many schools we are almost getting to the stage where it is an add-on. The curriculum may include some small element of formal musical instruction or musical appreciation, but it does not include as a normal part of the curriculum learning to play an instrument or learning to participate in music.  At the risk of repeating the congratulatory double act that Ian Jenkins and I took part in earlier today, I recall that Ian Jenkins made a pertinent and important point at a committee meeting earlier this week. He talked about the need to have music, dance, theatre and other actions as the purpose of education, and to feed the soul as much as the mind. That is the phrase that he used, and it is wise. If we do not do that, we will impoverish the whole educational process and reduce the ability of young people to develop as fully rounded human beings. They may be skilled in a variety of things, but their souls will not have developed. I use that term not in a religious sense, but in the sense of an appreciation of life, an ability to interact and an ability to think sensitively. All those attributes will be missing. Because of that, music instructors are central to what happens in schools. They need to be recognised as part of the school establishment, not regarded as something that is added on. It follows from that that their recognition, in terms of salary and pay and conditions, must be part of the overall package in schools. The difficulty with the emerging settlement—I accept that it is an emerging settlement; Donald Gorrie was right to draw attention to the fact that the matter is not concluded—is that the essential link with teaching salaries will be broken. The matter will be voted on by the music instructors, who are—as Mr Gorrie pointed out—from a number of trade unions and from none. However, the link with the teaching salary is important for many music instructors, not just for financial purposes, but because it ties in the link with the school. The link is a clear manifestation of the music instructors' involvement in the educational process, therefore to break that link, as is proposed, would make them more vulnerable as further cuts or changes take place. We have to be realistic about what we need to achieve. We need more music instructors rather than fewer. If the link is broken, many music instructors will feel undervalued. They may not leave but it will be more difficult to recruit new ones and, as a result, the offering of music instruction in schools will become rarer. I hope that the whole chamber will unite on that point today; I suspect that it will. Before anything is done irretrievably, let us make it clear that we understand the importance of music instructors and of treating them fairly. That is the message that I hope we can sent out from the debate. I commend Mr Gorrie on his motion. Personally and politically, it is the right thing to say. If the chamber were to say it today, and if the minister echoed it, we would have moved forward Scottish education as profoundly as we did not do this morning.

To judge from the evidence of the past three and a half years, Labour could not deliver a pizza.

No. I will not take any interventions from Labour members. It is about time that they sat and listened to some truths. I have found a number of responses to this debate remarkable. I do not think that it has been a good debate. We have seen a very poor reaction to and misrepresentation of ideas from Labour members, but some points made in the debate stand out in my memory. Johann Lamont is a member of a party that has talked about nothing but targets and what has to be achieved year on year. Now, suddenly, targets are to be abandoned; failing to meet them is not important. It is absolutely remarkable that those were her words.

No, I will not. The other remarkable point in her speech—and in Frank McAveety's speech—is that they said that much still needs to be done in Glasgow. Which party runs the administration in Glasgow and has run it for generations? Which party has failed Glasgow? The answer is the Labour party.

No I will not, but I will refer to Mr McAveety's remarks about cuts in education in Glasgow. In the past week, Glasgow City Council announced savings of £4,118,500. That includes savings from fewer pupils in primary schools and 25 fewer teachers. If the Labour members listened  to the part of my opening speech about the reduction of teacher numbers in primary schools because of falling rolls, they would know that part of the funding for our proposed package could come from such savings.

No, I will not give way to Jackie Baillie either. The SNP members came to the chamber with a carefully crafted set of ideas for debate. The Labour members showed, as they always do, intransigence and an ignorance about debating and discussing ideas that shames the Parliament.

No. It is no wonder that people in Scotland are tired of this Administration and sceptical about the Parliament. The Labour members' ignorance was demonstrated graphically this morning. I enjoyed Mr Jenkins's contribution. I admire and like Mr Jenkins. He and I have worked closely on a number of matters and we do not differ greatly on the important aspects of life. However, Mr Jenkins has a regrettable tendency to believe what he is told by his coalition partners. He said that he likes good news. In my speech, I welcomed the fall in class sizes, but I said that the evidence reveals that that fall is cosmetic and has not been achieved in key areas. It is important to tell the truth about the situation and not to hide it. Unfortunately, the truth is being hidden.

Rhona Brankin might want a ministerial job again, but she should not try to get it in my time. I will quote what Mr Fraser said on class sizes because it will come back to haunt him. He said: "Class sizes are irrelevant to Scottish education". Teachers and parents will look at that and say, "Back to Dotheboys Hall for the Tories." There is no progress in that philosophy.

Yes, I will listen.

Murdo Fraser has qualified what he said. He said:  "Class sizes are irrelevant to Scottish education".  [Interruption.] As Mr Swinney is pointing out, Murdo Fraser was guilty of a misquotation in his speech. No doubt there will be correspondence about that. We have heard about pupil-teacher ratios and pupil-adult ratios. There is not the slightest doubt that the best way to proceed is to ensure that pupil-teacher ratios are better than pupil-adult ratios. I do not intend to diminish the work of classroom assistants. One of the most unacceptable moments in the debate was when the Labour members jeered at Colin Campbell for making a perfectly reasonable remark and tribute.

No, I will not. I have said why. We must begin to talk about ideas. When parties present ideas, they should be debated.

I am not scared of Jackie Baillie in the slightest, but I am scared about the time wasting that comes from her Administration, which lacks purpose and achievement. I am tired of the dishonesty about that that comes from the Administration.

No. What there is is misrepresentation. Labour has been in power in local authorities in Scotland for generations and has been power in Scotland since 1997. Labour has not achieved its targets. It is time that we made real change. The SNP has come to the chamber today with a proposal for real change and ideas about how that could be done. We seek to debate the issue, which is live throughout Scotland—55 per cent of parents want to see that change. We know that it has been a long-held view of the educational union for years. We know that many things can be done and I am not against all those being done, but this is the key change that could make a difference. All we hear is misrepresentation, girning and self-justification.

No. Labour members have had their opportunity today and they have blown it. We must consider the matter closely, plan for the future and more than anything else—I say this from the SNP benches; we are the only people who believe it—in Scotland we must have some ambition and vision for the future. If ever there was a debate in this Parliament that proved that the only ambition and the only vision come from the  SNP, this was that debate. Sorry, I include Mr Harper in that, because he asked—

I will take Robin Harper's intervention.

Robin Harper is absolutely correct. Of course, he will receive no answer to that question, because there is no answer to it. One of the worst aspects of the debate was when we entered into the realms of discussing education. What we heard from Labour members was a retreat into the gulag. Their argument was that the only thing that mattered was to get their pet projects through. I remind this Executive that we are here to serve the people of Scotland. On the evidence of this debate, the people who are least able to do that are not just the Conservatives—although I liked Jamie McGrigor's speech—but the Labour party in this Executive. It is the deadweight on Scottish education and it is time that it went.

And different outcomes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There is an annoying whining noise in the chamber that is not just Murdo Fraser. Can something be done about it?

I remind the member that members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee were involved in that campaign too and helped to achieve a change of mind in Argyll. I pay tribute to Cathy Peattie, who was the reporter on that issue. Does Jamie McGrigor accept that one of the inevitable consequences of the Executive's desperate rush to private-public partnership projects is the closure of small schools? That is quite unacceptable. Does he agree that there should be a presumption against closure in most circumstances?

It was in my speech.

I had been enjoying the member's speech up until now. My enjoyment has just fallen away.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Brian Monteith give way?

I am interested to hear that the Tory party is continuing to ignore public opinion and public demand—that is what led the party to its sorry state. Fifty-five per cent of people who were asked want smaller class sizes and the teaching profession has been arguing for smaller class sizes since 1943. Why does Brian Monteith think that he knows better?

I quoted three out of many studies in support of my view, and I would be happy to provide the minister with more. Will the minister say what studies she is quoting, as I would be delighted to read them? It is very difficult to find any studies that support her position.

rose—

Let me put the argument very bluntly at the start of the debate. We need to get the most bang for our buck in education. We need to target resources where they will have the most effect for the longest period of time. We need to invest, as a nation, in the best prospects for our future. To do so we must take radical and direct action to reduce class sizes in the early primary years to 18 pupils or less. That policy has shown its benefits elsewhere and could show its benefits here: it leads to better attainment, more help for the disadvantaged, has long-term effects and, in economic terms, it pays for itself. The great advantage of the policy is that it is not a new policy. As long ago as 1943, the Educational Institute of Scotland committee on education reconstruction—a committee that was looking to rebuild Scottish education after the war—proposed that no class in the infant department should have more than 20 pupils on the roll. That was an expectation in 1943; it has not been fulfilled almost half a century later. The policy has wide public support. In the "British Social Attitudes Survey, 1999" smaller class sizes was the top choice for expenditure on primary education from parents.

No, please let me get under way. When people were asked to name only two things that they wanted to change in primary education, 55 per cent wanted smaller class sizes. It is worth noting that in the same survey, only 1 per cent sought more emphasis on testing, yet that has been a constant refrain from the Labour and Tory benches. Since Labour came to power in 1997, it has claimed that its first educational priority is the reduction of class sizes. Brian Wilson, just after the 1997 election called it "one of the Government's key manifesto commitments."  That phrase was repeated two years later by Peter Peacock. Helen Liddell, Brian Wilson, Sam Galbraith and Jack McConnell—and even the Minister for Education and Young People—have all trumpeted that intention. In "Working together for Scotland: A Programme for Government", the Executive even claimed that the target had been achieved for primaries 1 and 2. We have heard no more of that claim, because it was not true, as the school census showed. The reality of today's situation can be seen in the Accounts Commission for Scotland's report on key performance indicators for councils for 2000-2001. With less than six months to the cut-off date, only five councils—the three island councils plus Argyll and Bute Council and Dumfries and Galloway Council—were able to report that none of their primary 1, 2 or 3 pupils was in a class of 31 or more pupils. Two councils—South Ayrshire Council and West Lothian Council—had to report that more than 15 per cent of their classes were of 31 pupils or more. In addition seven councils had an increase in the number of such classes compared to the previous year. For the Executive, even a cosmetic target has been impossible to achieve, even with a declining school population. Over the period there has been a decline of almost 7,000 in the primary roll. The Executive might get there, late and by an accident of birth rate, but where is there? Classes of 30 are marginally better than classes of 35, particularly for the teacher, but there is no evidence that such small reductions in size are of any significant benefit to pupils or to their attainment. I am more inclined to listen to the Executive's advisers than to the Executive on the matter. Its advisers have argued that some research suggests that: "within primary schools (especially P1 to P3) a class size of between 20 and 25 pupils produces the best learning environment." That is from page 35 of the Executive's publication "2001 Scottish Social Statistics". The Government's advisers say 20 to 25. I think that Mr Sheridan would say 15. The evidence supports 18—and I will look at that evidence in a moment. Whatever the figure is, it is not 30, no matter what the hype and spin from new Labour. Scotland needs a real target for class sizes, backed by real evidence, which can show real benefits and is implemented by real plans with real resources. Talking about reality, here is Brian Monteith.

No, I do not accept that at all and I will tell him why; I am just about to cite the research. The policy of reducing class sizes to 18 or less has its modern origins in the Student Teacher Achievement Ratio project in Tennessee. That project was designed not just to introduce smaller class sizes, but to scrutinise the effects of such reduction. Mr Monteith can listen to this. Professor Frederick Mosteller of Harvard University, probably one of the greatest statisticians of the past half century—and I accept half century as 50 years—called the Tennessee programme "one of the great experiments in education in United States history." Mr Monteith should listen to this. The US Department of Education's office of educational research and improvement—a Government agency—claimed that the programme was "doubtless the all time most comprehensive controlled examination of the thesis that a substantial reduction in class size will, of itself, improve attainment." Peter Mortimore, director of the well-respected Institute of Education in London described the Tennessee study as "the most thorough research ever done on class size using the experimental method." The words used to describe the research, Mr Monteith, are "thorough", "comprehensive" and "controlled". All that proves that the advantage of smaller class sizes stays with pupils right through their schooling, into adulthood and their entry into the labour market.

In a moment. The evidence also suggests that the educational investment that I am advocating would more than pay for itself through strong, positive economic returns. I am about to address the issue of how much such investment would cost. If Rhona Brankin would like to make a point about that, I would be happy to take it.

We have supported consistently all the measures to which the member refers. In this debate I am making the point that reducing class sizes is the single most important policy. I want to talk about the cost of that policy. To implement our proposals in Scotland, we would need 3,115 extra teachers, taking today's pupil numbers as a baseline. At full operation, that equates to £105 million per year. Teacher training costs would need to be boosted by £56 million over seven years and maintained at an additional £3.1 million thereafter. The cost of additional school accommodation is more difficult to assess, but the Accounts Commission for Scotland noted that 31.6 per cent of Scottish primary schools were at 60 per cent capacity or less in the year 1999-2000, and it is likely that some space is already available. No building of new schools, however funded, that is in the pipeline at present should take place without accounting for a reduction in class sizes of the sort that we propose. The minister could achieve that with the stroke of a pen.

No, I will not. I have a lot to get through. The challenge as regards infrastructure is less great than it seemed even a year ago. Demographics help us.

I am sorry, but I will not. I must finish what I am saying. Most observers have failed to note that the Executive projects a reduction in the number of teachers in Scotland after 2004. Its figures project a fall of 2,900 between 2004 and 2011. Simply by maintaining the present number of teachers and by taking advantage of the increasing availability of space in our schools, we could ensure that much of the programme could be funded from present resources. Of course, not all of it could be funded from those resources. The SNP is a practical party, so we have had to argue that, in addition to meeting costs from present budgets and from cancelling planned reductions, we should meet them through an incremental implementation plan. We should work first in the areas of social deprivation, because in those areas the impact of our policy would be most obvious.

I am sorry, but I will not; I want to finish what I am saying. One might argue that the costs of the programme could be met from the underspend in education year on year by the Executive. Given its record of failure on expenditure, the Executive could learn much from the way in which the programme is planned and costed. There is a final reason for us to implement this policy, based on naked self-interest. The chamber is full of baby boomers. The majority of us and the majority of our fellow citizens—

The Parliament includes some aging baby boomers who are experts on Shakespeare, but only one or two of them. The majority of us and a large number of our fellow citizens are from the baby boom generation. We are moving inexorably towards a situation in which hundreds of thousands of people who are now economically active—bizarrely, MSPs are classed as economically active—will be dependent, not on themselves, but on the smaller and smaller number of people who succeed them in the labour market. As the birth rate falls, the number of those on whose shoulders we will have to lean becomes smaller by the day. The shrinking number of school pupils means that there will be a dwindling number of people to support their elders, who want to live longer and better. Those people will have to sustain not just that liability, but the massive public-private partnership liability that the Executive has produced. For reasons of naked self-interest alone, it is absolutely essential that the present generation of school pupils and those about to enter school are equipped and prepared to the highest standard for their working lives. We in Scotland know that we have an underperforming economy. We are the generation that will have to plan to make it perform for the future, if we are to go to our old age able to sustain our standard of living, our standard of health care and our standard of welfare. Not only do we owe to our children the best education that we can give them; paradoxically, we owe it to ourselves. When we see the chance of significantly improving education, of guaranteeing higher and longer-lasting achievement, of reducing learning support intervention and of assisting the most vulnerable in our society, we have an obligation to take it. When that opportunity means a better-educated work force that is capable of powering a  better-performing economy, we would be fools to reject it. I want a better Scotland, and this policy would pave the way towards that. I also want the best Scotland—this policy would be the guarantor of that. A better Scotland, leading to the best Scotland—that is the aim of the SNP and of this policy. I ask the chamber to support that aim and the means of achieving it. I move, That the Parliament notes increasing research that indicates considerable short-, medium- and long-term benefits from reducing early primary class sizes, preferably to 18 or below, and the particular impact that such reductions have on children living in poverty; further notes the performance indicators 2000-01 report by the Accounts Commission published on 24 January 2002, which shows that the Scottish Executive has not yet achieved its own class size targets, and therefore calls on all parties in the Parliament to support the SNP's radical initiatives on this matter as an important step in not only assisting individual educational attainment and individual lifetime achievement, but also bringing collective economic benefit for Scotland as a whole.

I congratulate Bill Aitken on his cogent argument that all decisions should be made by the European Parliament in Brussels. It is unusual to hear such an argument from a Tory—a group that opposed the Scottish Parliament. Are the Tories now saying that it is all to be done by Brussels?

Here are the figures.

Will the member give way?

What are we paying the minister for?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was not allowed to go into the wider issue of Sewel motions in my speech. You stopped me twice. The Minister for Parliamentary Business, however, is being allowed to do so. Is there an inconsistency?

Could the minister tell us how many debates on education the Executive has secured, specifically on the key issues of attainment and assessment in education, which the Executive is avoiding?

As expressed as a percentage of the time allocated.

Will Frank McAveety give way?

Will the member give way?

The member said that he would give way. What he has said is a total misrepresentation.

That is a misrepresentation.

When Ian Jenkins said that there was broad agreement about the Sewel motion, he was right in so far as there is agreement that this topic needs to be dealt with. However, there is no broad agreement on the use of a Sewel motion, of which today's is the 31 st , I think. Increasingly, the Executive does not want the Scottish Parliament to do its job; it wants the Parliament's job to be done for it. If Scott Barrie holds the view that he expressed on that subject, he should not have bothered to get himself elected.

Not yet, I have not even started. The First Minister has argued that we should do less but do it better. However, Sewel motions simply give us less to do. They take away decision making from Scotland and hand it to someone else. The Sewel motion is a flawed procedure.

I certainly accept that the minister's intentions are honourable. I hope that she will extend the same courtesy to me. I will not accept the calumny, which we hear often and of which we saw some sign from Labour members this afternoon, that because we oppose the means by which the bill is dealt with, we oppose its substance. We do not. We oppose the means by which it is dealt with and we are right to do so.

Mr McConnell keeps shaking his head. I wish that he would think about his responsibility to the electors of Scotland and about what the Parliament is for. Sewel motions came about in the first year of the Parliament. There were four in that year. The then Minister for Parliament negotiated them with me, as I was the SNP business manager. They were supposed to be exceptions, not the rule. However, there are now more than 30 of them; they are becoming almost weekly occurrences. The Administration is not pushing hard enough to devise Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. The Administration is not taking the Parliament seriously enough. The Administration lacks ambition to think through the implications of what it is doing. I will give an example: the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill. The chamber blithely, and, I have to say—

To be fair, Presiding Officer, I am making a substantive point about the use of Sewel motions. On occasions such as our consideration of the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill, we have given away the right to legislate only to find that legislation has not then been passed. That also happened with aspects of  the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Bill.

If we cannot debate the flaws in the Sewel motion procedure when a Sewel motion is before us, we are not addressing the substantive issue.

If I am not allowed to make my points, I will be brief. I do not want to hear any more interventions. If the Parliament will not look out for the job that it is elected to do, no wonder the people of Scotland are getting tired of it and the Administration.

The minister will be aware that the inspectorate links attainment and class size. How does the minister respond to figures released yesterday which show that Labour's binding commitment to reduce primary 1, 2 and 3 class sizes to 30 or below, given by Brian Wilson, Helen Liddell, Peter Peacock, Sam Galbraith and none less than the First Minister, has not been achieved and that attainment has been affected?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No, it is a different one. You are no doubt aware that the standing orders lay down a standard of questioning, particularly for written questions, which should be to the point, brief and avoid prejudicial language. I am sure that you would want to advise any member, who, as the Official Report shows, regularly tries to ask supplementary questions that are self-serving, petty and purely political, that that is not the way to behave. Perhaps you would so advise Rhona  Brankin, to whom you have given warnings on, I think, half a dozen occasions. [Interruption.]

It is not the first.

Many SNP members will believe that some bid is better than no bid, although the best bid would have been a Scottish bid. Having said that, we are pleased to know that the benefits of working with our Irish cousins, which Labour members have always denied, are finally being recognised. The First Minister can be assured that SNP members will support a bid, if there is one—his statement was hedged around with many ifs and buts. However, in answer to a question from Richard Lochhead in May 2001, the former First Minister made a commitment to ensure active involvement of all parties in the development of the bid and in developing ideas for the championship. Will the First Minister commit himself to seeking to establish such a structure, so that there can be genuine co-operation across the chamber?

Before I get into the burden of what I want to say, I want to comment on the speech that we have just heard from the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. Lewis Macdonald's speech came from the school of politics that can be characterised by the announcement, "Good news, comrades, the butter ration has been cut." The speech contained no words about the reality of travelling by train, but was yet another series of announcements. The reality for the Scottish travelling public is clear. Today, as the minister was speaking, thousands of people were huddled on platforms waiting for trains that were not coming; thousands of other people were standing crushed on inadequate trains because there are not enough carriages; and there were thousands of people whose services had been cancelled because of an industrial dispute of which the Executive has washed its hands. Yet Lewis Macdonald, the man responsible for transport, said not a word about those things but, once again, made a series of announcements. It was woeful and pathetic.

Absolutely not. I do not want to hear any more of that sort of thing. On 18 June 1846, the Edinburgh to Berwick-upon-Tweed railway line—the first cross-border rail link—was opened. Two years later, the Royal Border bridge, designed by Stephenson, was opened at Berwick-upon-Tweed. The bridge allowed people to travel by train from Edinburgh to London. The great industrial historian and social  commentator, Samuel Smiles, as he watched a train taking people over that bridge on their way to the great exhibition in London, commented that railways provided the cementing of the union. Fortunately, we are now seeing the unravelling of the union. One of the best reasons for sundering that union is the fact that neither a Westminster Government nor the Westminster-controlled parties can deliver effective and efficient public services. The union has failed Scotland and transport is as good a way as any in which to examine how that failure has taken place. The only future for Scotland is as an independent nation. I was not surprised but saddened when Wendy Alexander asked what she should have done when she went to London. She should have stood up for Scotland rather than simply accepting what she was told. The real job that must be done is to restore confidence in the public transport system. However, confidence in either of the parties that have run the railways for several generations cannot be restored. Rather interestingly, Susan Deacon—and Robert Brown, I think—said that there had been decades of underinvestment in the railway system. Susan Deacon said that as if it were just a natural occurrence—an act of God for which no one was responsible. The Labour party was responsible and the Conservative party was responsible. They are the parties that have been running this country. The decades of underinvestment are the political responsibility of either the Tories or Labour.

No, I want to get through my speech. The Tories took a system that was failing and turned it into a failed system. That was done for ideological reasons; actually, it was done to enrich their friends. Mr Mundell asked where the money is coming from, but the important question is, where did the money go? It went into the pockets of entrepreneurs, not into the railway system. However, one must be fair to the Tories occasionally. They are no longer in power and have not been in power for five years. The Labour party has been in power. What did the Labour lot get wrong? Mr Sheridan referred to that. They had a policy that they inherited on 1 May 1997: they did nothing about it. As usual, they thought that they would get away with Tory policies. They would sign up as their chums the Tory chums who had made a profit from privatisation. The five years of doing nothing have been the problem. Now that Labour has been found out and we  know that it did nothing at all, what has its answer been? It has not been honesty. It has not been an explanation. It has not been an attempt to do something new. It has, incredibly, just been spin—spin, spin and more spin. Let us take a couple of examples from the minister's speech. The Larkhall line was first promised in 1998 by Donald Dewar after a long period of debate. It was an electioneering announcement.

Once I have finished my point, I will take the minister's intervention. When the Larkhall line was re-announced in 1999 as part of the Hamilton by-election campaign, that line was just about to happen. Now it has been announced that the line will go ahead within five years. The reality is that Labour will produce the re-announcement when it thinks that it is in trouble, but it will not produce the goods.

No. The reason that the line has not gone ahead is lack of political will.

No, I will not take another intervention. The reason that the line has not gone ahead is that the Executive did not deliver it. That is the reality. That reality applies to many more things. Let us take the minister's announcement today, which is trumpeted in the Evening News : "AIRPORT RAILWAY IS GIVEN GREEN LIGHT". No it is not. Let us look at the words of the article. Stephen Byers says: "potentially from 2005, we could begin to see some implementation of those projects." Is that a green light? It is not. It is not even an amber light. What does the minister say? This is the minister's binding commitment; this is what Susan Deacon called a firm commitment: "This could make it possible to move to design and construction from 2005—subject to suitable resource being available at that time." Those are not commitments. They are more spin; they are more promises. We are just not getting delivery.  I will make a commitment, which is a commitment that we have made often: we will build that line when we are in power. The minister finds that amusing. I think that the travelling public will find less than amusing a minister and her deputy who have done nothing, delivered nothing and provided nothing but who sit in the chamber cackling. The travelling public do not trust a word that Wendy Alexander says, that Lewis Macdonald says, that Sarah Boyack said, or that Jack McConnell said. Nothing is provided, nothing at all. That is what is happening in Scotland today. In Scotland, we need vision and the energy to put that vision into place. We do not need spin. We do not need deceit and incompetence. They were the hallmarks of the Tories and are the hallmarks of Labour.

No. I am not giving way. We need to say to the people of Scotland, "Here are the projects that we will deliver," then deliver them. Those projects were outlined by my friend Mr MacAskill.

I ask Mr Macdonald to sit down.

No. I heard Mr Smith's speech and I do not want to hear any more. The reality is that the Tories and Labour have failed to deliver services in Scotland over many generations.

No, I will not. We must change the system in Scotland. The SNP is the only party that will do that.

Will the member give way?

I am sure that there are so few of them that it would not be a problem. Remember that New Lanark has a great tradition of having days when people dress up and pretend to be things. Perhaps Mr Mundell visited on the very unlikely "dress up and pretend to be a Conservative" day.

Forgive me as I croak my way through this speech—my voice has almost gone. I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing this debate and those involved with New Lanark on securing world heritage status for the village. I started to visit New Lanark when I lived in  Clydesdale, in the 1980s. I have seen the village develop so much since then that I feel that I know it very well. I am particularly fond of New Lanark not least because, in the 1987 general election, when I was the SNP candidate in Clydesdale, we won the village of New Lanark—we did not win many villages in that election. I hope that New Lanark has remained faithful to all sorts of causes, including that of the SNP. This is an achievement of world significance—and we should always welcome world-class performance by people in Scotland. Jim Arnold and Harry Smith deserve world recognition for the passion and vision that they have shown and for the fact that they have not given up. There must have been many times when, in the face of enormous difficulties and obstacles, they felt like doing so. However, they went on and recreated something of great significance. I want to share with members the story of one day that I spent in New Lanark, as I have come to think of it as a rather special day. Karen Gillon said that, this September, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee visited New Lanark. We did. We were there on 11 September. That afternoon, we undertook a tour of New Lanark with Jim Arnold and Harry Smith. It was not the first time that I had been round the village, but it was a fascinating afternoon. In New Lanark, mobile phone reception is not very good, but we were standing outside the hotel when Cathy Peattie's mobile phone went off and her daughter told her that something extraordinary had happened in New York. After hearing the basic details from Cathy, we went inside, spoke to a number of people and went upstairs to our rooms, where we watched television for 20 or 30 minutes. I then drove to Edinburgh, where I had to attend a meeting, listening to the radio all the way. After the meeting I returned to New Lanark. When I think about that day now, I recognise that it was a day of huge contrasts. It was a day when we saw the worst that human beings can do one to another and a place that epitomises the best that human beings can do one to another. In New Lanark there is a vision of human beings helping one another and interacting with kindness—that is a good word—and generosity. As Jim Arnold knows, in New Lanark a number of Gaelic speakers evicted from the Highlands were able to find employment and—in the real and best sense of the word—betterment of their condition. In my mind, 11 September, a day on which we will all remember where we were, is intertwined with a vision of a better society—a vision of a better Scotland and how that can be achieved. I shall go back to New Lanark again and again—not just because of that recognition, but because I love the place. Now, however, every visit will have  a deeper meaning for me. I suspect that that is true for many members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I commend the motion to the chamber and commend those who are working in New Lanark. If people have not been there, they should go there now.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If Nora Radcliffe were to withdraw question 5—which she might be persuaded to do—we would be able to take question 6.

I have only one point to make. The journalists who this morning lambasted members of this Parliament for their lack of work and ability may want to focus on this bill as an example in microcosm of how the Parliament works. As a former member of the consultative steering group, you, Presiding Officer, will also have enjoyed observing the progress of the bill. The bill deals with a comparatively minor matter and should not have been contentious. It seeks to correct one error and to get something else to work. It managed to bring disparate political groups together on a committee, out of concern for a problem that had been brought to them by an outside organisation during scrutiny of legislation. Through debate and through the use of strong-arm tactics with the minister, the bill has been improved and will, I believe, be agreed to unanimously by the chamber. What will the bill do? It will help people considerably. Many parents have had difficulties with placing requests. The bill will resolve some real constituency cases with which many of us have had to grapple. It will also help to implement the McCrone agreement, which we hope will improve conditions in schools. This is an important bill. There were difficulties relating to it and it led to a genuine debate involving the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, all the parties represented on the committee, the minister, the Executive, Scottish local authorities, COSLA and others. At the end of that debate, we have reached a satisfactory conclusion. That is a credit to the Parliament. This is not a major matter, but it is an important one. Perhaps we should talk more about that than about most other things.

I shall be even briefer than the minister. It is important to remember that the purpose of the bill, particularly of section 1, is to correct a problem that arises from the way the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 was drafted. One would have hoped that the bill was correct and would overcome the problem. It is regrettable to note what the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People said in his letter to the committee, dated this week. The letter reads: "We accept that the law on this point"— being the same points to which the minister has just referred— "is unclear and that the Bill as introduced did not take account of this concern." It is regrettable that the drafting of the bill as introduced did not correct the problem. One would have thought that that would be right, given that it was the sole objective of section 1. The importance of what happened in committee is that, having heard evidence from COSLA and having seen evidence from local authorities, it accepted that a problem remained. It was unfortunate that, at that stage, the minister was not prepared to accept those difficulties or to enter into dialogue about them and try to get things right. That is why, I think uniquely, all committee members voted for an amendment that I lodged. I do not expect that to happen again, but it did happen—because the committee wanted to see the problem got right. It was in fact COSLA's victory—a victory for an organisation that had come forward with genuine concerns and that wanted to be listened to. However, I pay tribute to the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People. Having got a bloody nose on that occasion and having defended the indefensible—extremely well, I have to say, and despite the fact that his civil servants looked extremely unhappy—he did everything thereafter absolutely right. I commend him for that. He met representatives of COSLA, he lodged two  amendments that actually work and he consulted extensively to ensure that they were acceptable—extensively even until the last conversation he and I had on the matter last Monday, when I was speaking on a mobile phone while buying a cheese roll in a baker's shop in Lochgilphead. I hope that that was not obvious to the minister at the time. I am very grateful for the work that the minister and his civil servants have done to get section 1 to the stage at which it should have been when the bill was introduced. We now have a solution that we would not have had if we had passed the bill unamended. It is important to note that another objection to the bill was voiced by local authorities. There was a fear that section 2, although necessary, does not cope with the issue of assistant principal teachers in schools and the McCrone agreement. The purpose of section 2 is to ensure that, in removing the post of assistant head teacher—I declare an interest, as my wife is one—it is not necessary to advertise deputy head teachers' posts, because that would clog up the entire system. That change is consequential to the McCrone agreement. There are fears in schools and among the unions and local authorities that a similar change is required with regard to the abolition of the post of assistant principal within departments. There is concern that if that is not done, the McCrone agreement will be implemented in a way that the unions will not recognise as what they agreed to. We have the minister's assurance—I hope that he will reiterate it in his summing up—that that is not the case. Let us hope that it is not. Otherwise, we will have to return with a second amendment bill to change that part of education legislation. There will be no objections from Scottish National Party members to the two amendments, nor will there be objections to the principles of the bill. This should have been a quick, simple matter, but it has become slightly more complicated than it needed to be. I finish, uncustomarily—as it is Christmas—by paying tribute to the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People for having got it right in the end.

Will the minister give way?

As the minister will discover, one of the key problems in his portfolio is that the amount of money that is spent on capital projects is part of the problem: a major refurbishment often results in higher running costs. There must be a balance. It should not just be about—I see the Deputy Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport looking worried—putting new projects into place and talking about capital all the time; it should be realised, as Fiona McLeod has said, that the rate of inflation in libraries is much larger. Just talking about refurbishment capital is irrelevant.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do the standing orders contain anything that requires someone who responds to a debate to reflect the fact that 10 of 11 speakers opposed what he said? The minister did not reflect the fact that the entire debate went against what he said.

I sympathise entirely with what the member says, but does she accept my point: that a basic level of national funding is required for heritage activities in Scotland, and that the Executive is failing to meet that requirement? The situation that we are discussing is a symptom of that problem.

I congratulate Fiona McLeod on achieving this debate and on her eloquent introduction to it. I also congratulate Angus MacKay—I see that we shall receive spirited contributions from him from the back benches. Such speeches might not be good for his future career, but they will certainly entertain us. This topic is a symptom of the increasing  problems that are found in the heritage sector. Brian Monteith rightly said that the issue concerns direct funding from the Executive to what is broadly a heritage organisation. When we heard this morning from the librarian—he is in the public gallery—it was quite clear that, shorn of the bureaucratic language, he was essentially talking about yet more cutbacks within his library. In recent days, we have also heard about cutbacks in the National Museums of Scotland, in a variety of arts organisations and in Scotland's smaller museums. Throughout the cultural and heritage sector, people are saying that money is being squeezed and that constraints are being applied that they cannot live within. That is what is said privately. However, organisations that are dependent on the Executive for money are nervous of saying things publicly. They therefore employ consultants and produce reports. Sometimes, the consultants whom they employ are poor and do not even talk to staff, as Angus MacKay mentioned. Sometimes, the organisations employ good consultants. The job of the consultants is to find cheaper ways in which core cultural tasks can be undertaken. If that was a matter of greater efficiency, none of us would object. In reality, most of those organisations have had to become more efficient year on year simply to survive. Now their core services are being cut to the bone and, indeed, beyond. They cannot provide their core services, so—Angus MacKay put it well—they have to find excuses for continuing to make cuts. That is why they use phrases such as, "These will be available on the internet," and, "There is a lack of demand." I am grateful that Fiona McLeod totally exploded those arguments. We need people who are prepared to tell the truth about such matters. I commend Sir Stewart Sutherland for speaking out about one case in which I am involved, which is the Scottish place-names survey. The survey is about to run out of money. When it does, there will be no comprehensive examination of place names in Scotland. Such activities take place worldwide and are important to academic study of where we came from and what our society is. When I submitted a written question to a previous deputy minister responsible for the arts and culture—there have been many and no doubt another will be along in a minute—I was told that the matter was not the responsibility of the Executive. However, Sir Stewart Sutherland, who is the principal of the University of Edinburgh, which houses the survey, was quite prepared to say—and to be quoted as having said—that such surveys were a normal part of Government expenditure in almost every other country in the world.  I welcome the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport to his new role, but I say to him that he will have to persuade his colleagues and his department that we need to be a normal nation that funds its cultural activities in such a way that we can not only enjoy but be enriched by them. That will be the measure of his time in post. If he fails to do that, he will have failed as his predecessors have failed, which means failing Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what response it intends to make to recent comments by the director of Glasgow City Council's education department regarding the effectiveness of league tables as a measure of educational progress and achievement, as reported on BBC News Online on 29 November 2001. (S1O-4277)

Perhaps I should encourage the Minister for Education and Young People, who is in the chamber but did not answer the question, to live up to her old-fashioned radicalism and do what her colleagues have done in Wales and Northern Ireland, which is to stop publishing league tables. As Ken Corsar said in the report that I mentioned, school league tables are "crude" and ineffective.

Political parties have an absolute right to allocate members to committees—I have taken part in that process myself. However, there is one change in the list in the motion that is contrary to the best interests of a committee. I have the permission of the person involved to say what I am going to say, although she may be embarrassed. I did not vote for Cathy Peattie in this morning's election of the Deputy Presiding Officer, but she has been a distinguished vice-convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and has contributed an enormous amount, particularly in the cultural areas.  I know that the die is cast as far as this motion is concerned, but I point out to Patricia Ferguson that, if a contrary view were expressed by the time that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee meets next week and Cathy Peattie were to be allowed to remain in her position, the other members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee—for whom I think I can speak on this matter—would be happy. Cathy has contributed greatly to what we do. For instance, she contributed some important information to our Scottish Ballet report, which we published today and in which she played an important part. In saying that, I am saying nothing against Jackie Baillie, whom I would be happy to see in the committee. I make this statement in the spirit of cross-party co-operation and I hope that it is accepted in that spirit. I will not move against the motion, but I think that my point had to be made.

I will, Presiding Officer.

Mr Peacock will hear a little bit more. I am glad to know that we have made substantial progress on this issue. Those of us who believe in PR for local government will go away from the debate knowing that the Deputy Minister for Parliament has just told us that we should not rule out the possibility of legislation. That is a major step forward. Mr Rumbles must be delighted that so much progress has been made so quickly. In the debate, Michael McMahon—having sat in the chamber for two hours—asked the important question: "What is this all about?" The reality of what it is about came in two distinguished contributions—from my friend Mr Welsh and from Scott Barrie, both of whom have substantial experience of local government. I shall come on to John McAllion's contribution in a moment. Thank you, Mr Jenkins, for pointing him out. I think that Mr Welsh has more experience than anybody else in the chamber, apart from Mr John Young, who was in local government for most of the last century and some of the preceding one. Mr Welsh and Mr Barrie know that the issue is better local government and better response to local government. Mr Smith was also a councillor—the leader of a council.

Sorry, he was the leader of the opposition in a council. Proportional representation is about providing services to the people who are in the gallery. It is about governing Scotland better, getting out of the way of the people and allowing them to choose the government of local authorities that they wish. As Mr Welsh said, it is about empowering local authorities—it is about democracy. What we have heard today has been very interesting. The Tories do not want a democratic Scotland—no change there then. Labour fears a democratic Scotland and Mr McAllion made that point eloquently. It is wrong that any party should fear democracy. Most discreditably of all, the Liberals value their perks more than a democratic Scotland. That is truly disgraceful. The other worry that the debate has presented is that some want to give up even the small advances that have been made in proportional representation in Scotland. We knew that the Labour backwoodsmen were out there. We knew  about the Hoods, the Wrays and the Donohoes, but there are also some in the chamber. Helen Eadie made a speech—I think it was a speech—in which she asked us to reverse all the progress and go back to the situation in which Labour rules everything. I am sorry, but that is not going to happen here; it is not going to happen in Scotland. We should continue to make progress. The regret is that so little progress is being made. What we should do—Scott Barrie made this point—is point out that many good people are working in local government as officials, and indeed as councillors, but that local government is constrained and sometimes destroyed by the lack of accountability to its electors. Kay Ullrich made an excellent speech. She and I suffer the attentions of North Ayrshire Council. In conclusion, I want to illustrate the history of North Ayrshire Council in about a minute and a half. The reality is that North Ayrshire Council is a solid Labour fiefdom in which 25 of the 30 councillors are Labour councillors. In the previous elections, Labour got only 46.9 per cent of the vote, but has 83 per cent of the seats. That situation has continued in North Ayrshire for some considerable time. It has led to there being an institutionally corrupt council. There is no doubt of that. Let me indicate some of the highlights, or lowlights, of North Ayrshire Council. In 1994, the council scrapped its economic development committee after a falling out between rival factions in the Labour group. It was a way of punishing the convener and vice-convener of that committee. North Ayrshire now has one of the highest unemployment levels in Scotland and takes some of the least action on economic issues, because of a historic fight within the Labour group seven years ago. In 1990-2000 the council ran up a deficit of £4.4 million. It added to that in 2000-01, slashed services—including its budget for special educational needs—and paid no attention to any representations that were made to it. In 2000 there was the incident of the big pie dinner. At that celebrated civic event, the leader of the council was assaulted by a fellow Labour councillor, who was dragged out by two others, got up, went back in and hit him again. What happened? Was there an inquiry? Did Labour do anything about it? It was covered up entirely. Nothing whatever happened. It was just part of civic life.

No, I do not want to. I want to finish my speech. In 2001, there was another cover-up at a civic  function to crown the Saltcoats queen of the sea. A councillor's wife, who was also a councillor, was not allowed on to the public platform. She was excluded by the council convener who said, "She's no frae Saltcoats".

No, I am sorry. There was an inquiry into the fracas. The council forbade the councillor who saw it from giving evidence to the Labour inquiry. That sort of thing goes on year on year on year. This year, there are 25 special responsibility allowances in North Ayrshire Council for 30 councillors. Who gets those allowances? The 25 Labour councillors get them. Some of those allowances are for vice-conveners of committees. Last year, two of those vice-conveners worked for only an hour each. The cost of the SRAs was £61,240. Labour councillors in North Ayrshire Council can get more than £30,000 an hour. It is remarkable. I see alarm and despondency among those on the Labour benches who are intelligent enough to show it. The importance of the story is that North Ayrshire Council is an exceptionally bad council. The lives of the exceptionally good members of staff who work for it are made a misery by it. The only way that we will change that is by changing the electoral system to ensure that there is vigour and determination within the council to stamp out abuses. As it is in North Ayrshire, so it is in most of Labour Scotland. The motion is simple. It says that the Parliament believes that the time for change is now and asks members to endorse that change. There is no difficulty with any member who believes in change endorsing it. The trouble is that those who believe in change are being hampered by those who do not want it. Those who do not want it are the majority of the Labour members. They will continue to hamper change unless the Liberal Democrats, the SNP and Mr Harper, who made a most eloquent contribution, come together and speak up for the people of Scotland, in the public gallery and elsewhere, who need and want change and who have had enough of one-party states.

I accept that legislation takes time to draft. However, the minister will recall that the Scotland Act 1998, which is complex legislation that put the Parliament in place, was drafted after Labour's victory in May 1997 and introduced in its first form in December 1997, if I remember correctly. If work was started today and the minister scribbled away with his pen, we could look forward to the introduction of legislation on the matter in the middle of next year. Will he make that commitment?

Will Mr McMahon give way?

If we were to implement what I think should be called the Eadie doctrine, that we should abolish PR entirely for the Parliament, I would have to say goodbye to the member.

Would John Young abolish PR?

I thank Robin Harper for giving way—he is showing an example to others in the chamber. Does he agree that one of the most incredible things about the previous speech was the argument not only that there should not be PR in local government but that there is something wrong with PR in national elections? The burden of Robin Harper's argument is that PR in national elections is essential. That contradicts a remarkable contribution from the previous speaker, who wants to turn the clock back.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

We are supposed to be participating in a debate. Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

He does not understand.

I know that the minister was not in the Labour party during the 1997 referendum, so he might not know that, during the referendum campaign, a group of people from across Scotland worked together, including many members of the SNP. Indeed, most commentators have said that the leader of the SNP produced the most effective contribution—something that the Labour members would not mention because they were embarrassed by the contribution of Labour party members. In the interests of fairness, accuracy and generosity, does the minister accept that point? I presume that that will derail the rest of his nonsensical speech.

There is no need for a debate now.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to page 8 of today's business bulletin and to the motion in the name of Patricia Ferguson on the membership of committees. It is almost unbelievable that the motion refers to a replacement for Cathy Peattie on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I admire Cathy Peattie—I like Cathy Peattie. However, the motion makes an assumption about something that the chamber may or may not agree to later today. That is an abuse of the chamber and should not be permitted.

I appreciate what the minister says, but the Parliament had an opportunity, through an amendment to the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill that I lodged and which was supported by John Farquhar Munro, to establish in law the right to Gaelic-medium education. The amendment was voted down by the minister's colleagues. Also, the budget for Gaelic-medium education will be static for the next three years. I do not expect the minister to respond to that point, but will she make it her priority to find out whether that right can be provided in law. Without such a right, very little can be done.

rose—

Bruidhnidh mi sa Ghàidhlig aig an toiseach, agus an uair sin sa Bheurla. Fàilte ris na Ministearan ùra le cùram airson na Gàidhlig—'s e obair mhòr a th' aca, ma tha iad airson Gàidhlig a shàbhaladh. Tha mi taingeal do Mhaureen Nic Ille Mhaoil airson a' chothrom seo airson deasbad air ceist chudromach: Dè a-nis airson na Gàidhlig? Agus dè a-nis airson foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig? Anns na bliadhnaichean a dh'fhalbh, bha clann na Gaidhealtachd a' bruidhinn na Gàidhlig, ged a bha na tidsearan a' bruidhinn na Beurla, ged a bha a' Ghàidhlig an aghaidh nan riaghailtean. Ach anns an linn seo, linn an fhoghlaim, agus linn nam meadhanan, bàsaichidh a' Ghàidhlig mura faigh i cuideachadh bhon stàite agus àite ann am foghlam. Tha foghlam tro mheadhan na Beurla a' faighinn a' chuideachaidh sin mar-thà. Mar a bhios fios aig a h-uile duine ciallach, feumaidh barrachd chloinne a bhith bruidhinn Gàidhlig. An-diugh tha 's dòcha timcheall seachd mìle duine cloinne a' dèanamh sin. Chan eil iad uile anns na sgoiltean Gàidhlig. Chan eil ach mìle, ochd ceud trì fichead agus a dhà ann an aonadan Gàidhlig—dìreach ceud nas motha na bh' ann ceithir bliadhna air ais. Ged a bha foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig a' fàs gu luath còig no  deich bliadhna air ais, chan eil e a' fàs an-diugh. Ann an Alba an-diugh, chan eil foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig a' fàs cho luath 's a tha na seann Ghaidheil a' bàsachadh. Tha mi duilich—'s dòcha nach e sin an dòigh is fheàrr air a chur—ach sin mar a tha e. Ach—agus seo an rud a tha cudromach—chan eil adhbhar sam bith carson nach urrainn dhuinne rudeigin a dhèanamh airson sin atharrachadh. Aig deireadh an làtha, tha a' Ghàidhlig mar phàirt dhen chùram againne anns a' Phàrlamaid seo. Bidh pàrantan a' sgrìobhadh thugam fad an t-siubhail, ag ràdh gu bheil iad a' lorg àite ann an aonad Gàidhlig airson a' chloinn aca. Ach chan eil na tidsearan ann. Fiù 's ann an colaistean nan tidsear—Cnoc Iòrdan agus Caisteal Leòdhais—chan eil ach dòrlach oileanach a' dèanamh chùrsaichean.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I welcome the new ministers with responsibility for Gaelic. I am grateful to Maureen Macmillan for this opportunity to have a debate on an important question: where now for Gaelic and, specifically, where now for Gaelic-medium education? In years gone by, Highland children spoke Gaelic even though their teachers spoke English, even though Gaelic was against the rules, but in this age of mass education and mass media, Gaelic will die without some state assistance and without a place in education. English-medium education gets that assistance as it is. As every sensible person knows, more children need to speak Gaelic. Today, there are perhaps 7,000 children who can speak it. They are not all in Gaelic schools, though. There are only 1,862 in Gaelic units, which is only 100 more than there were four years ago. Although Gaelic-medium education may have been growing quickly five or 10 years ago, it is not growing today. In Scotland today, Gaelic-medium education is not growing at the rate at which old Gaelic speakers are dying. I am sorry—that may not be a nice way to put it, but that is how it is. However—and this is the important bit—there is no reason why we cannot do something to change that situation. At the end of the day, Gaelic is the responsibility of the Parliament. Parents are always writing to me, saying that they are struggling to find a place in a Gaelic unit for their children. The problem is the shortage of teachers. In the teacher training colleges such as Jordanhill College and Lews Castle College, only a handful of students are doing courses that lead to qualifications to teach in Gaelic.  The member continued in English.  The burden of the argument is not that nothing is being done, but that not enough is being done. The reality that we must face and be honest about is the fact that Gaelic is dying. As I just said, Gaelic is unfortunately dying because Gaels are dying and we are not bringing forward a new generation of Gaels who can speak the language and enliven the culture. Over the past two days, I have held a number of conversations with senior individuals in the Gaelic world who were prepared to say, privately, that Gaelic was better off under Westminster—what an indictment of this Parliament.

No, not under the Conservatives; under Westminster. For once in my life, I pay tribute to Brian Wilson—

It will definitely not become a habit. Even Brian Wilson was called the minister with responsibility for education and Gaelic, yet after two and a half years of this Parliament we still have no minister for Gaelic. How can things be getting better if there is no minister for Gaelic? I welcome the new minister, although Gaelic is not in the responsibilities listed in her title, and I hope that she will work hard for Gaelic. I also pay tribute to Alasdair Morrison. He and I have fought on many occasions in this chamber, and sometimes outside it.

Metaphorically speaking, as Mr Wilson says—although not entirely. However, despite the fact that I have questioned many things about him and many of the things he has said, I have never questioned his commitment to the language. Without a commitment to the language in the Parliament and the Administration, Gaelic will die. That is the real task that the minister faces. What she is taking on, as part of her wide brief, is nothing less than responsibility for the future of the language. There are young people in the public gallery today who are in Gaelic-medium schools. The budget that exists for Gaelic-medium education is static and, as the Education, Culture and Sport Committee discovered, it will not rise in the next three years. Gaelic is dying and we have to do something about it "without further delay", to quote the motion. This debate must be the last debate on this subject and there must now be action. The responsibility for that lies with the minister.

Nonsense.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the interests of fairness, could you confirm that the SNP submitted an amendment identical to the one that David McLetchie lodged? We disapprove of Andy Kerr as much as we disapprove of all the others.

Section 47(3) of the Scotland Act 1998 says: "A Minister appointed under this section- (a) shall hold office at Her Majesty's pleasure, (b) may be removed from office by the First Minister". I suspect that the person who drafted that section could not and did not foresee the circumstances of today's debate. The First Minister has ensured that Her Majesty's pleasure has been forcibly withdrawn from three quarters of the entire Scottish Cabinet and more than a third of the Scottish ministerial work force. In opposing the nomination of a minister, one factor that a member must take into account is the fitness for office of the person concerned. I do not question Cathy Jamieson's fitness for office. However, many in her party believe that she is no more or less fit than many other members who have not been preferred or catapulted from the very back bench to the very front bench in the time that it takes Jack McConnell to sack an enemy—in other words, in no time at all. I question the process of appointment. Unfortunately, Cathy Jamieson's appointment is the result of a flawed and shabby process. Not a week ago, Jack McConnell promised his own group and the country that there would be no night of the long knives, that there would be an end to factionalism and that he would ensure that all those with a contribution to make were valued. Three promises were made and three promises were broken within 24 hours of his being sworn in. With 519 days to go to the Scottish Parliament elections in 2003, Jack McConnell is well on course for a place in "The Guinness Book of Records". Cathy Jamieson has been appointed through a deeply divisive process. An arcane knowledge of the processes of the Labour party is required, but some things are clear—friendship with Jack McConnell is a clear asset and support for anybody else is fatal. There is an obvious attempt  to get at somebody who is not even in the chamber—the king over the water, although the water is only the Firth of Forth. The reshuffle is designed to damage the Chancellor of the Exchequer. I am not against that. In the Sunday papers, he was described by someone on the front bench as a paranoid egomaniac. The reshuffle is about the war between Jack and Gordon—that is the background and the war has nothing to do with Parliament, policy or serving the people of Scotland. There is a tussle for place and a clash of personalities. Parliament is the victim. Cathy Jamieson's appointment is the result of a demeaning process. It demeans those who are appointed, Parliament, our democracy and the First Minister, who has had the shortest honeymoon period in electoral history. Yesterday morning, he did not have one rival. Now, they are on the benches round the chamber. The process demeans Parliament because Jack McConnell understands exactly how cronyism works. It works not just by appointing one's friends, but by doing down one's enemies. Cronyism is not just about connections rather than talent taking one forward—it is about ensuring that despite talent, ability and determination an individual will not succeed. Cronyism is not just about favouring the less talented because they have pledged their loyalty—it is about disadvantaging the more talented because they have not pledged their loyalty. On my way to the chamber this morning, I saw a billboard advertising The Scotsman . It said: "First Minister rewards his friends". In the past 24 hours, Jack McConnell has signalled to Scotland and the world that it is business as usual for a party whose time has passed and that is tainted by cronyism and abuse of patronage. He intends to raise those to an art form. I am glad that I did not vote for him last week. I suspect that his benches are now full of those who wish that they had not voted for him either, although I hear them cackling. We should not approve the Cabinet. The whole process is damaging to Scotland and deeply destructive. We should reject the Cabinet and reject Jack McConnell, too. I move amendment 2488.3, to leave out "Cathy Jamieson".

It was a Liberal priority. [Laughter.]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sorry not to have given you notice of this point of order. A notice has been issued to members of the press regarding a visit to the chamber this afternoon by Mr Iain Duncan Smith. The final item in that notice reads: "1515-1540: Mr Duncan Smith will be available for media interviews in the Black and White corridor". Who gave permission for that to happen? Why was that permission given? Are reciprocal rights being granted to members of the Parliament to be interviewed in the lobby of the House of Commons? Has anybody, perhaps in the Conservative party, told Mr Duncan Smith that he will be a distraction from another event in the chamber this afternoon? I cannot imagine that many people will wish to address him.

I accept the assurance that Mr McConnell gave to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee that a statement of clarification would be provided, along with the assurance that the minister is giving now. However, Trish Godman made a very important point. It would be much better for the bill to be properly drafted and easily understood than for it to be accompanied by further documentation. Local authorities and others have expressed the view that it is possible to improve the drafting of the bill. I accept that this is a matter for debate, but members from all parties have indicated that they would rather have the bill properly drafted at stage 2 than have a statement of clarification or additional documentation provided.

I declare an interest, as my wife is one of the people who will be affected by the legislation. She is an assistant head teacher and will disappear—not physically, but in terms of her title. I am sorry that Mr McConnell is not here today as it would have given us an opportunity to bid him farewell in—who knows?—his last role as Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs. As he was the minister who presented the bill to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and answered the committee's questions, I am surprised and disappointed that he has not come today to carry on with the task. I want to address three issues, the first of which is the drafting. Nobody appears to have seen the problem with the previous bill—it went past all of us. Mr Monteith is nodding sagely. Even the eagle- eyed among us did not notice the difficulty, although its results quickly became apparent. I had an early case, which arose in South Ayrshire. There is a general point about drafting that needs to be addressed. The nature of the way in which ministers and civil servants approach the issue of drafting when talking to committees, particularly at stage 2, or at stage 3 in the chamber, is confrontational. There is a defensiveness about the drafting of any legislation. The shortage of parliamentary civil servants who can assist members with drafting issues is severe, as a result of which ministers and the Parliament are in the hands of civil servants. It is obvious that drafting mistakes were made. There is another worrying case in the same bill. I am glad to see John Farquhar Munro here because, during the debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools Bill, he and I proposed an amendment—amendment 34—on Gaelic education. It was resisted by the then Deputy Minister for Children and Education, Peter Peacock, who said: "Amendment 34 seeks to place duties on 'education authorities', in the plural, yet authorities, in the plural, are not a recognised legal entity. It is therefore not possible to place a duty on them."— [ Official Report , 7 June 2000; Vol 7, c 23.]  I presume that that was a civil service instruction, on which the minister was briefed. Subsequent research reveals that the Standards in Scotland's Schools Bill contained 22 references to education authorities in the plural. Five of its sections included the words "Education authorities shall". It was therefore a combative and defensive attack—presumably by the civil servants who had drafted it—on an attempt to amend the bill, the basis of which turned out to be completely untrue. I exonerate Mr Peacock from any charge of misleading the chamber, but it illustrates the way in which civil servants, in briefing their ministers, prepare to do battle in the chamber against reasoned discussion of bills and the way they are drafted. That combative nature unfortunately showed itself in the committee's discussion of the School Education (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. As noted in the Official Report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, Mr McConnell said with regard to COSLA's reservations about the bill, particularly the section on placing requests: "There is no support in the Executive at a professional level for the view that has been expressed."—[ Official Report , Education, Culture and Sport Committee, 23 October 2001; c 2678.] That is not the question that Mr McConnell was asked, and it is not the question that we should ask here, but if education authorities—without any  axe to grind—and COSLA still have reservations about the way in which the bill is drafted and about what may happen when seeking placing requests, it is important that those concerns are addressed. It is not important to defend the amour-propre of civil servants or the words that appear on the purple page of the published bill; it is important, for heaven's sake, at the second attempt, to get it right. I therefore appeal to whoever is the minister—it may even be Mr Stephen—to enter into constructive dialogue with the committee at stage 2 about the exact drafting of the section on placing requests. We cannot afford to get it wrong a second time. There are genuine questions about whether the section on McCrone goes far enough. The McCrone job-scoping exercise may have to go further and deal with principal teachers. Although the bill deals with deputy heads and deputy principals, principal teachers in departments will be excepted by the job-scoping part of the McCrone exercise, and the statutory obligations relating to their appointment must be addressed. It would be best to consult committee members and members of the Parliament about the exact detail of that exercise at stage 2, rather than entering into an unnecessary battle. The bill restores the status quo only in terms of placing requests. It is not a revolution and there is no new thinking. It simply restores the status quo as we believed it to be. There are big questions about the placing of young children in schools. There are questions about whether we in Scotland have the appropriate starting age for school, about the transition from nursery to primary education, about whether there should be rolling enrolment in primary schools and about whether the old concept of having a cut-off date is still relevant. All those questions are worthy of debate. The bill does not and cannot address them and we should not lose sight of the fact that what this bill does is tidy up legislation and make allowances for the McCrone settlement. We are not progressing ideas in education a whit. We should return to the chamber to do that. Those points aside, I and my party colleagues have been pleased to play an important part in the early stages of the bill and we will continue to do that. I do not think that the bill will detain the chamber or the committee for long, but I hope that when we consider it at stages 2 and 3 we will take on board fully the views of local authorities and of COSLA and will make absolutely certain that we make no further mistakes. Perhaps the Parliament will also take on board the fact that drafting is a matter that we should all be involved in, rather than something that should be the focus of another war between the Executive and the Parliament.

I accepted the fact that there are occasions on which we need to legislate on a UK-wide basis. Does the member believe that there are more occasions on which we should do  that, than occasions on which we should legislate ourselves? The figures that I gave showed that there are more occasions on which we allow other people to legislate than occasions on which we legislate ourselves. If he agrees with that position, why did he bother to get elected?

A simple statistic says it all. If we pass the Sewel motion today—I hope that we do not—the Parliament will have passed 25 Sewel motions. We have only passed 23 items of legislation. Sewel motions are now not the exception, they are the norm. We ask others to legislate more often than we legislate ourselves. Those are the simple facts of the matter. That alone should make us pause to decide what to do today. I agree with Gordon Jackson—this is the only point on which I will agree with him—that Sewel motions are a possible and legitimate tool, on occasion and in specific circumstances. In the early days of the Parliament, the Sewel motions that we discussed were agreed among the parties because they dealt with small matters of legislation in a larger United Kingdom bill. That was true of the Financial Services and Markets Bill, the Limited Liability Partnerships Bill, small changes under the Representation of the People Bill and the small details of the Insolvency Bill. However, what we are asked to do in passing this motion is different. We are asked to approve a major item of legislation with enormous impact on Scotland on the basis of an hour-and-a-half's debate and a vote at 5 o'clock.

Allow me to develop my argument, please. To pass such legislation in such a way is the wrong thing to do for three clear reasons. The first  is not to do with the Parliament, but to do with the country. Scotland, as the minister said, is not immune from a terrorist threat. It is absolutely right that the Government of Scotland engage the people of Scotland in debating the appropriate response to the present international situation. That is happening in every country in the western world and beyond. As members know, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and I were in Canada last week. There, a major piece of legislation on terrorism is working its way not just through the federal Parliament, but through the provincial Parliaments. That is the way in which the Canadians are deciding on their response to the world in which we now live. This Parliament is being denied the right to do so by the Scottish Executive. The Executive is denying Scotland the right to do so. When the Scottish Government is asked how it is going to respond and how Scotland is going to respond, its answer is incredible. Its answer is, "somebody else will do it for us".

I will let Mr Brown intervene in a moment. We cut out the possibility of engaging Scotland in the debate and getting the whole-hearted support of the people for measures that may be necessary to defeat worldwide terrorism. I can understand that the Labour party may be more concerned with internal matters than with the governance of Scotland, but surely the obligation on that party is to lead Scotland, not to abrogate its responsibility.

I have just made that point. The most important issue—I will repeat it in simple terms for Mr Brown—is to engage Scotland in the debate, not to cut Scotland out of it. In that way, we will get the full assent of the people of Scotland to the measures that may be necessary.

I am sorry, I will not give way. I must make progress. A second, strong issue arises. There will and must be appropriate developments in Scottish institutions to take account of the changing world. The Sewel motion does not allow those institutions  to change. It freezes the debate. It says that such decisions are always made elsewhere, as in Gordon Jackson's remarkable contribution. Such decisions are not always made elsewhere. An obligation is on us to consider the best response for Scottish institutions and allow them to change and develop. That is being denied in the debate, which is entirely wrong. We will be left with a set of devolved institutions that have not responded and that Scottish democratic politicians have not been able to help to develop. There is a third, even stronger reason to be worried about the Sewel motion. If we pass it, we will assent to certain measures that are anti-democratic. We are a small European country. We value liberty greatly. We have assented to the European provisions on civil liberties. By passing the Sewel motion, we will be saying that we no longer care about those provisions. I regard it as astonishing that the Liberal Democrats, who have a strong track record in such matters and are saying in Westminster what I am saying, should say it in this Parliament, but that their votes should not follow their voice.

I am sorry. I will not give way to Mr Smith. What happens, as usual, is that the Liberal Democrats say, "We have some objections, but we're not going to do anything about them." There are three strong reasons to be worried about what is happening in the Parliament today. There are three strong reasons why we should pause before we agree the motion. For me and for the SNP, there are three strong reasons why we should oppose the motion.

The minister says that culture is not something that can be reported. How does that square with 36 pages of graphs and details of the report in the document? Have we just wasted  the past hour and a half just as the minister has wasted the past year?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

It is about Michael Fry.

I concur entirely with what John Farquhar Munro has just said and I commend him for those remarks. Will he reflect on the fact that although page 10 of the progress report says that "Gaelic-medium education is a cornerstone" of the Executive's support for Gaelic, the Deputy Minister for Sport, the Arts and Culture and the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs admitted at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee on Tuesday that the allocation for Gaelic-medium education is not set to rise for any of the next three years? In other words, with inflation, it will actually fall. I do not think that John Farquhar Munro or I would regard that as support for the cornerstone, would we?

I join the member in celebrating the things that are happening in his constituency in the Scottish Borders. However, we need to ask whether those things would have happened without the national cultural strategy, whether they were happening anyway, and whether far more would be possible with a much more creatively focused set of proposals than these. If we look around the public gallery, we will see that this occasion, on which we are debating Scotland's cultural strategy, has not pulled in the Scottish artistic and cultural community so that it might engage with us. The only member of that community whom I see in the gallery is Mr Michael Fry, who may be having a pleasant time after his long lunch. I congratulate him on the launch of his new book today. We are not engaging people like that, because many of the things to which Ian Jenkins referred would have happened without the cultural strategy.

Will the member give way?

I welcome some of the announcements that the minister has made, although I am disappointed at the lack of other announcements, to which I shall come shortly. To support the bid by Inverness to become the city of culture is sensible. Glasgow was highly successful as city of culture, although not much of it rubbed off on Mr McAveety. Let us hope that more of it will rub off on the people of Inverness. If they succeed in the bid, they are likely to have a highly successful year. I also welcome the commitment to the writers factory. To start investing in Scottish writers and Scottish literature is sensible. There has been substantial underinvestment in that area. I hope that investment in Scottish writers will also mean investment in Scottish publishers. There is no doubt that Scottish publishers are underachieving, but that there is great talent in the sector. I welcome the opportunity to debate the first annual report on the strategy. I would welcome it more had the report been made available at the same time as the motion was lodged. The motion celebrates the contents of the document, even though there is not much to celebrate in it—I will come on to that—but unfortunately the report was available only at 20 minutes to 11 this morning. That is 18 hours after amendments to the motion were required to be submitted. It is clearly impossible to accept a motion from the minister that welcomes the contents of a document that none of us has seen. I give the minister the benefit of the doubt. I do not think that the situation was a deliberate slight on the Parliament. It was the type of incompetence in the Scottish Executive to which one has become used, but it should not happen again. Having the report in one's possession is more dispiriting than not having it in one's possession. The name of only one creative artist appears in the report and it is not Allan Wilson, who wrote the introduction; the name Robert Burns occurs twice  in the report. Nothing is wrong with that—I too am a member of the Burns Federation and support the promotion of Burns—but if in the whole of the Scottish cultural strategy and the report on its first year, there is room for the name of only one creative artist, and he is mentioned twice, at the least we must say that something may not be right with the strategy. The reality is that there are strong doubts, reservations and disappointments throughout the cultural communities in Scotland with regard to the national cultural strategy. The existence of the progress report does not in any way diminish those doubts, reservations and disappointments. The basic flaw in the Executive's policy lies with the original cultural strategy. At least the cultural strategy documents have come down in size—that is something to be said for the annual report. The problem is that the faults of the original strategy and the way in which it was put together damage fatally any possibility of having a visionary and sensible cultural policy. The strategy document is not a document of vision. It is a management and micro-management document for the arts in Scotland. It has unfortunately been distilled into a micro-management document about aims and objectives for a cultural strategy, which means little. The document is sprinkled with words such as "will", "might" and "possible". It says little about what has happened. Let us consider the original strategy document. It contains 64 key objectives. My colleague Irene McGugan asked 64 parliamentary questions about each one of those objectives in the late spring, only to be told by the minister that he would report today on what progress had been made.

In one moment. The reality is that three of the 64 objectives have been met in part. My disappointment about one of the three objectives on that very small list of what has been achieved is that the minister has not mentioned what will happen with the national theatre. Does he wish to intervene to tell me about his response to the request from the Scottish Arts Council for additional theatre funding? If the minister wishes to say something about that, I shall sit down.

Even I would not go so far as to call the deputy minister a space. It is extremely important that the Scottish theatre community knows what is likely to happen with requests for moneys equivalent in a sense to the Boyden money south of the border and with the national theatre. I reiterate the point that I made to the minister on Tuesday. The Scottish Arts Council has called the establishment of a national theatre and the funding of Scottish theatres a "virtuous circle" and has said that one will not flourish without investment in the other, but it is not an either/or. I have confirmed with Scottish theatre communities today that they are not looking for an either/or; they are looking for across-the-board investment. I do want to be accused of being entirely negative in the debate.

Mr Tosh is indicating that it is unlikely that I would be entirely negative anyway and I accept that generous intervention. It would be tempting simply to point out the failings of the documents—and there are many—but the minister is keen to ensure that cultural matters flourish in Scotland. I do not think that he has the tools with which to do the job—he certainly does not have the tools in terms of the cultural strategy—but there are indications of areas that might benefit from the attention of the Executive. Before I come to those, it is quite obvious—in the light of amendment S1M-2354.2—that nothing will be forthcoming from the Conservative party that will assist the dialogue. The dialogue on such matters will have to be between the Scottish National Party and the Executive. It is absolute economic and cultural illiteracy to argue that state subsidy for the arts should always be resisted. Mr Monteith's amendment is termed in such a nonsensical way that it does not bear debate. Let me come to the important issues that require action. Over the past 12 months, the major stushies in the arts world in Scotland have been about direct funding of the arts and, in particular, a previous minister's penchant for supporting Scottish Opera not simply by attending its performances, but by handing it cheques. The national companies are in a different position from many other clients of the Scottish Arts Council. We should debate whether funding  to the national companies should be direct, not channelled through the Scottish Arts Council, which would refocus the Arts Council on a much wider range of clients and on the propagation of creativity and energy within the arts. Cathy Peattie and I have debated that in private and we disagree on it. There should be a debate about the Arts Council—it is not enough for it to review itself. There should be a debate about whether, in the 21 st century, it is the best way of distributing money to the arts in Scotland. The arm's-length principle that arises from gentlemen sipping sherry in Oxbridge common rooms and exchanging grants is outmoded. There needs to be more direct engagement. The Government does not need to be involved in that, but there are better ways to administer the system. We could examine some of the European models, for example academies and involving working artists in developing other artists. Developing creativity throughout Scotland needs to be considered, because the present structure is bureaucratic and difficult to access. There are ways of ensuring that the structure works more enthusiastically. I have referred to theatrical issues. There are issues in literature and publishing, which I am glad the minister is beginning to tackle. There are touring issues—a lack of money for Scottish companies to tour abroad concerns every Scottish artist. There are museums issues—the funding of museums is crucial and I look forward to reading the interim report. There are the issues surrounding the national companies and the management of such companies, in particular Scottish Ballet, which has been appallingly mismanaged in recent months. All those issues need to be carefully addressed, but the biggest overall need, and the place from which we should start this debate, relates to how we excite and release the creative energy of everybody in Scotland. That is the purpose of a cultural strategy. The Executive's document does not give us any sense that there is any energy and excitement. I was impressed with the minister's list of quotations—I compliment him on them. I think that the most important one for the Executive's document comes from the poet Roger McGough. He said: "I have read your manifesto with great interest, but can find nothing in it about singing." That is the reality of the Executive's arts documents: there is a lot of management, but no culture in them at all. I move amendment S1M-2354.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert:  "regrets that the report is not available to MSPs or the public until 25 October 2001; notes that of the 64 strategic objectives, key priorities and supporting actions in the National Cultural Strategy document Creating our Future: Minding our Past , very few appear to have been progressed significantly; continues to express concern that the Scottish Executive's present cultural policy, as expressed in its National Cultural Strategy, lacks coherence and vision, has failed to engage the support and enthusiasm of the Scottish community in general, and the arts communities in particular, and is unlikely to help fulfil the potential of Scotland at home and abroad or to widen opportunities or assist in delivering social justice; observes that funding crises and other operational difficulties continue to be the daily norm for most publicly subsidised arts bodies, museums and others within the arts and heritage sector, despite the Scottish Executive's relentless self-congratulation about its own actions, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to reconsider its policy and to begin to deliver on some of its promises, including a properly funded National Theatre within a clear and reasonable time-frame based upon a better supported theatre sector in Scotland."

Will the minister give way?

What a dreary whinge we have heard from Alex Johnstone, Iain Smith, Hugh Henry and Brian Fitzpatrick. What dreary whingers they are. Their lack of ambition for Scotland is conterminally confused by the fact that they are always doffing the cap to the union.

I will count in Mr Monteith if he so wishes. He, too, is a dreary whinger on this matter. What terminal confusion and lack of ambition. The reality is that the members of this Parliament, except those who sit on the SNP benches, have no ambition. Only the SNP members talk about Scotland as a nation. How revealing it was that each time one of the dreary whingers was asked a question—

No. Ben Wallace should sit down. He can whinge, too, when he wants. Each time that those members were asked whether Scotland is a region or a nation, they would not answer—except for Mr Johnstone who blundered with a memorable phrase that we will use time and again.

No, I will not. Today's question is simple: what is the best representation for Scotland within a consultative Committee of the Regions?

We already know that that is not the answer. The Committee of the Regions is a consultative body, not a decision-making body. This Parliament is a decision-making body. The ministers are meant to be a decision-making body. I know that that seems unlikely, but that is what they are supposed to be. In such circumstances, Scottish ministers should be represented on the Council of Ministers and Scottish local authorities should be represented on the Committee of the Regions. The issue is very simple. There should be no difficulty with that whatever. We have heard excuses today because that reality cannot be accepted by any of the unionist  parties, which must go on doffing the cap to the union and pretending that Scotland is a region and not a nation. That is what today's debate has been about.

No. I am sorry but I have only three minutes.

Not from Ben Wallace, I am sure. In such circumstances, the proper representation on the Committee of the Regions should come from the councillors in Scotland. The SNP has democratically chosen the councillor that will take part—I am sure that the new Labour party has forgotten democracy, but it would be quite good for it—and each party should do the same. If our amendment is not successful today, I warmly welcome the fact that Irene McGugan will be in the delegation. She will keep the delegation honest. In her new role as depute spokesperson on Europe and external affairs—I am proud to say that I will be shadowing Mr McConnell—she and I will keep the minister honest on this matter. We will do that because we believe what is a fact: Scotland is a nation.

There is a surprise.

But the Conservatives are against Europe.

I am sure that the Accounts Commission, like HMIE, can apportion blame. The Accounts Commission can also punish. However, we are talking about a point that several SNP members have made—how do we put in resources to help children who are suffering? The minister has almost finished his speech. Between  now and the end of the speech, I and many in the chamber will look for an indication of some money to help the children whom Christine Grahame talked about. If we do not get that, I am sorry to say that the minister's performance will not have been good enough.

May I move a motion to extend the business?

There is an additional point, which is germane to the member's argument. Mainstreaming is particularly effective when the parents positively support it. In the cases in question, parents are demanding mainstreaming. That makes all the legislation in the world almost irrelevant—it is the parents' demand for the best for their children that adds the voracity to the argument.

As I was listening to Mr Tosh, for whom I have a great deal of respect, I heard a comment from a man who is sitting behind me and for whom I also have a great deal of respect: Alex Neil—although he will be surprised to hear me say that. In the middle of Murray Tosh's speech, Alex Neil said, "What about the weans?" That is the only possible answer to what Murray Tosh has just said. What we have heard is an extraordinary abdication of responsibility. Although I respect Murray Tosh, what we heard from him was an abdication of a desire to care for those who are suffering. He provided no answer for those who come to us and ask for a solution. People who come to the Parliament in genuine distress have no use for technical answers.

In a moment. There is a precedent for what Murray Tosh is talking about: the Education, Culture and Sport Committee inquiry into a process of school closure  in Argyll. The process was halted by the council on the basis that its consultation process was inadequate. Before Murray Tosh responds to my points, I must say that I am astonished by his accusations about the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I heard from a Scottish Borders councillor last week who wanted to blame not the director of education and not the administration of the council, but the churches and the teachers' representatives because they sat on the education committee. The people to blame are those who ran the Scottish Borders Council budget and the councillors. We should blame them and not try to blame those who are blameless. Murray Tosh may intervene.

That is an angels-on-the-head-of-a-pin comment. The reality is that a great deal of damage and suffering has been caused. The Executive can take a variety of measures. Let us talk about that for a moment. It could use some of the vast underspend that exists to help real people—the real people who are in the public gallery. The Executive could also take the example that Comhairle nan Eilean Siar set when it had a disaster lending money to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International. In that situation, the council was given a special borrowing power because the effect of the loss of the £27 million it lost would have been so grievous as to decimate the education service. Mr Peacock will remember that. I believe that he was in the Highlands at the time. He was not in the Western Isles. I freely acknowledge that he was completely blameless in that matter. He was not in the Labour party, as Mr Ingram points out. I will return briefly to the core of the question. I want the minister to respond to two points. The minister is brave to close the debate, particularly as he is a Liberal Democrat minister. I admire him for it. First, how did the situation happen? I have  worked with our councillors. I pay strong tribute to Christine Grahame, whose work on the situation has been outstanding and who is standing up for people in a way from which Murray Tosh should learn. There has been no explanation. There has been no acknowledgement of responsibility. There has been no apology. That is completely unacceptable. Who is responsible and will they put their hand up, please? Somebody has to find out who is responsible. What is happening at the moment is a disgrace to local government. Secondly, and even worse, the weakest—the poorest of the poor in society—those who are really suffering are being made to suffer more. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee produced a report on special educational needs that assumed that the bad days in that sector were over. We were trying to show the rest of Scotland that there is a lot to be done and that we were overwhelmingly impressed by the work that is being done in every part of Scotland by people who really care. We could not have imagined that within weeks of the report being issued, the first option of a council would be to cut services for those who need them most. That is a disgrace. No member should rest until that wrong has been redressed.

Before I come to the burden of our amendment, I will comment on some of today's speeches. Hugh Henry demonstrated yet again his reputation from his days at West Renfrewshire Council. He is unable to tolerate opposition of any description—it is regrettable that that intolerance was apparent today. Donald Gorrie reminded me of an article that I think appeared in The Scotsman some years ago, headed "What on earth are the Liberal Democrats for?" The article was written by Peter McMahon, who I think is the First Minister's spin-doctor. Listening to Donald Gorrie, he would have realised that to be involved with the Liberal Democrats is incredibly foolish. However, I will say something nice about Mr Jenkins in a minute. The purpose of our amendment is to address reality. There are facts—something that the Tories were rather short of—in our amendment. If those facts were in dispute, Mr Canavan provided further facts to support them. There are things that are wrong. The present strategy has not succeeded, nor did the strategy of the person whom Mr Monteith described as his good friend Raymond Robertson. There is a failure to give young people the opportunity to participate in sport and there is a failure to build sporting excellence.

In a minute. Our amendment draws attention to that failure. We are not saying that everything that the minister announced was wrong—I will say something nice about him in a minute—but that he cannot avoid the facts. Our amendment represents a slight frustration on the part of my mild-mannered colleague Irene McGugan, which is that the self-congratulatory motions must stop. If things are wrong, let us decide what the problems are and tackle them. Let us not just congratulate ourselves again and again.

There are very constructive ways to move forward, but they do not all have to come from the SNP; some can come from the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I remember that the committee's report was endorsed by all its members, including me. I am not assuming that the SNP has a monopoly on wisdom, but I am looking for a recognition of reality.

No. Procedurally, there should have been a response to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report and then a debate on the report. As with the debate on the architectural strategy, we debate these matters in a vacuum. However, I welcome the minister's announcement about the school sport alliance, which I am certain will become known as the Gillon institute, given Karen Gillon's contribution to it. There have been important contributions that demonstrate the correctness of the SNP's position, although they come from individuals who will not support our amendment. Mr Jenkins, for example, was correct in the conclusion of his speech when he talked about the need to analyse the whole purpose of education and to find out how sport fits in. The recommendation of two hours a week in primary schools comes not from the SNP but from the sportscotland document. The Executive supports that document. We support the recommendation because it seems about right. One of the coming ideas in education is to consider things as a whole, including the ability of school communities to decide on their priorities.

No. Although Mr Jenkins will not support our amendment, he could do so because it recognises the problems and seeks to address them. Karen Gillon could support our amendment—many of the points that we raise are well-known to her and to anybody who has studied the matter as she has. Those are the circumstances in which we are saying, "Address the real issues." We will support the minister in the chamber when he makes welcome announcements and talks about initiatives that are making a contribution. However,  when he moves an anodyne motion that simply congratulates the Executive on what has happened and does not continue to press forward, set new benchmarks, say that there are things still to be achieved or address Dennis Canavan's crucial point about moving from our current position to the hoped-for attainment not just of sporting excellence, which is perhaps the icing on the cake, but of good health—a healthy mind in a health body, to use a Latin tag in English—as a continuing activity, we cannot support him. I would welcome the Executive's motion if it were more ambitious and more keen to succeed, instead of resting on its laurels—to use yet another sporting phrase. We still have a lot to do, the SNP amendment recognises how much we have to do, and the Parliament should support ambition rather than self-congratulation.

For the avoidance of doubt, the purpose of the amendment is to reiterate some facts about the situation, and to reiterate the fact  that self-congratulation is no praise, a point that Hugh Henry demonstrated amply in the past five minutes.

That is opposition.

Will the member give way?

Mr Jenkins is aware that one of the big issues in education is the question of its purpose. Discussion of that issue unites him, me and other members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. One aspect of that question is what goes in where. My colleague Irene McGugan's point is that there is strong evidence from abroad, and in the Executive documents, that two hours is the right amount. We take that as one of the building blocks. I am sure that Mr Jenkins would welcome—as I would—an initiative to talk about the overall purpose of education, which would enable us to make progress on the matter. In fact, I think that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee is now going to take such an initiative.

Will the member take a positive intervention?

Mr Fraser must get used to surprises in the chamber. I commend Mr Fraser's views on shinty and suggest that it is a great pity that the innovations in shinty, for example those made by schools in Argyll, are not spread more widely in Scotland. I hope that the member will join Fergus Ewing and me in arguing for much greater support for shinty, to get it into schools and to have it recognised as the exciting sport that it is, although, as Mr Fraser no doubt knows, it can lead to damage to the head  from time to time.

My question is about procedure. It strikes me that as the deputy minister has initiated a debate on sports promotion in schools, and as the Education, Culture and Sport Committee has produced a report on sport in schools, it would have informed the debate if the Executive had responded to the report before the debate, rather than having the debate before responding to the report. The order does not help the Parliament.

I am sure that the minister is aware that the number of qualified applicants to train as primary teachers far exceeds the number of places. Is the minister considering increasing the number of places as fast as possible to allow entry into the profession of qualified people who want to teach? At the moment, the entry requirements to the colleges are set extremely high because there is an over-supply of well-qualified young people.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister twice named members and twice those members tried to intervene—[MEMBERS: "Three times."] I am sorry—it happened three times, yet she did not take those interventions. As she did not have the courtesy to acknowledge those interventions, will she tell us why she did not take them?

We have just seen a graphic example of the Scottish Tory party's rush to the right. Its conversion is not so much Damascene as Gadarene. Unfortunately, it is rushing to destruction yet again. It is clear that the party wants to slash public spending and Scottish public services. Whatever else divides the chamber, the vast majority of members know that that would be a recipe for disaster in Scotland. It has been a recipe for disaster for the Scottish Tories—clearly that will continue. Before I talk about the education underspend—because, no matter what the Minister for Finance and Local Government says, there is an education underspend—I must say that I am intrigued by a report from the Finance Committee on stage 1 of the 2002-03 budget process. At the committee meeting on 22 May, the convener was involved in a long discussion with committee advisers and members about exactly what the modernising government fund is. One of the advisers said: "Entering the £13 million in that table— the table of finance— seems to have been a mistake."—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 22 May 2001; c 1268.] The convener later admitted that he had no idea who was responsible for the programme. He said that the clerks had checked the introduction to the report and that there was no specific mention of it. If we pin that down, we should be able to identify where the cost falls. Mr Watson is an expert on the matter now, but he did not seem to know anything about it then. The reality of the situation is that, in the past 12 months, schools, hospitals and public services in Scotland did not get the money that they needed. That is irrefutable. I talk regularly to teachers and ask them what they need; they know that their services are underfunded. They were horrified to discover, at a time of cuts in education when it  was impossible to get books in classrooms and some schools were closing, that the Executive had underspent its budget by £85 million. The minister and the Finance Committee convener may shake their heads, but people cannot be fooled. They know whether a Government is doing its job. When they cannot get hospital services and their children cannot get books in schools, they know that the Government is to blame. When they discover that, although the Government spins and blusters about every programme and announces and re-announces, it is not spending the money and the programmes are not taking place, people know that the blame lies in only one place: on the front bench, with a Minister for Finance and Local Government who cannot run finances efficiently and a Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs who is not performing and not delivering. There is no way round that.

A much better question today would be, "What do we pay the Minister for Finance and Local Government for?" If he is saying that all this has been done by his friend Gordon Brown and told to people at Westminster, and that he is only just following it up, we should not be paying him a penny. [ Interruption. ] I am coming to the McCrone issue. The reality of the situation is that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs told the chamber that there will be no transfer of resources away from key priorities into teachers' pay. If he is saying that, at the very beginning of the McCrone process, there was a plan to transfer money from things like school repairs into teachers' pay, he should have told us. We supported—and continue to support—the McCrone settlement. What we do not support is economy with the truth in the chamber or in answer to the people of Scotland. That is clearly what is happening. I have a letter here from Comann nam Pàrant (Nàiseanta)—the Gaelic education parents group—to the minister. It suggests what the minister could spend a small amount of the money  on—if he is so incompetent that money is available. Matters such as Gaelic education, which was bitterly opposed by Mr Peacock when he was the Deputy Minister for Children and Education, are still not being funded. People are looking at the Executive and saying, "It can talk, put out press releases and bluster, but it cannot help the people of Scotland."

The point that I made, which Mike Watson has not clarified in any sense, is how can an official set of figures—in the minister's press release—show a budget of £13 million and an underspend of £22 million? It is ludicrous. If the convener of the Finance Committee cannot see how ludicrous that is, I suggest that he should take a refresher course in simple English.

I will explain what the SNP is saying and use an analogy from Mr Stone's background—I remember that he is a  distinguished cheese maker. Our argument is that if the budget for his cheese-making enterprise was 30 per cent underspent, it would be obvious that some of his customers had not had some cheese delivered to them, because the cheese would not have been made. I hope that Mr Stone understands the argument now.

Will the member give way?

With regard to information being provided to parliamentary committees, would Mr Davidson support my and many other people's calls to the minister to publish detailed information about which budgets were underspent, along with some explanation of that, so that the committees can see the impact of the Administration's incompetence?

It would be pushing the envelope of consensus very far to accept the Conservative amendment, particularly in the light of Mr Monteith's opening speech and of Murdo Fraser's summing-up. I must admit that I am overwhelmed by the minister's generosity.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It goes against the grain, but my party would be prepared to support both amendments—including Brian Monteith's. Would that be procedurally possible? Both amendments insert words at the end of the motion. If the Presiding Officer can tell us how the motion will read if both amendments are accepted, we will perhaps accept it and wander away surprised at what we have done.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Well that would be a change for the Tories.

Will the member give way? I can help to explain SNP policy, as he clearly does not know much about it.

rose—

I welcome the fact that Mr McAveety has drawn attention to the word "competitive" and I remind members that Mr Monteith used that word four or five times in his speech. I am sure that Mr McAveety noticed that. Does he accept, as I do, that competition might be part of education, but it is not the reason for education?

Michael Forsyth?

Will the member give way?

I am surprised that the Tory education spokesperson knows so little about what happens in classrooms. There is regular testing in primary classrooms. That testing is made both subjective by the teacher and objective by the testing evidence. That happens, but if Mr Monteith and Fred Forrester do not think that it happens, they should go to a primary classroom and see it happen.

I want to follow up on Mr Monteith's experience. In what exact ways was the information that was provided to him, as a parent, inadequate? What did it not tell him and what could he not compare?

I always respond.

The motion is comparatively unobjectionable. I say "comparatively" because it contains one thing that my party will have to consider before we decide whether we can support it. What we heard from the minister was far from unobjectionable, however. It was a typical, Jack McConnell, new Labour, managerial, spun speech. When challenged on the new announcements that he was making, he claimed that they were not new announcements but reannouncements. We are very familiar with reannouncements from Labour ministers, but either these are new announcements or they are not. If they are new announcements, notice should have been given of them; if they are reannouncements, the minister is conning the Parliament and the people of Scotland. This all came together with an action group. Surprise, surprise—another action group, another task force. The only surprise in the minister's speech was a quote from Einstein—that was certainly unexpected. However, as the Executive is doing the opposite of what the quote calls for, it just proves that Einstein and Jack McConnell are not like minds. Undoubtedly, there is a need to assess educational achievement or attainment. Indeed, the motion seems to regard assessment as a means of improving by monitoring. No one would take exception to that. However, there is the pertinent question of how much assessment is required and whether it is necessary to take the watch to pieces all the time just to find out whether it is working properly. My objection for a long time has been that the burden of assessment has been growing and growing. The evidence for that arose during the inquiry into the Scottish Qualifications Authority. Mr Jenkins is wise in education matters and drew our attention to the difficulty. It was obvious that in the higher still programme, for example, the level of assessment completely overwhelmed the purposes of the courses. The real question about  assessment is what level it should be. I regret that the Executive is not going to produce the long-promised green paper on education. That paper would have asked some of the important questions, such as what an assessment is, how it should be levied and how much we require. As that is not happening, the debate is being closed down. We may have an action group, but action groups come and go. We do not have a proper debate about the level of assessment. The motion worries me—I am always nervous of things that Mr McConnell stands behind—because, on the surface, like Mr McConnell, it appears eminently reasonable, but it might have hidden elements that reveal it to be a Trojan horse. Perhaps that hidden element lies in the third bullet point of the first published version of the motion. It may be—I asked the question in an intervention and I regret that Mr McConnell would not give a straight answer—the introduction of national primary testing in a form that Scotland has already rejected twice. I see that Mr McConnell is shaking his head. If he is prepared to make that absolute commitment as I asked him to earlier, I would be a much happier man.

Mr McConnell chooses not to stand, so I remain concerned that that is the problem that we face.

Does Brian Monteith have the answer? How surprising.

I have to say that Mr Monteith and Einstein are also not like minds. If Mr Monteith does not recognise what national primary testing means, or why there were objections to it when it was proposed by his more liberal friend Mr Forsyth, I am not going to enlighten him. I want a system of education that our young people not only benefit from but enjoy. I want a system in which the pressure is not so great that it crushes the enjoyment from the process. Listening to young people and their parents in Hamilton during the SQA inquiry, I was struck—as, I think, was Cathy Peattie—by the young people's suffering at the pressure that they felt, largely because of the level of assessment that they had to go through. We need to debate the level of assessment, starting from the simple premise that it should not  increase. It should be reduced and we should make an effort to allow people to enjoy education more. As our concise amendment suggests, we should recognise that "the core activities of teaching and learning remain the priorities for our education system." In recent years, there has been a growing tendency—pushed initially by the inspectorate and pursued by all manner of education administrators—to think that the purpose of education was assessment. There was a belief that the whole purpose of educating young people was to allow them to be checked to see how far they had got. That is not the purpose of education. That is why we need a green paper such as the one that the minister is not bringing forward. We need to debate the purpose of education, and we need to decide the purpose of education for Scotland in the 21 st century. However, I am absolutely certain that the purpose of education is not assessment. Accordingly, the motion as amended would be acceptable to me, because it would mean that we were saying, "All right, there has to be assessment in schools, and I will give the minister the benefit of the doubt on national primary testing." However, the motion contains a lot of meaningless verbiage, such as the endless references to stakeholders. There are so many people holding stakes in Scotland that I am surprised that we can get into it. The reality is—[ Interruption. ] Mr Frank McAveety has made some sort of witty remark, but I am afraid that the chamber missed it. The reality is that we must focus on learning and teaching as the core activities of education. If, when he sums up, the Deputy Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs accepts the amendment in my name, the SNP will support the motion. I look forward to hearing what the Tory amendment means. I warn Mr Brian Monteith that, at the first sign of his usual divisive approach to education, I will be happy to confirm that we will not touch it with a bargepole. I move amendment S1M-2236.1, to insert at end: ", whilst ensuring that the core activities of teaching and learning remain the priorities for our education system."

We will make the argument about publishing statistics part of our platform on another day, not today. For the avoidance of doubt, however, what the minister has just said is a complete refutation of the story—some might call it a campaign—that The Scotsman has been running for standardised national primary testing.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When a minister makes what is, in essence, a statement of new initiatives, it is normal for Opposition spokespeople to be provided with information on the statement. Mr McConnell has always extended that courtesy in the past, but will you note that that has not happened on this occasion? This has been a statement of announcements, but without the courtesy of providing a copy of it to the Opposition parties.

To ask the First Minister—[ Applause. ] I hope that the welcome will be as warm when I finish as it is now. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues he plans to discuss. (S1F-1243)

It is always important to ask the First Minister questions, but I hope that we will get some answers today. After yesterday's announcement about underspends, will the First Minister consider selling tickets for his next meeting with the Prime Minister? It will truly be worth witnessing: he will have to explain why he is constantly telling the press that he needs more money for programmes when he cannot spend the money that he has. One of the miracles that the First Minister has achieved is in the modernising government programme. That programme started out with a budget of £13 million and ended up with an underspend of £22 million. It almost doubled its budget. Will the First Minister tell us how that was achieved? Did the staff hold a flag day, for example?

Perhaps I could quote another reliable newspaper—at least, the Labour party used to think it was reliable—the Daily Record , which ends its leader today with the words that the First Minister should "GET A GRIP!" I remind the First Minister that this is question time. For him, it is answer time. If he is incapable of answering questions on the generality, I will deal with the specifics. What explanation has the First Minister sought from the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs for the fact that he managed to avoid spending £86 million, which is one third of his budget? What explanation has the First Minister sought for the fact that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs said to Parliament in February: "The Executive has made additional resources available for teachers' pay and we stand by that commitment"?— [ Official Report , 14 February 2001; Vol 10, c 1203.]  It is obvious from the figures and from the explanation given by the Minister for Finance and Local Government that the money was found by holding back money from existing programmes—holding back from spending money on schools, material and books. What action is the First Minister taking to get an explanation from the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs?

The First Minister still does not answer the question. I understand, the chamber understands and the whole of Scotland understands why the First Minister cannot hold his education minister to account. Talking of education, does the First Minister recall that on 22 August 2001, standing shoulder to shoulder with his Minister for Education, Europe  and External Affairs in Livingston, he announced a programme of £12 million for refurbishing Scottish schools? That is just over 1 per cent of what Scottish schools say they need. At that time, did the First Minister know that there was an underspend in the education budget of an amount that was double the annual budget for refurbishing schools? If the First Minister knew that, why was he not honest about it at the time?

We all welcome the constructive nature of the member's speech, but what connection does it have with Bill Aitken's aggressive opening speech, in which he proposed such things as grounding people and forcing them to read books in darkened rooms? What is the connection in the Tory philosophy?

I find it surprising to say, but I agree with almost everything that I have just heard from Brian Fitzpatrick—except perhaps, at 10.10 in the morning, concerning demanding girlfriends. Bill Aitken opened by saying that society has deteriorated since the children's hearing system was put in place. Many of us would agree. If we were students of government, we would quickly work out that, of those 30 years, the Tories were in power for 21. Much of the responsibility for a deteriorating society and for the difficulties that young people face, which Irene McGugan, Cathy Jamieson and Brian Fitzpatrick spoke about, lies at the Tory benches. It might have been wise had Bill Aitken remembered that on his way to the chamber, before giving us such bizarre spectacle. I was struck that Brian Fitzpatrick accused the Tories of just wanting to lock young people up. He may not have noticed it, but I did: there were nods on the Tory benches. That is what the Tories want to do. It is a policy born of fear. Cathy Jamieson was right to say that any member who talks about young children as animals, or about a policy that is, from what I heard, very similar to reintroducing the workhouse, is devising policy out of fear. Mr McLetchie used the word "protect" or "protecting" more than once.

I am sorry. It was Mr Gallie.

It is, and considering how far to the right Mr McLetchie is drifting, he will in fact soon be Mr Gallie. Mr Gallie used the word "protect" more than once. What we have heard in Tory members' speeches and what we see in their motion is a policy of fear. It is the exact opposite of how we should be helping young people.

I think that Mr Aitken's choice of word was significant. I took it to be significant, as did Cathy Jamieson. I think that those who listened to him found it significant. Last week, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee visited New Lanark. I am sorry that its Tory member did not join us, because there was a lot to be learned there about what we are discussing today. When Robert Owen established New Lanark, there was a view that young people—and indeed many other people—were merely animals that had to be disciplined and kept in order and that workhouses were a good way to achieve that. What Robert Owen did at New Lanark was to look at things in the opposite way, saying that, if we help and support people, show kindness and encourage the best in people, we get a better society. It is a great pity that those messages have not yet spread fully in this country and this society. It is, however, an interesting object lesson—despite dating back 200 years—of how a policy that does not focus on the needs of supporting individuals is bound to fail, not just socially but economically. Such a policy is wrong for all reasons: socially, politically and economically—yet the Tories have learned nothing. We do not need more of what Bill Aitken is talking about, but an emphasis on individuals. When I listened to Irene McGugan, I was listening to someone who has been at the sharp end of working with difficult children, unlike Bill Aitken, who was on the bench judging them. That was the difference between their speeches. On the one hand was somebody who has worked with children and knows that we need more focus on individual children, on the choices in their lives, on the difficulties that they face and on poverty. We  also need more focus on the fact that we are responsible for the society that we create and must do something about it. We require a broad-brush approach to help young people and must use it to decide how we focus down. What we heard from Bill Aitken today was the broad-birch approach, which is absolutely unacceptable, certainly to this party and hopefully to most of the chamber. The Tories, now in the era of Iain Duncan Smith, are lurching wildly to the right—we have seen more signs of that today; fortunately, the people of Scotland are not.

I agree that any innovative measures have to work. Presumably, the minister also thinks that they have to be, at least in their origin, child centred, as that is the basis of the system.

The fact that the member takes no view on the matter indicates that he did not listen to the debate. There was no debate about the efficacy of corporal punishment; there was a debate about a set of proposals—we were also concerned about them in so far as they had not been published—which related to abusing children by striking them with implements and in other ways. I presume that he is not saying that he thinks treating children in such a way is wise. Not even his colleagues said that.

We have heard a wide range of arguments in what has been a crowded and, at times, a passionate debate. I find myself in some discomfort because I am going to go against what is an important, clear and long-standing policy of the Scottish National Party. Others have said that it is also policy in other parties. It is not something that I have done before and I might not do it again, but I am doing it for clear reasons. Those reasons are not dissimilar to those we heard from Elaine Murray. Two years ago I stood in for my friend Alasdair Morgan when I attended a Countryside Alliance hustings in Castle Douglas. It was one of the worst evenings of my life. If members have seen the film "The 39 Steps", they will remember Richard Hannay when he found himself in front of a League of Empire Loyalists meeting by mistake. It was an horrific experience. Elaine Murray is nodding because she remembers it. I entered the Countryside Alliance meeting convinced that I would support Mike Watson and Tricia Marwick's bill. I respect them for having the courage to promote and sponsor the bill. During that meeting I became more convinced that I would support the bill. The quality of questioning was awful and we listened to people who were completely out of touch with Scotland. Many of them had no interest in the Scottish Parliament and were using the bill as an excuse to say that they did not like the institution. Then something happened. A farmer called Jim Wylie stood up to speak. He was an ordinary farmer from Lockerbie and was a man who would not stand out in a crowd. During his speech he said, "I wanted this Parliament and now it is going to make me a criminal." I was struck by that remark because I suddenly realised that that would be the effect of the bill. Therefore, in the past two years, I have toured the south of Scotland, as has Elaine Murray, and have talked to a lot of people who are involved in hunting and discussed with them their problems. I have talked to gamekeepers, people who own hounds, farriers and people who run stud farms. This is a simple argument that does not go into the technicalities in the way that the Rural Development Committee has but, as I spoke to people, I realised that by voting for the bill, we would be voting to make people criminals. The bill says that. Section 1, which is entitled "Prohibition and offences", states: "A person must not hunt a wild mammal with a dog."  Section 5(1) states: "A person guilty of an offence under this Act is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for up to 6 months or a fine of up to level 5 on the standard scale or both."

I am sorry; I have little time. We will decide whether to accept the principles of the bill in a free vote. There are 129 of us and we are the only people who can decide. That principle will make people criminals. Such people undertake an activity—some of them have done so all their lives—that I do not like and which to some extent I find reprehensible, but we are making them criminals.

I am sorry, Mr Sheridan. The class war is one thing, but allowing people to be made criminals for an ordinary activity that they have done for most of their lives is another. They are not criminals, but the bill would criminalise such activity. I would go further. I would have been uncertain about how to vote on the bill until March this year, when I—as a South of Scotland member—saw the devastation caused by the foot-and-mouth outbreak. Anybody who experienced the stench of burning carcases and saw the distress in the rural community will have said to themselves, "We cannot do things that are going to upset people more."

I am sorry. I do not like to have to say this to a member of my own party, but I understand the moral argument. I am not arguing against the strong moral objections that Michael Matheson has; I am arguing a case after spending two years talking to people. After the foot-and-mouth outbreak, it would be wrong to put an extra burden on so many people who are suffering. The right thing would have been to take the matter away for a time, because things are too bad in the Scottish countryside. That has not happened and I am left with a simple choice. David McLetchie said that I was quoted as saying that this is the wrong bill at the wrong time. It is the wrong bill at the wrong time. I have to say as an individual MSP—not with any whip—that I cannot support it. I hope that members realise that the process of coming to that decision has been long and difficult.

No.

I was slightly hopeful when the minister rose to speak because I thought that he was going to discuss the matter in terms of the education, rather than the punishment, of parents, but we have just heard that there will be a list to which courts can refer. We have already heard, in the Deputy Minister for Justice's opening speech, of the difficulties of interpretation on matters that came from sympathetic back benchers. He talked about drawing lines rather than changing behaviour. Is the minister telling us that we will have a table of acceptable behaviour? It strikes me that the confusion that that will cause will be almost impossible to deal with. It will not clarify matters; it will make them more difficult.

On a point of order. Would the Deputy Presiding Officer accept a manuscript amendment to add the word "undue" between the words "without" and "delay"?

Will the member give way?

I do not think that evidence of bogeys lurking in the background, of which Lord James is afraid, exists, but I have a specific point for Lord James. If the ECHR and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child require legislative change, will he accept that that is legitimate? I accept that the minister has not said whether that is the case, but if it was, would he accept that that was an international obligation?

The amendment in my name is designed to assist the debate. Having heard Mr Gray's speech, I am more concerned than I was at the outset, because the major problem that we face this afternoon is the lack of information and precision. The more questions that were asked of Mr Gray, the fewer answers we received. That is entirely the wrong context in which to have the debate. I will develop that point. We start with the premise that no one—that is no one—is in favour of abuse of or cruelty to children. Indeed, the use of implements to punish children is something that we would all agree has no place in a modern society. However, there are legitimate concerns from a variety of stances about the motion that is before us today. Those concerns can be defined in two ways. There are those who are worried that there is a proposal to interfere unduly with the rights of parents. As a parent I understand that concern. There are also those who are in favour of abolishing any physical punishment—a legitimate position—and who are worried that the proposals do not help, but hinder, the process. Everybody is in favour of a less violent society and no one needs to make that point in this week of all weeks, but how do we achieve that in terms of parents setting an example to children? Do the proposals that are being made, as we understand  them, achieve that aim? We could start by asking what others have done in similar circumstances. If this is a problem that needs to be addressed, what legislation exists in other places? The examples that exist in other places appear to encourage educating, rather than punishing, parents. One of the worries about the proposed legislation is that it seems—the Deputy Minister for Justice used this term—that it is designed to draw lines. We should be seeking legislation that changes behaviour. The lines that we heard the minister trying to draw some moments ago will cause enormous difficulties when we come to the details. However, an attempt to change behaviour in Scotland is something that we all might be able to coalesce around. We also must address why this is being done at this time. Many of us know that there are obligations under the European convention on human rights and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child that Scots law may not—although this is open to question—fulfil. In such circumstances, it would be helpful to know what the obligations are and what cases and judgements we are responding to, so that we can measure for ourselves—in so far as we know what the proposals are, and I stress that point—how far the proposals measure up to that difficulty. We should ask what type of debate we can have without knowing what the proposals are, what others have done and what obligations remain unfulfilled. I say with great regret that I do not regard it as helpful that we debate the subject on the basis of a consultation report on the Executive intranet and a three-line motion. We are not debating the nature of the legislative proposals. I would have thought that, after two years and many rough rides in the Parliament, one of the lessons that might have been learned is that it is best to debate specific proposals rather than general statements.

I will give way in a moment. Those of us who would be and are sympathetic to change feel that debating general statements causes difficulty. It opens up the possibility of the misinterpretation to which the minister referred at the start of his speech.

It is not contradictory in the slightest. We would all have preferred to have seen the specific proposals that will be made and to have had the time to debate them, rather than to debate the generalities, which are even open to misinterpretation by those who are sympathetic, because they do not understand the detail. The more the questions come, the less the answers come. We should also ask ourselves—this is a central point—in what context we can achieve change in Scotland. Is the context education of parents, who need help? We do little to help parents to face the challenges of parenthood. As a parent, I know how difficult being one is. Lyndsay McIntosh is agreeing with me and I think that every parent in the chamber will agree with me. Parenting is difficult and we do not do much to help people with it. We should ask ourselves a genuine question. Is legislation of this nature going to help to educate parents? It could; there are examples—to which my friend Irene McGugan will refer—from Sweden and elsewhere. The legislation could help to educate parents, but there seems to be no indication that it will do so. We will have legislation that simply sets penalties, and that might be unhelpful. I will address my final question differently from my friend Mr Ewing. In having the debate and trying to achieve the results that many of us want, do we say enough to satisfy public expectation of Government? Do people believe that this is what we should be doing? If we are going to make these changes, are we persuading people that we must make them and that that is the right thing to do? I am uncertain, from what the minister has said today about the measures, whether we are moving in the right direction. The evidence that we gave as a party to the minister's consultation process was broadly supportive, but it raised questions. I am being genuine in raising more questions with the minister and the Executive. We could move forward better on the matter if we had firm proposals, if we understood the international obligations and how we fall short of them, and if we also understood that there was a desire to help and assist parents. That is what I am asking for today and that is what my amendment asks for. If we could have that information, many of us would feel much happier about the situation in which we find ourselves. Three-line general statements, no matter how worthy they are, do not assist parliamentary debate and scrutiny. Parliamentary scrutiny is about firm proposals that can be changed through the Parliament's committee system to provide the best possible legislation. So far, the jury is out on whether that will happen.  I move amendment S1M-2206.1, to insert at end: "but calls upon the Scottish Executive to publish full details of its proposed legislation without delay and to explain in detail to the people of Scotland why such legislation is necessary in terms of the European Convention on Human Rights and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and to ensure that the emphasis in any such legislation is on helping parents by means of educative change rather than applying punitive sanctions.

I welcome the minister's statement and join him in paying tribute to all those who have been involved with the exam results this year, in particular the SQA chair, John Ward, Bill Morton, the SQA board, all the SQA staff, the teachers and staff in Scotland's schools, colleges and local authorities, and the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and his team, who have worked very hard indeed. What I have to say in my question is not a criticism of any or all of those people. I also pay tribute to Colin MacLean. I did not tell the minister too early on that Colin MacLean and I were at university together, in case it prejudiced the minister against him. The minister's tribute to Colin MacLean, however, highlights the problem with his statement. I do not know whether the minister will agree, but I think it is true to say that, to all intents and purposes, the SQA has been operating as an agency over the past year, and has needed to operate as an agency to fulfil its functions. It is obvious that the SQA will need to continue to operate with the type of support and direction that that implies throughout the next period of years. That is absolutely clear from page 10 of the minister's statement, which indicates an arrangement with a non-departmental public body that is far from ordinary. I have three clear questions for the minister. First, if the close relationship has started to put things back on track, surely the lesson is that that close relationship will be necessary over a period of years to restore the necessary confidence in the Scottish exam system. The views that the committees took last year, sound as they were, have been overtaken by events, because it is the SQA's operating under agency status that has made the difference over the past year. Secondly, if the aim of us all, as it has to be, is to restore normal service, surely we should have wide consultation on the status of the SQA, rather than an ex cathedra pronouncement. The pronouncement closes down debate on a matter that requires more discussion. Thirdly, I accept that all reform is difficult and takes time, but surely it would be possible over a  period of years to design a system that could make the SQA again the gold standard of Scottish education while paying attention to the clear difficulties of serving two different client groups, schools and colleges. The minister's statement in no way recognises the demands of those two client groups. Will the minister confirm, first, that his statement means that the SQA's agency status is being changed to something else and that it does not mark a reversion to the status quo? Secondly, instead of closing down the options, will the minister confirm that we will have a consultation period to consider the options? Thirdly, instead of assuming that the needs of the different client groups are similar, will the minister ensure that the needs of those groups are addressed? Everybody in Scottish colleges and schools will tell him that the core of the problem—bringing together two organisations that never gelled in their ethos or work—still remains. That matter was at the heart of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report.

For the record—

It is on now. I can usually be heard without it—as can Mr Tosh. It is not good enough for Mr Tosh simply to repeat parrot fashion arguments from the Labour benches about the SNP. My colleague, Fiona McLeod, lodged amendments to the Transport (Scotland) Bill on tolling and Irene McGugan lodged two motions on the Skye bridge. Simply repeating things that Labour says is dangerous and does not do any service to the debate. I am sure that Mr Tosh will want to correct what he has said.

Will the minister read out the list of new Liberal Democrat ideas and initiatives from its August press releases? It will not take  long and I think that the list will be found wanting if the Executive's programme is anything to go by.

I commend the Executive on a good and original programme for government. I am sure that that will come as a surprise. The reality is that the programme is both good and original, but not at the same time. The list of proposals has some good measures: the community care and health bill; the mental health bill, as mentioned by Johann Lamont in an unfortunate contribution for which I hope she will reflect on the need to apologise; and the bill to replace the diligence of poindings and warrant sales. Those are all good bills, but they are not original bills; they are bills from ideas that were brought to the Parliament by people other than the Executive. The land reform bill could be a good bill, but it is at risk of becoming a boorach. The local government bills will not be good bills at all, especially if they are shorn of proportional representation. I am most impressed by the gullibility of the Liberal Democrats, who honestly believe that the Executive will produce a proposal on that. I will confine my remarks largely to education. The purpose of a legislative programme is to create a coherent and intellectual philosophical framework for legislation. It should, as David McLetchie rightly said, tell us something about the people who are producing it. What is their vision of what needs to be achieved? How can they match the nation's needs with the Parliament's ability to create opportunities or to right wrongs? If one examines the key issues in education, one is struck immediately by the sheer inadequacy of the programme. Our exam system struggled through this year, with enormous effort from those involved, and requires a major overhaul, yet there has been no word of that. Our system suffers from massive over-assessment. We have to question what we are doing with young people and how they learn to think, but there is not a word on that in the legislative programme. We have a growing crisis in teacher supply—not a word about that. Our school buildings are crumbling, but the answer was to offer in a showpiece presentation by the First Minister and the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs less than 2 per cent of the money that is required. On Gaelic—and I am glad that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic is here—the Labour party's manifesto in 1999 gave a commitment to grant secure status, but that status still has not been conferred. Where is the logical, coherent intellectual framework from the Executive? It is non-existent. Presiding Officer, you will recall—although you were not there, I am sure—that Disraeli called one  of Gladstone's last Administrations a row of burnt-out volcanoes.

"Burnt-out" was the word, but we can check it. The members of that Administration had done so much that they were exhausted. This lot have done nothing, yet they are exhausted. There is no coherence in the programme that has been produced. The biggest contribution that the Executive has made today to moving Scotland forward has been to move the Liberal Democrats from one side of the chamber to the other to try to give the impression of cosiness and co-operation. The reality is that the Liberal Democrats have been conned, as the people of Scotland are being conned.

I do not want to take an intervention, thank you. The reality is that some good bills are coming from the Executive, but they are not Executive bills; they are bills from Scottish civic society and others. The rest of the stuff is incredibly poor. Fortunately, there is some hope of redress, because, according to the First Minister, the Scottish public sector ombudsman bill will "make provision for investigating complaints of maladministration that are made against the Scottish Executive". What bigger example of maladministration could there be than the First Minister's statement, which is all that the Government could come up with after two years? Of its 14 pages, seven talk about the past and the other seven talk about other people's ideas. The Administration is a row of burnt-out volcanoes—they were never lit, but they are completely burnt out. It is time that the Government gave way to people who have a coherent view of what Scotland should achieve. There is nothing wrong with ambition in Scottish politics. The people are crying out for that and they are manifestly not getting it in the programme announced today.

Will the minister give way?

What is strange about nationalism?

The SCVO's criticisms include criticism of short-term funding. Ian Jenkins is right  to identify the difficulty of that. How does he respond to the SCVO's other criticisms about transparency, having a Scottish committee work on the fund and the erosion of the principle of additionality, which are key issues?

On the question of capital projects being liabilities rather than assets, which I agree is a key point, one suggestion has been to have an endowment associated with smaller projects, such as the cycleway to which David Mundell referred, as happens when a house is gifted to the National Trust. The funding package will then include an element of endowment, which pays for upkeep, that payment perhaps going to the local authority. Would David Mundell consider that as a possibility, and would the minister comment on it when summing up?

I welcome many of the grants that have been made and many of the projects that have emerged. Although in my speech I will be critical of the Executive's policy and will point out some of the difficulties in that policy, I make it clearly understood that I do so in the context of welcoming the money and its effect. For example, I notice from the latest announcements that North Ayrshire Council has received £227,000 to extend the work of the art school project to primary school children in rural areas. The activities will include creative arts, drama, music and dance workshops. That will make a big contribution to young people in North Ayrshire. Equally, I note that the Dunoon new community schools project—I declare an interest in that as my wife teaches in the community school in Dunoon—has received £20,000 to extend and enhance summer school provision. Those grants are to be welcomed. However, there are problems in the Executive's motion and policy. This has been a long year in Parliament and we draw to the close of it.

I shall ignore that remark. There is one rather unusual element in this afternoon's debate: we see Allan Wilson cast in heroic mould in relation to the constitution of this country. In The Herald on Monday, there was a report of an attack by Lord McIntosh of Haringey, who is apparently a Labour front bencher, on what the Scottish Parliament can discuss. Lord McIntosh made it clear that the London Government had not yet decided whether there  should be a reduction in the number of MSPs. A source was quoted as saying: "Although the Scottish Parliament is perfectly entitled to debate reserved matters and Westminster, devolved matters, the fact is, MPs have never debated devolved issues while Holyrood has so far held 16 debates on reserved matters". The point of that was to say that MSPs were wasting their time and could not be overworked. The debate that the source used as an example was: "tomorrow they are due to debate the new opportunities fund." I am glad that Allan Wilson is challenging the constitutional settlement radically, although I suspect that the Labour members will not be happy, because it might result in many of them having to squabble like ferrets in a sack for a reduced number of seats. I congratulate him on bringing the debate to the chamber. However, the motion is disappointing and flawed. The primary critic of the motion is not the Scottish National Party; it is the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. In its briefing, the SCVO says: "SCVO believes the structure and accountability of the NOF currently fails to take adequate account of the Scottish context, leading to ineffective use of significant funds. It is also subject to obvious incorporation into Government agendas leading to rapid erosion of the principle of additionality." The main voluntary organisation in Scotland is making the point that the Government's motion is deeply flawed.

I shall come to school sport in just a minute and the minister will discover exactly what my views are, but I want to develop my argument first. The reality is that, according to the SCVO and many others, the method by which the funds are disbursed and scrutinised in Scotland is flawed. It is flawed because there is no legislative responsibility for the funds in Scotland and the Scottish Executive is consulted by grace and favour. Many people argue that the right way for Scotland to be involved in the new opportunities fund is to have a Scottish committee—that is the SCVO's view—and to ensure that the Scottish Executive is formally involved in the process, not  involved on a grace-and-favour basis. That is the basis on which the Executive is involved. The minister wanted to talk about examples and about sport in schools. It is interesting to note the opinion of the Scottish Sports Association on the example that the minister used about money for sport in Scotland and in schools. The SSA said, in its response to the minister, that the programme that he is proposing "would be warmly welcomed but this alone will not deliver the desired outcomes" and that there should be a joined-up approach that incorporated "broader national and sport specific strategies in place or under development by sportscotland, the governing bodies and local agencies." That is necessary for the initiative to work.

If the minister will allow me, I will proceed a bit further on my point about sport. The situation is similar with school sport co-ordinators. That shows a fascinating set of difficulties that are inherent in the motion. The first difficulty is that experienced by Aberdeenshire Council, for instance, in implementing the sports co-ordinators, as it does not have the resources to do so. The same programme is being supported south of the border by the new opportunities fund to the extent of 50 per cent. That example illustrates something else. In that instance, money is going from the new opportunities fund towards Government initiatives rather than towards additional activity. I presume that the Tory amendment aims to make that point. Money is going to shore up Government initiatives, not additional activity. The SCVO is worried about that too. The new opportunities funding then becomes the underpinning of Government schemes in the short term, rather than allowing a diversity of new schemes to emerge across the spectrum. I am not saying that that is always the case, but there is sufficient worry in the voluntary sector that that is happening quite often for the Executive to have recognised that in its motion, as I hoped that it would. However, it does not; indeed, it trumpets what is taking place.

I have made it absolutely clear that I welcome the investment in sport, whether it is £87 million, £80 million or £90 million. However, the minister will have to take on board the fact that many concerns have been raised by a range of organisations, to the effect that the principle of additionality is being eroded, that there is an underpinning of Government schemes and that the mechanisms that are being used to deliver the money in Scotland are neither accountable nor transparent. My amendment is designed to say that we heartily welcome investment in all sorts of things in Scotland. However, the structure for the good investment that takes place is wrong. The question of how to use the proceeds of the national lottery in Scotland—and that of the proper interface between the Parliament and the people of Scotland, with that money being available to voluntary and community groups—has not yet been answered. I think, and hope, that our amendment points the way to find the answers. I move amendment S1M-2043.1, to leave out from "endorses" to first "initiatives" and insert: "notes that the priorities identified by the Scottish Executive are merely consultative and not binding on the New Opportunities Fund; believes that on matters devolved to the Parliament, the New Opportunities Fund should take its instructions from the Scottish Executive and not from the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport;"

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the budget statement this morning, we heard that ministers were to make further spending announcements over the next few weeks. As you are aware, Presiding Officer, we go into recess this afternoon—many of us are happy with that fact. A key function of the Parliament is to scrutinise the Executive's expenditure. I suggest that the announcements that are to be made on expenditure by departmental ministers should be made to meetings of the relevant subject committees that have been convened for that purpose, rather than that we have no scrutiny over the next eight weeks, which—I am sure—the Executive would not wish and members should not tolerate.

I shall be brief. The most revealing but least constructive comment of the afternoon came from Mr McCabe. At the moment, he is speaking in his role as whip. The moment a member is out of Mr McCabe's sight, they must be briefing somebody against him, and the solution to any public concern, disquiet or dissent is to order members not to talk to journalists. That does not seem to me a sensible approach to a project that is the cause of huge public concern. If Mr McCabe does not understand that concern, he is simply not listening to what is happening. SNP front-bench members have attempted today to help the situation by injecting some new elements into the motion while taking nothing out. I know that some members who are tempted to support my amendment regard the rhetoric of the last few lines as unacceptable. I am sorry about that, but I think that the rhetoric of those lines was cancelled out by Mr McCabe's rhetoric this afternoon, so we are equal. In those circumstances—

I am sorry, but I would like to finish my speech. I know that Mr Jenkins always dislikes my rhetoric and wants me to be to be simpler and plainer, and he is probably right. However, the balance of this afternoon's argument has been to inject new elements of accountability and openness into the debate, to engage the Executive in the project, which is absolutely—even symbolically—essential, and to make certain that the financing arrangements are more sensible than those that have been proposed. I urge members to support my amendment. It does not detract from the motion, and it is being supported by a member of the progress group. I hope that members will support it, because it will make a difference.

It is a matter of huge regret to all members that, once again, we are debating the Holyrood project not in terms of its advantages to the people of Scotland, the progress of Scottish confidence in its new democracy or substance with regard to construction and content. We are debating it in the context of further confusion, further adverse publicity and a further lack of transparency, which—regardless of the reasons for it—increases rather than decreases press speculation and public concern. The SNP and many members of other parties believe that we must get a grip on what is happening once and for all and attempt to regain the confidence of the people of Scotland in this institution. The endless rows about the Holyrood project are damaging the reputation of Scotland's new democratic institutions and, by extension, damaging Scotland. However, we do not avoid dispute by insisting on the false unity of the graveyard. We overcome disputes by honest debate and by tackling the problems of the past. My amendment seeks to do both those things. We are in this mess not because of individual culpable error by members of the corporate body or the Holyrood progress group. I pay tribute to those who are working tirelessly to bring the project to fruition, not least my colleague Linda Fabiani, who is a long-term supporter of the project and whose skills and expertise are ideally suited to the role that she is fulfilling on the progress group. We are in this position because the original decisions that were made in the UK Cabinet Office by Westminster politicians and anonymous civil servants—together and separately—were fatally flawed.

I am sorry, but I have a lot to get through. Instead of being admitted and corrected, those errors were compounded by misinformation that was given regularly to the Parliament and the public. As recently as last June, the Parliament agreed to a cost ceiling for the project that was impossible to achieve even at that time. That mistake led directly to the terms of the motion that we are debating. That near-fatal mistake was made by new Labour and proposed by a new Labour member.

I apologise to Mr Gallie, but I want to get through the burden of my argument. If those mistakes were admitted openly, we could still salvage something from the situation. I hope that we will hear that admission from ministers today. That point is dealt with at the end of my amendment, but there are two more important points in the amendment, both of which relate to the issue of public responsibility. The Scottish Executive is the ultimate paymaster for the new building. When the original cost of £40 million was announced, it was assumed that such a sum could be met fairly easily from revenue expenditure. That cannot be the case for a sum of £250 million or even £300 million. It would add insult to injury if Scotland's young people, old people, sick people, homeless people and unemployed people were to suffer because of the flawed decisions of their representatives. Accordingly, the Executive must proceed to a new financial plan, treat the project as it would any other major capital project and seek loan finance at Government rates. That would reduce the yearly cost to a more acceptable level. I suggest that a Scottish trust for public investment would be an appropriate vehicle for that and I offer to lend Mr Wilson to the Executive so he can help ministers to sort that out—I promise that we will take him back afterwards. The Scottish Executive must engage with this project as paymaster and begetter because it is the source of many of the mistakes that have been made. When the SNP agreed to nominate a member to the progress group, it was on the understanding that the Executive had not yet ruled out the possibility of a minister joining the membership. The Executive has still not acted on that matter. Neither have the Conservatives. I would have more time for the arguments that Mr McLetchie is muttering and for those of his more sane colleagues if the Conservatives were taking part in the debate as a party that was trying to find a solution. Perhaps Mr McLetchie will indicate later that he will nominate a member if the Executive  does.

Excellent. We have taken a step forward. A minister attending every meeting of the progress group with a desire to help with the financing and the planning is an urgent imperative. Every day that goes by without such a nomination to a group that controls the largest capital project in Scotland serves to strengthen the perception that the progress group exists merely to carry the can rather than to solve the problems. This is a parliamentary project and the Executive is part of the Parliament—in this case, it is an essential part of the parliamentary process. I want to make a positive suggestion as to who in the Executive might be able to help. Out of the great range of talent on the front benches, there is one obvious choice: the man who carries in his title the word "Parliament". The chamber knows that I have a great admiration for my friend the Minister for Parliament's skills in the arena of political fixing. Cometh the hour, cometh the man. Mr McCabe cannot sit idly by at this moment of crisis for the Parliament—for that is the way in which the situation is perceived. The events of the past few days show that the addition of high-level political skills, which Mr McCabe has aplenty, and some clout in fixing can only assist the Holyrood progress group to achieve a successful outcome. I therefore challenge Mr McCabe to nominate himself to the job. It is no great secret that I have never been convinced by the plans for Holyrood. It has been an ill-starred project from the beginning. Perhaps the most sensible investment would be in a feng shui consultant.

No, thank you. The Holyrood project remains a source of anguish and concern for most members, as does Mr Gallie. I would have been much happier if we had decided to wait in these premises for a while until we could judge what Scotland's new democracy needed. I would have been content if we had decided on a more modest vision and had moved to a refurbished complex in St Andrew's House and Calton hill. However, neither of those options was permitted by the UK Labour Government—we must never forget that it made the key decisions. The Liberal Democrats are not responsible and not even the Scottish Labour party is responsible. The responsibility lies elsewhere. The determination of the Scottish Executive to do what it wishes was well summed up by the  former project manager, William Armstrong, who was quoted in The Herald today as saying: "The problem is the agenda. The building is going to be built whatever it costs and however long it will take." He goes on to say: "It is very sad because this should have been an icon for Scotland and devolution but it has become a bit of a Dome". That would be a terrible epitaph for Scotland's new Parliament, but the SNP's amendment offers us a way in which we can avoid that. It will bring honesty and rigour into the process. It will allow the Scottish Parliament to say that we will watch what is happening and that all of us will take responsibility for it. I will support the amendment in my name. I will abstain from voting on the motion if my amendment is not accepted, because it will not deliver the honesty, the rigour and the joint responsibility that the project demands. I move amendment S1M-2012.3, after "rigorously", to insert: "calls on the Scottish Executive to work with the SPCB to agree a financial plan for the completion of the project which has no adverse implications for revenue expenditure on public services in Scotland and which recognises that the project must be funded through normal procedures for major capital works, for example through borrowing at government rates; further demands that the Scottish Executive appoint a minister to attend the progress group in order to engage the Executive fully in the project and its financing; notes that the financial and other problems of the project now being tackled by the progress group are a result of deeply flawed decisions made by Westminster politicians prior to the establishment of the Parliament and by repeated misinformation thereafter from New Labour and the Scottish Executive on the likely costs of the project."

I left to have a conversation with the clerk, who sent me a note about another matter. I hope that the member will accept that assurance, as I know that he does not talk to the press.

On a point of order. We have spoken on many occasions about the propriety of discussing civil servants in the chamber. I know that there has been unfair criticism in the press, but I think that Mr Stone is now erring very badly against the Presiding Officer's previous advice on the matter and against good sense.

The minister will be aware that the SQA succeeded in meeting by the skin of its teeth its targets for markers only yesterday. There will be an increasing need for markers for future diets; indeed, there is an additional examination diet this year. What work is the Scottish Executive doing to research the reluctance to mark, despite the increase in fees? What work will it do to try to improve the situation and to overcome the fear already expressed by some people that compulsory marking might enter into teachers' contracts?

I begin by observing a parliamentary convention and congratulating Mr Fitzpatrick on his maiden speech. Although he broke the convention that maiden speeches should attempt to endear the new member to all parts of the chamber, I shall not break the convention of congratulating him. Elections are funny things. They put you up, they put you down; you win some, you lose some. There are swings and roundabouts. After elections, one can feel elated or slightly deflated, but this debate is a good antidote. Suppose somebody who was feeling slightly deflated came along to listen to Jack McConnell. I have known Jack McConnell for a long time and I am very fond of him, but one always knows when he does not really believe what he is saying, because he goes slightly red in the face and starts to gabble. That is what we saw this morning. Jack McConnell was surrounded by his chorus of performing seals. Then we heard Tavish Scott with his troupe of performing political midgets and Mr McLetchie had a troupe of performing political fleas. I come to the chamber and say to myself, "There is a strong argument for independence." That argument comes from the SNP benches. When I listen to the debate, I know that we are in the right because we have ambition for Scotland. The other parties are in the wrong because they have no ambition for Scotland. All  the other unionist parties wish is craven, supine and fearful acceptance of crumbs from somebody else's table. That is not good enough for Scotland. Nevertheless, much more unites the chamber than divides it. There are three principles in the Parliament's operation of external affairs. First, we need an external affairs policy. I welcome the conversion of the Scottish Executive to that principle. In the 1999 election, the SNP was derided for its view that there should be an external affairs department in Parliament, but there is one now. I am glad that Mr McConnell has converted to the idea. Secondly, we should build external relations constructively. The document may not be ambitious, but it is a constructive attempt to work with other small nations of Europe to influence the debate in Europe. We all welcome that step forward, although Mr McConnell's assertion that the document signed by Mr McLeish in some way affirms the right of Belgium to have a view in the European Union is very strange. The Belgian Government must be in grave trouble if it needs Mr McLeish to tell it that. Thirdly, we should talk about Scotland's external affairs openly and honestly. The SNP lodged the motion and has said to the Excecutive that the declaration is only a small step, but that the SNP supports it. Instead of having a debate, Mr McConnell has gone back to the garbled repetition of old press releases from 1997 and 1999. Those also formed the burden of Mr Fitzpatrick's speech. He even used the same words—he must have written some of them. If we are to have a debate on Scotland's position in the world, the First Minister should come to the chamber and lead the debate. Honesty is needed from the Executive parties and the Conservative party about what we could achieve. If there is disagreement, we need it to be honest disagreement. The SNP has put forward strong ideas, but if another party does something and we agree with it, we will support it. The inability of the Executive—and the more thinking members of the Executive—to engage in a debate depresses me. The fascinating thing about election results is that they change from election to election. The fear in the eyes of the Conservatives, who know that is true, comforts me, as does the laughter of the Liberal Democrats, which reminds me of the biblical phrase, "Like the crackling of thorns under a pot". Those parties are afraid of Scotland's progress in the international world, but that progress is inevitable.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce what financial support will be made available to the Scottish national theatre plan as outlined in the report of the independent working group, submitted to it last month. (S1O-3556)

Let me remind the minister that the plan for a Scottish national theatre has been around for many years. It was endorsed by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in its report on the national arts companies, which was published on 2 February 2000. Many people hoped for some movement from the Executive to support and encourage the national theatre with a detailed plan, rather than simply saying, yet again, that it is somebody else's decision.

Either would do.

There will be some concern about what the minister has just said about a standing advisory cost limit. Parliamentary approval of that will have to be sought—I presume via the Procedures Committee—rather than the Executive making an ex cathedra decision that there is to be such a limit. I hope that the minister will take that on board when the matter is considered. An Executive decision could be used to restrict the answering of questions. I am sure that it would not be, given the Deputy Minister for Parliament's good offices, but parliamentary assent to the limit would perhaps avoid that possibility.

I ask the minister for a commitment that there will be parliamentary discussion of, and parliamentary authority for, the standing advisory cost limit. The Parliament should have that reassurance.

I want to address just one of the Executive's policy objectives. For several years, Labour has had a commitment to cut class sizes to 30 or fewer in primaries 1, 2 and 3. The Labour party has claimed that it will do so before 31 August 2001. No teacher believes that that will happen as it would require the Executive to take more than 1,000 children off the register every week for the  next 12 weeks. Will the First Minister come clean and say that the commitment will not be delivered by 31 August? Anything else is a fib.

To ask the Scottish Executive how long it will take to deal with the current backlog of repair and refurbishment of local authority schools. (S1O-3504)

In addition to those steps, will the minister consider two other measures? The first is the establishment of a minimum tolerable standard for school accommodation, which would not include rain penetration of windows that are boarded up because the frames cannot hold glass, as is the case in one primary school in the south of Scotland. The second is to make a special repair allocation to local authorities as quickly as possible to overcome difficulties such as the one that I have described. That would make schools much more acceptable very quickly.

The proposal to integrate the inspections has been warmly supported by the SNP. I want to raise with the minister a technical point on the published reports. There is an established format for reports by HMI, which is well understood by members of the teaching profession and by concerned parents. I hope that, in the publication of the reports from that integrated approach, that format will be maintained and that, as a result, there will be an ease of understanding of those reports. The minister will be aware that, within the existing formula, it is comparatively easy to pick up the difficulties that exist and the need for continued inspection and remedial action. That format of reporting will be valuable in future, as it will allow us all to be aware of what is taking place. If the minister cannot respond to my point today, I would be grateful for further information as the consultation period and the minister's action take place.

We will support these amendments, but I would like the minister to confirm that although they are necessary to achieve the overall objectives of the bill, they will not impinge on the review of adoption and fostering. The chamber has accepted that that review is necessary, as has the Executive. Many members are looking forward to the review because new attention to the legislative framework for adoption and fostering is overdue.

The minister always makes a splash.

Although Ross Finnie said earlier that ministers were sort of politically neutered, it might be useful to point out that Nicol Stephen is a Liberal Democrat. The protest in Govanhill has involved a range of community activists including, if I am correct, Judith Fryer, who was a Liberal Democrat candidate. When the minister responds, he might reflect on the fact that his party is involved in the protest.

The member may be slightly mistaken. In my childhood, I learned to swim in the open-air pool in Troon, which Kay Ullrich knows well. Each year, there was a competition to see who would be the first person in the pool on the day that it opened. It was extremely cold, but it was good for us—the result is myself—and it did me no harm. Swimming in the coldest of cold water would improve many aspects of young people's lives.

I am grateful to the minister for his statement. The minister will be aware of concerns that there is a problem in the hefted sheep population of the southern uplands. I hope that those concerns are unfounded, but the disease and rumours spread like wildfire. There would be a considerable impact if those concerns turned out to be well founded. The minister may wish to comment on that. There has been a rumour that the minister is not interested in an inquiry. I am glad that he has been able to deny that. I hope that he will consider focusing on two particular areas. The first is the economic and human impact of the outbreak, which has been considerable. I hope that the  inquiry will work out the best way of dealing with similar situations in future. The second key area is preparation. The inquiry should consider the preparation that was in place before the outbreak and the preparations that should properly be put in place after it has ended, so that we are not put in this position again. The minister is aware that in addition to the report of the 1967 outbreak, which is known as the Northumberland report, the Australian Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry produced a report in 1996 on the handling of an outbreak. A simulation exercise was conducted by the USA, Canada and Mexico—known as the tripartite exercise—in 2000 and a report on a specific strain of foot-and-mouth disease was prepared by Dr Knowles and Dr Samuels of the Pirbright Institute for Animal Health and was presented to the Europic 2000 conference in Rome last year. Those documents should have been of help this time. To them we will add a document about this terrible epidemic. I hope that we will produce an action plan for the future. The minister knows, as I have raised the matter with him before, that such a plan must include the moral and ethical issues, which are of great concern not only to people involved in the outbreak but more widely.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that children with visual impairment receive the best possible support in mainstream education throughout Scotland. (S1O-3463)

The minister might be aware of the view of the Royal National Institute for the Blind that the level of support throughout Scotland remains variable and that it is a matter of postcode provision. Will the minister undertake to perform a survey of the local education authorities in Scotland to discover whether additional help and resources are needed so that we can meet the objective of maximum mainstreaming in Scotland, which was stated in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's special educational needs report, which the minister welcomed?

No one was named.

There are a number of profound differences. Our manifesto is better designed and is not produced at the taxpayers' expense.

It is the motion that is in my name.

As Cathy Peattie knows, to her embarrassment more than mine, she and I often agree on educational matters. In councils such as North Lanarkshire Council, there has been an attempt to drive down class sizes—particularly in the first two years of school—to 20 or 18, which is a low level. That has happened in urban areas, where it is seen as a successful strategy.

Will Mr Stone give way?

That is the minister's fault.

I addressed that issue directly in my speech, but I am happy to repeat my point now. There is indeed a recruitment crisis in many areas, but the ratio of people who apply for primary education courses to those who get in is 9:1, as I said. Colleges will confirm that at least three times as many suitably qualified people apply as there are places available. There is no crisis in recruiting people for primary education. The crisis is elsewhere.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I am surprised that Mr McConnell did not realise that ours is a phased policy, as that was stated in the SNP paper "We stand for Education". He asked for a copy of that document—although we were probably slow in sending it to him. He knows now, however, and can go back and check that it has been a phased policy from day one. I will ask the minister a simple question. He says that the objection to the policy is financial. Taking into account all the international evidence that I have given him and all the research that he and his civil servants have at their disposal, does he not consider that the policy is a good idea?

The motion concerns the need for a radical and ambitious programme to raise the standard of Scottish education. I will say a word or two about what the debate is and is not about. I have spent many years opposing Mr McConnell as we have been through all sorts of political incarnations. I can therefore predict with a fair degree of certainty some of the red herrings that he will want to drag across the debate to distract members and the people of Scotland. I can also predict some of the rhetoric that we will hear from Conservative members. I will dispose of some of it immediately—the meaningless Tory amendment. It is a jumble of words that has no content. In short, it is dogmatic, ideological mince. That is all that I will say about the Tory amendment.

No, I ask Brian Monteith to let me get started. He has time enough before he is mince. The debate is not about the performance of Labour local authorities or even of SNP local authorities. It is not about the squillions of pounds that Labour has double counted in its over-spin about spending. It is not about what did or did not appear on an SNP website, or in an SNP or a Labour leaflet. The debate is in part about finance, but not in the terms that Mr McConnell and his colleagues will want to suggest. There is no doubt that the Barnett squeeze will impose an effect on current spending programmes and also, significantly, on any ambitions for new programmes. Barnett will first of all squeeze Scotland's aspirations and will more than squeeze them if certain Labour ministers in London have their way. The debate is also in part about fiscal autonomy, which is—of course—supported by members of all parties. The debate about controlling Scotland's resources is not an arid economic discourse. It is a debate about the means by which we can achieve  the ambitions and aspirations that we set ourselves. It is about getting the tools to do important jobs—such as being an MSP. Most of all, the debate is about the here and now and about the ambitions that we should have for all our young people. Chief among those ambitions is that which is contained in the SNP motion: that we should give our children a quality education. That ambition can make a real difference to the opportunities that are afforded to—and the prospects of—our children and grandchildren. My old school, Marr College in Troon, has as its motto "Hic patet ingeniis campus". I do not have to tell the learned members sitting in the chamber that the motto means, "Here lies a field open to the talents." We need to make our society open to our young people by developing their talents. The debate today is about how we do that. Over the past few years, the issue of class sizes has become increasingly important. In their 18 disastrous years in government, the Tories said and did very little about class sizes. Those years are not going to come back for the foreseeable, or even—reading the polls—unforeseeable future. Tory rhetoric about class sizes was only rhetoric. There were no financial resources to match the need for educational change. Local authority funding has remained under pressure from 1997 onwards. However, there have been some notable successes and I pay tribute to them. One of the successes—early intervention—is mentioned in the Executive amendment. It was certainly discussed during the Tory years, but it only came into significant effect in recent times.

I used the words "it only came into significant effect in recent times"—that is accurate. However, it is good to hear from a Tory who has a popularity rating higher than that of William Hague. That is probably the case for all of the Tories on the bench opposite, even the ones whom nobody knows. Early intervention in the first years of primary school helps to overcome disadvantages and adds value to the educational experience for those who are at the precise point where added value can be of most help. The inescapable logic of early intervention is that it indicates a need for close pupil-teacher contact in the key, formative years of a child's education. In a pioneering study conducted by the Institute of Education last year, the effect of that contact  was observed and reported on by a distinguished team. Its leader, Professor Peter Blatchford, pointed out that to most parents and teachers it is "obvious" that children do better in smaller classes and that smaller classes are better than larger classes. One of his colleagues, Professor Goldstein quantified that difference in the conclusions of the study when he asserted that "A drop in class size from 25 to 15 leads to a gain in literacy of about one year's achievement for the bottom 25 per cent, and about five months' for the rest." That study was the first British study of an American phenomenon that I will talk about in a moment. It is fair to say that new Labour has recognised the link between class sizes and attainment. Labour manifestos since 1997 have set targets for class size reduction. Labour has repeated those targets this year and no doubt it means to achieve them, but it is not yet doing so. The latest figures indicate that some 19,597 children are being taught in classes that are outwith the targets for primaries 1, 2 and 3. It is obvious that, to meet the target date, more effort and resources will need to be expended. Even if that reduction is achieved—and it would be better to work at it than to promise it—its effect would be marginal. It is certainly marginally easier to teach 30 children than 33 children. However, any teacher will say that it is only marginally easier. The ratio of adults to children in classrooms has got better but, as all studies show, that is not nearly as good as reducing the class size. The Executive may have ambitions to reduce class sizes further. It is clear that 28 is better than 30 and that 25 is better than 28. Twenty-five is, of course, the maximum that is permitted for a composite class. However, as I was told only last Friday in the most impressive Ullapool Primary School, any teacher will say that, for a composite class, 25 is still quite a challenge for even the best teachers. There is strong practical experience and there are strong practical examples of the fact that the optimum class size lies at around 18. The evidence that shows the effect of achieving and sustaining reductions to that size comes in the greatest part from the STAR project—the student teacher achievement ratio project—in Tennessee. That project commenced 16 years ago and has been followed up in other parts of the United States. At the present time, some $1.3 billion is being spent on emulating it in the United States alone. Although much has been written about the STAR project, it is easy to summarise its  outcomes. The project found that smaller class sizes, with an optimum of 18 or less, resulted in a substantial improvement in children's attainment. That attainment was sustained in later classes, behaviour improved and the need for later educational intervention declined. The project found that the effect of smaller class sizes on ethnic minority pupils was particularly marked. On those who suffered the effects of social exclusion, positive achievement was initially doubled before it became equal to that of the majority groups. The STAR project also found that pupils with special educational needs were identified earlier and received more effective support at crucial times. Those results are not surprising. To quote Professor Blatchford again, they are "obvious". Smaller class sizes give pupils better learning environments, teachers the opportunity to teach more effectively and young people a better start in life. Some surprising results have been found in the STAR study and in subsequent work. The STAR study found that the effect of smaller class sizes in the first three or four grades was long lasting. It found that the cost of the programme was offset by reduced high school drop-out rates, a diminished need for remedial instruction and long-term special educational support and—significantly for Scotland—by increased teacher retention. Perhaps it is not surprising that the project found that investment produces dividends. Let me turn to the cost of that investment. I note that the Labour press release that attacks the SNP manifesto launch—and what a magnificent manifesto it is—attempts to cost the programme of class size reduction. The costing is from the usual dishonest Labour spin machine. What is particularly revolting is that, instead of entering into a debate about the desirability or otherwise—there may be other views—of radically improving education by reducing class sizes, Labour prefers to use false numbers to frighten Scottish parents. That, no doubt, was a Liddell ploy. I hope that it will not be a McConnell ploy today. Of course, there is a cost attached to any new initiative. For a start, we will need more teachers, in particular more primary teachers even than the number proposed under the McCrone settlement. I recently commissioned research on the latest figures that Mr McConnell provided in a parliamentary answer. We will actually need 3,115 extra primary teachers. The research also shows how a reasonable programme that increases places for primary teachers can be put in place. The programme would use the substantial over-application for primary teacher courses—currently, there are about 9 applications for each place—to increase the annual intake to 700 students for the postgraduate certificate in education course and  1,100 for the Bachelor of Education course. That is a rise of 200 from current assumptions for the PGCE course and of 300 for the B.Ed course. The number of primary teachers that will be required to implement both the McCrone settlement and such an initiative should peak at around 23,500, which is a rise of over 5,500 from current numbers. That programme could be achieved within 7 years and would allow for the McCrone increase. That is the first reason why the SNP proposes a phased introduction for such a programme, which would start in areas of social exclusion. By summer 2006, which is three years into the next session of the Parliament, we could have 600 new primary teachers in post under the programme. By summer 2007, that number could rise to 1,480. The cost of all the training that would be required would be £56 million over 7 years with a steady-state recurring cost of £3.1 million. It would not be the £28 million in a single year that the Labour press release claims. Mr McConnell knows that. Just as that figure is wrong, all Labour's other claims are wrong too. A Labour document claims that 5,000 new classrooms would be needed. No account is taken of existing available space or progressive refurbishment, or team-teaching, or even that Labour's figure for the teachers is wrong.

There is a substantial number of portakabins at present. We must get rid of them. That is why we need a refurbishment programme. I am coming to that. Good things are still to come in this speech. There is no doubt that ambition costs money. We have indicated the lack of ambition and the worry about money.

No, I want to finish. The problem for the Executive is that failure is much more expensive than ambition. At present, we are failing to produce the optimum results in Scotland's schools. The SNP phased implementation programme to reduce class sizes would be completed in 7 years. During that time, money would be required for new school buildings, for refurbishment and repair, for salaries and for training. The cost of the programme would, at its peak, be around £100 million over that period. That would be £100 million well spent—it represents a quarter of the Executive underspend for this year, it is 0.5 per cent of the Scottish  budget and it is just over 2 per cent of the increase in the Scottish budget that has been promised by new Labour. That £100 million would be better spent on education than on weapons of mass destruction. It would be £100 million of Scotland's hard-earned revenue spent according to Scotland's hard-headed priorities for its future. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry that Labour members do not think that spending £100 million on Scotland's young people is worth while. That is a great shame. It will no doubt be said that such a programme would be too expensive. All sorts of doubt will be cast on the figures and we will get inaccurate figures from the Executive, but those are excuses, not reasons, for not changing Scottish education. We have had enough excuses. The results from America clearly show that there would be actual financial benefit from such a programme. Instead, we get miserable parsimony from an Executive that knows the price of everything and the value of nothing—or perhaps just knows nothing. The motion encourages the Parliament to think big about Scotland's future and Scotland's education. It encourages the Parliament to take practical steps to improve not only our education system but—in time—our entire society. That is what politics is about. That is what the Parliament is about. That is certainly what the SNP is about. I move, That the Parliament notes Labour's failure to meet its 1997 and 1999 manifesto pledges with regard to class sizes in the early primary years and the failure of the Executive to meet the same targets, as set in its first programme for government; further notes the examples of good practice that indicate a direct correlation between class sizes substantially smaller than the Executive's target and higher sustained levels of attainment; recognises also the clear results from programmes of class reduction that show the particularly strong effect which class sizes of 18 or less have on children suffering from social exclusion, and therefore calls upon the Executive to follow the SNP's lead and work much harder to achieve real and meaningful reductions in class sizes in the early primary years, setting 18 as the maximum figure.

Has the circulation risen or fallen because of that?

I hope that what I said was not interpreted as anything other than an expression of great sympathy for Irene Oldfather about her hamster. I just felt that I would like the opportunity to talk about my hamster if I had one.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this debate. It is very clever of a member to secure a debate in which he manages to mention the name of the local newspaper, thus ensuring coverage; by bringing his own travelling support with him today, Duncan McNeil shows that he is even cleverer. Obviously he does not go out much alone. Duncan McNeil is quite right to talk about the history of local newspapers. Local newspapers are extremely important, because they very much form the foundation of the democracy that we enjoy today. It is exciting, and sometimes depressing, to read the archives of local newspapers—as I often do in my other careers—and to see that they reflected a wholly different society, which was keenly engaged with the issues of the day. Today, of course, as Duncan McNeil is very much on message in new Labour, he knows that targeting the local press is one of the key things—

Mr McNeil shakes his head at my suggestion, but he is one of the most on- message people I know. He knows that it is important to target local newspapers. It is interesting to see that Mr McCabe will reply to the debate; he has no doubt already targeted the Hamilton Advertiser with his comments. If the Presiding Officer, Mr Reid, could speak, he would want to target the Alloa and Hillfoots Advertiser and Wee County News , two newspapers that vie for the honour of reporting his activities with a keenness that recalls the circulation wars between the Daily Express and the Daily Record . We can find plenty of examples of local newspapers providing strong, campaigning voices for vibrant communities. For example, one of the local newspapers in Irvine has been campaigning strongly on issues related to old people in the community. The fact that those people's concerns are covered week after week in the newspapers reassures them and reminds the community of their views. Furthermore, the Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard near the area where I live has been campaigning vigorously about the pier, which is as important an issue to Mr McNeil as it is to me. We must also remember that local newspapers face difficulties. This is a time of declining circulation and a falling number of newspapers. The challenge of the internet is real and those newspapers that have met it best are providing good local news services on-line for the whole world. The first, and best, of those newspapers was The Shetland Times , and there are now a whole range of them. Mr McNeil is right to say that there is enormous interest throughout the world in each part of Scotland, which is primarily a result of the diaspora. Those people want to find out what is happening in the communities. Bringing matters closer to home, I noticed that Duncan McNeil mentioned his column in the Greenock Telegraph . Some of us argue strongly for columns in the local newspapers; we offer a high quality of writing. I make that advertisement again now. I am sure that I cannot emulate my colleague Irene Oldfather, whose recent columns have mentioned the illness of her hamster and the loss of her glasses; however, were the Irvine Herald and Kilwinning Chronicle to give me a column, I would try hard to ensure that the quality of my writing was as strong as that. Local press is at its best when it reflects a broad spectrum of views. In that respect, I commend Christine Grahame's Southern Reporter column, which might annoy Ian Jenkins but is effective in putting across her point of view. I believe that Mr Jenkins also puts across his point of view in that paper. There are exceptions. Some local journalism in Scotland is afraid of authority or is deliberately partisan. It might surprise most members to know  that I wrote for the West Highland Free Press in the late 1970s. [MEMBERS: "Tut."] Indeed—I am ashamed of it as well. I was not ashamed of the paper at the time, but I am ashamed of it now, because it has gone from being the voice of campaigning journalism in the Highlands and Islands that had no fear of what was happening to being a paper of the Labour establishment. That is very sad, because the paper has become worse as a result. Local journalism needs constant vigilance, constant innovation, constant ideas, constant excitement—and more columns. I am available.

When he was between 62 and 64?

Will Mr Chisholm give way?

I want to make a small but important point. Will that report to the Parliament contain the evidence that the commissioner has considered? In other places, such evidence is published. The Parliament might want to know about such evidence.

I shall endeavour not to cough; however, I assure members that it is getting much better, and therefore less expressive. Unfortunately, I take issue with much of Brian Monteith's speech. For example, the letter from Harmeny school that he mentioned was written before its representatives returned to the committee and met the minister; they—and the other schools—would admit that any doubts and fears that they might have had have been assuaged by those meetings. It is not—should not—be possible to go into a detailed exposition of what happened in a private meeting when the committee was endeavouring to come to an agreement on its report. I have said in the past that there are times when the committee needs to meet in private. With the permission of the committee, I will re-emphasise what I said in my intervention; I do not recognise Brian Monteith's account of that particular discussion. There was a desire to reach an agreed position among the parties and individual members—which is how we approached the matter—on what we would say about the seven special schools. What we wanted to say—the point has been made time and again in the debate—is that this group of schools is not homogeneous. Different children have different requirements and, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton eloquently pointed out, the schools perform different roles. However, they are worthy of support, and the issue of how such support arrives is almost incidental to that fact. In his opening remarks, the minister helpfully indicated that he also sees the issue in a much wider context than whether the money comes directly from the Executive or in other ways. The report in no way lessens the commitment to those schools; however, it recognises children's different requirements and the need for a partnership among parents, local authorities, the Executive, the Parliament and the young people themselves. I hope that the minister will take on board the fact that such a partnership must now develop a national strategy, because all those people are key stakeholders in what happens and how the matter is taken forward. It is a perversion of the debate to limit it to the question whether the Executive should sign an annual cheque for seven schools—that is not the real issue. The real issue that members in all parties have addressed is how we should focus on  each child's individual needs and how, as a society, we can support and develop those children, not only in the special schools, but throughout their lives. By doing so, we can begin to address some of the problems that will arise—and that are arising—at the end of schooling. By and large, we have had a consensus and a positive approach. Furthermore, many individual remarks and accounts of experiences have thrown light on the need to support the committee's report, to accept what the minister has said and to engage in joint activity involving the Executive, the Parliament and the other stakeholders. However, I was very struck by a comment that was made by John McAllion, which was echoed by my friend Adam Ingram. The debate is also about resources. Fortunately, we have not made that issue the centre of the debate and we have not divided on it. That said, the debate is also about providing sufficient resources to ensure that children receive the help and support that they need. That help is not cheap. In my opening remarks, I mentioned that the minimum cost for a child at Daldorch House School is probably about £100,000. That child requires 24-hour attention, three shifts of staff and all the ancillary services. The cost could be as high as £200,000 or £220,000 for severely autistic children at the school. That is a lot of money; for a local authority, it is the cost of keeping open two primary schools. As those authorities have genuine difficulties, involving them with the Executive's support as willing funders in the partnership is the only way forward. If that does not happen, local authorities will be glad to slough off the responsibility, because it can be met by other sources. I do not mean that as a criticism. However, the issue is complex. If local authorities slough off the responsibility for any child, they also slough off their central commitment to mainstreaming. The moment that a local authority says that a child who lives in its area is not its responsibility, there is no mainstreaming, because a whole section of children is removed from the established context of education in Scotland and put somewhere else. All those issues are interlinked, and trying to focus on the single issue of where the money for special schools will come from damages the debate. I am very glad to welcome some young people from Stanmore School who have just arrived in the public gallery, because today's debate is not about statistics, money or the minutiae that Brian Monteith has tried to suck us into. Instead, it is about supporting, helping, caring for and involving in the community the children who are in the chamber today and many others. If we see the debate in such a way, the Parliament is not some dry and arid place, but part of the living  development of the Scottish community. The Parliament and the Education, Culture and Sport Committee have shown themselves in a good light today. However, this is the start—not the end—of the process. Although we have reached an agreed position with the Executive that we can proceed with, we must never lose sight of one vital factor. The debate is not about figures, politics or—as Mr Monteith said in his opening remarks—dogma; it is about belief, faith, caring and the creation of community. In the words of Ian Welsh, who was the inspiration behind the report, it is about human rights and human beings.

rose—

I must not allow my cough to stand in for me. I am afraid that I do not recognise the account that Mr Monteith has given of what was discussed in the committee. I see that there is assent to that from the other committee members. The committee attempted to discuss the issues that Mr Monteith wanted to discuss. I seem to remember that we had great difficulty in getting Mr Monteith to formulate the issues into an amendment that we could debate. In all those circumstances—I shall return to the matter in my summing up—I do not think that Mr Monteith's account of events bears the hallmark of, or stands the test of, truth.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton correctly enumerates the schools and what they do, but does he agree with the point that other members and I have made that those schools are not a homogeneous group? As John McAllion said, those schools must sometimes cater for children who might be happy and well looked after in mainstream schools, if their local authority were able to provide it. As Mr Monteith said, that is a matter of choice.

Will the member give way?

I also welcome the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report. I wish to start by paying tribute to a member who is not present—indeed, who has not been present since the end of 1999: Ian Welsh, the former member for Ayr. He started off this inquiry, and I will refer to the views that he expressed in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. Ian Welsh had a strong personal interest in this issue. When the committee was discussing its work programme in November 1999, he said: "I would be concerned about restricting ourselves ... There is a broader issue about the integration of children with special educational needs. I am concerned that we do not take a top-down approach ... The basic issue, as I have indicated before, concerns human rights."—[ Official Report , Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 3 November 1999; c 192.] What Ian Welsh started, in the form of this inquiry, has been a tremendous learning process for the committee, which has developed knowledge about and concern over the subject. I wish also to pay tribute to my colleagues Nicola Sturgeon and Fiona McLeod, who, at the inquiry's early stage, bore the burden for the Scottish National Party—they have now moved on to other things. I also thank the committee's staff and advisers. Five of the seven members have, I think,  served on the committee since the start of this Parliament. Its meetings have been enjoyable to attend. It may have its political fights, but I think that it is an effective committee. I have been struck by the warm response to the report from right across the special educational needs sector and I am grateful to the minister for his response. That is important and indicates a very broad consensus and the keen concern of everybody involved to get these matters right. I will address two specific issues: mainstreaming and what happens to young people when they move beyond the support that schools can give them. That is touched on only briefly in the report, but is one of the crucial areas that we have still to consider. Before I tackle those two issues, I will speak briefly about the one contentious area in the report, which is indicated by the amendment that Brian Monteith lodged yesterday but which was not called for debate. The debate on special schools and specially funded schools in the committee was complex—this is a complex issue. Those schools are not homogeneous. They are not all the same and do not all exist for the same reason. Those of us who have visited those schools have been profoundly moved by what we have seen. Later this morning, young people from Stanmore House School in Lanark will attend the debate. It is tremendous that they will be here for the summing-up speeches. That school provides exceptional support for children with exceptional difficulties. The school has to exist because there is nowhere else where those children could be cared for in such a way. Other schools exist perhaps for different reasons. Some schools exist because there is still something of a postcode lottery in provision for certain disabilities, even those of a low incidence. For instance, support for people with visual difficulties and visual impairment is very patchy. Different types of school need to be thought of in different ways. We cannot jump in with both feet. I tell Brian Monteith that that is an indication that we must give political support to special or grant-aided schools. The position is not simple and there are a range of issues to be looked at. Local authorities have a role in supporting young people in those schools. Local authorities have to work in partnership with schools to find the best way to help individual young people. The centre of the debate lies with what is best for individual young people. On Monday, I visited the National Autistic Society school in Ayrshire, Daldorch House School, which is not funded as a special school by the Executive. That presents a very heavy funding  burden on local authorities. Some children there require not only one-to-one but two-to-one support. Some local authorities pay up to £200,000 a year to support a child there. We need to develop the knowledge in local authorities that such support is necessary. The Executive should help local authorities to meet those costs, particularly where one area has a higher incidence than others, which is a lottery in itself. We should develop the means by which we get the best for every child. We should approach the debate from a young-person or child-centred perspective, not from a dogmatic political perspective. We should do what the minister said and build the partnership. We should not just talk about transfer of funding in the abstract but look at the way in which we can create a better context for all young people and their families who need help, wherever they are and whatever problems they have. The concept of achieving the best for each child also affects mainstreaming and integration. We have seen evidence on this from parents, some of whom are here today, and many of us have received letters and e-mails on the subject. Certainly, as a principle, many parents want their children to be an integral part of the school community within their own community. That is sensible and wise and we applaud it, but it does not work for every child and every school community; therefore, it is important to have the sensibility and the resources that are needed to be able to make individual decisions. Undoubtedly, the most desirable option for any young person or child is to be mainstreamed, to be within the community of their peers. However, we have to recognise that, where the balance is disturbed and the child, the other children or those teaching or looking after those children cannot cope, the same formula does not fit everybody. That is why I think that the report's conclusions are sensible. The report accepts that there is a variety of need and does not try to impose dogma. I will address briefly post-school support. When I was at Daldorch House School on Monday, I was struck by the story of a young person who had difficulty living even in that small community but who, at the age of 18, had to leave it. The local authority could not provide the level of support that that young person needed. Within three months, that young person was hospitalised; three months later, there is talk of a secure institution for that young person. Society has invested hundreds of thousands of pounds to care for and develop that young person. The process does not end at an arbitrary date. As my friend Mr Quinan knows, there is a distinct prospect of help and development throughout such people's lives, but cutting support off at an arbitrary point makes the  problem worse and betrays the young people whom we should be helping. The same issue exists at Stanmore House School, which has developed an innovative programme with a local college to try to bring young people at the age of 16 into another form of educational community so that they can continue the process of learning and education. However, that is the least-well-supported aspect of the school's work and the aspect for which it has the most difficulty in finding funding, and the funding is not permanent. The Executive or a committee will have to consider post-school support seriously because it is becoming the key issue. The committee has done the Parliament a service by producing the report. The debate today can do so also by examining with some intensity the issues that the report presents. I knew very little about this subject when the inquiry started. I approached the subject and my first visit to some of the schools involved with trepidation, but I have scarcely seen more caring, loving and enjoyable places in which to spend time. That testimony makes me believe that the support of all parties for the Executive's work, as long as the Executive works in partnership with the Parliament, is the right way forward.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There have been rulings in the chamber that during summing-up speeches ministers should not introduce new material by making announcements. The minister clearly intends to make announcements, which has been ruled against previously. It is quite wrong to make announcements when summing up as it gives no chance for reaction; it is against the principles of the chamber.

Will the member give way?

I am only sorry that I cannot offer Mr Jackson his usual fee. I am glad that he is delighted with the minister and the chance to have a debate. There is nothing wrong with a chance to have a debate. However, the substantive point that I make to the minister—I have made it to  many other people as well—is that the motion welcomes a policy on architecture, but the Executive has admitted that there is no such policy and that such a policy may be some weeks away. Would it not have been better for the Executive to have come to the Parliament with a policy to debate, so that members had something to talk about, rather than coming here with an anodyne motion and no policy?

Would Lord James add to that list of memorable buildings one with which he will be familiar, which is also a tourist attraction and used to belong to the family Châteauhérault? Perhaps the lesson that it teaches is that one should not dig coal mines under buildings, as that tends to make them fall down. Would Lord James care to remind members of that as well?

Will Des McNulty give way?

Will Des McNulty give way?

Had the minister mentioned any of the initiatives that Des McNulty has mentioned, had the minister produced a policy proposal to support such initiatives or had the motion mentioned the good work that has been done in Glasgow, I would have been entirely  happy to praise those initiatives. I do so now. We are debating a motion from the minister that says there should be a national policy. We do not have that policy and, by the admission of Ian Jenkins, a member of the Liberal party, which is part of this Executive, we are not getting the policy for another few weeks. This is a waste of our time. There is not a national policy. I say to Mr McNulty that I am not criticising those initiatives. I am criticising the minister for what he is doing here today.

The member referred to the consultation document and its response. He may have missed the end of Mr Wilson's lecture. The document that was referred to contains many key points, and I tried to press Mr Wilson on the policy. Will Ian Jenkins answer a policy question? For example, is the policy that arises from the consultation that the "selection of consultants should be made on quality criteria and not solely on fee bids"? Is that the Executive's policy, or is the document simply consultative? Have no decisions been made on such important issues?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the length of speeches will add to the quality of the debate. We heard the most extraordinary introduction to the debate from the minister—we listened for almost 20 minutes. I wrote down six lines from his speech, which I would like to share with the chamber. He said that buildings are  "interventions in the natural world"— much like flying saucers—and that they carry a message "into the future". He also said that the purpose of the Government's policy is to work to implement change and that architecture is a rich subject area that can "illuminate and inform". Out of all that—and out of all the months of thinking and consultation documents—the Executive has produced a works procurement guide for civil servants. That is the fruit of the Executive's policy. The minister gave us a wonderful dissertation.

I will get going first, but I will give the minister plenty of opportunity to interrupt me soon. As I said, the minister gave us a wonderful advanced higher essay on the purposes of architecture, but it contained no policy at all. I defy him to give me an example of policy. The only thing that I learned from his speech was that the Lighthouse exists to promote the policy, but as there is no policy, I do not know what the Lighthouse will be doing—I presume that it will have to go out. We should have known from the motion what we were in for.

I will give way in a moment. The SNP did not lodge an amendment to the motion for one reason: to call the motion anodyne would be greatly to exaggerate its controversy. I am about to reveal to the minister far more policy than was contained in his speech, which surprises me. I thought that he might have had some policy, given the back-up that he had from civil servants and from that self-confessed expert on architecture, Des McNulty—who is sitting behind the minister and who will, no doubt, deliver a learned dissertation later. When Rhona Brankin was the Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport, a framework document was published. I will come on to the result of the consultation, but the minister has lodged a motion for debate that will take up two and a half hours of parliamentary time in order to welcome the fact that he should have a policy. I always live in hope—I thought that, in a little coup de théâtre, the minister would announce that policy. However, he has announced nothing more than the fact that the Lighthouse exists to promote a policy that the minister does not have. The minister's performance was astonishing, but one should not be surprised about that. The truth of the problem with the Executive's policy on architecture can be found in "The Development of a Policy on Architecture in Scotland: Report on the  Public Consultation". Four hundred and thirteen people attended nine public meetings in Scotland. Those who attended are listed in the response document under what they do. They included architects, design professionals and others. There is also a listing for individuals—the people we want to be involved in debating and discussing architecture and the built environment—but how many individuals attended those meetings out of the total of 413? The answer is that only 10 members of the public attended nine public meetings.

I will take an intervention from the minister in a second—I want to finish my point. When I have done so, I will be happy for him to intervene. Before the minister tells me, eight of those 10 individuals attended the meeting in Melrose. As Ian Jenkins knows, there is not much to do in Melrose of an evening—no doubt the meeting was a big draw. However, only 10 individuals attended those meetings and the issue at the core of our debate is why we have not engaged the people in Scotland in the debate on what architecture is about.

I have already explained to the minister why we did not seek to amend the motion. One would really have to be expert at splitting hairs in order to be able to amend the motion, and we are not—we are generous people. I am happy to contribute to the policy on architecture—I am just about to do so. The question for the people of Scotland is, "What is architecture for?"

I see that the minister is being prompted by Rhona Brankin. Please carry on, minister. Let us hear Rhona Brankin's intervention.

Fortunately, we are here to rescue the Executive from itself. In the course of the next 10 minutes, I shall give the minister plenty of ideas—gracious me, he needs them, given his speech. I was speaking about the nine meetings, the 413 people and 10 members of the public. That  signifies that the people of Scotland are not engaged with the idea of building an architecture policy. There can be little surprise about that because the biggest public example of where architecture has gone wrong in Scotland is the responsibility of Parliament and the Scottish Executive—the Holyrood building. There can be no surprise that the idea of creating new buildings in Scotland has come under scrutiny and been found wanting. Indeed, the record of Governments in helping people through architecture is not good. I remember well a Tory Prime Minister—Harold Macmillan—who was MP for the place where I was born. In the 1950s, he had a plan to build 400,000 houses a year. In Scotland, 40,000 houses a year were built. Nowadays in Scotland, I doubt whether 1,000 public sector houses would be built in a year. Fine buildings were created in the past, but we have great difficulty in pointing out fine buildings that are being built now. Sister Gallagher referred during time for reflection to the building that houses Parliament and its history. Part of its history is the building's function. It was created to be the Free Church of Scotland hall and to be an inspiration for a whole movement that was created in Scotland. As the minister said, buildings are not just practical and they are not just utilitarian; they are sociological and cultural. We want to express our culture through our architecture, but therein lies the Executive's difficulty. For the Executive, the culture of Scotland is a culture that dare not speak its name. To develop a vernacular Scottish architecture that speaks to people is difficult for the Executive. There is endless consultation, but there are no results. That is the charitable interpretation of the appalling hollowness of what we heard from the minister. We should start at the very lowest level and ask ourselves what specific problems we have to address in Scotland, and what are the specific components of those problems. One of the problems is architects. Architecture belongs far too much to architects. In the list of people who attended the public meetings, more than half were architects or from architectural professions. Architecture has become something for specialists, not for the population. People have lived through two generations in which they have seen much of the environment with which they were familiar changed or destroyed. Some of the measures that Governments have taken have made the situation worse. The imposition of VAT on work to existing buildings, for example, has been an incentive to demolish rather than to conserve and improve. Planning has focused on economic issues and not on holistic issues—it has not focused on aesthetic,  cultural, social, and people criteria and it has not focused on sustainable criteria for developing new buildings. In addition, when regeneration is considered, sustainable best practice in conservation has never been given the same consideration as new build. We heard a graphic example of that in Parliament last week. Richard Simpson talked about the Holyrood project and attacked the Executive in respect of Queensberry House. He described the fact that Historic Scotland had insisted on limewashing that building as a disgrace. Does he not know that limewash and lime building were essential to the buildings of that time? Does he not know that there is a centre in Fife that was established by the family of the Earl of Elgin to teach architects, builders and practitioners how to use lime in restoration? We heard an attack upon an existing building because it got in the way. When politicians say such things, it turns off the public. We also need to learn how to spend money to make a difference in comparatively small areas. For example, £9.8 million of grant aid was available to Historic Scotland in 1990 for the preservation of historic buildings—in particular, private historic buildings—but the figure is now only £11 million. The number of buildings that require assessment has grown enormously, but the amount of money has stayed almost the same. There is an interesting example of new build in the Western Isles—the minister looks puzzled; perhaps he has just read his summing up—but the money that is available in grant and loan for croft houses has remained at £35,000 throughout the 1990s. That means that those who are trying to make a difference find doing so difficult. For example, the building of new black houses has become a very interesting movement. Werner Kissling's ideas of the 1930s have been built on by young architects to provide a cost-effective intervention in the Western Isles landscape that is sympathetic to that landscape. However, it is almost impossible to achieve that with the money that is available in grant and loan for croft houses.

I am delighted to agree with Jamie Stone. As he is a member of the Executive parties, no doubt he need only write a letter to the minister and the level of grant will be raised. The reality is that the low level of moneys that are available for the significant things—for allowing people to live in the landscape in which they need to live and for creating new build that is  sympathetic to the landscape—has squeezed out the best ideas. If I may quote Alastair Campbell, the "bog-standard" has been allowed to become the standard for building. We need to make some differences. We need an approach to architecture that encourages debate at the grass roots and in places where there is a physical problem in which Government policy can intervene. We heard from the minister a long, 20-minute lecture on the theory of building that said absolutely nothing. I am sympathetic to the Lighthouse. It is a great thing, but how can it promote a policy that does not exist? Sorry, is Rhona Brankin attempting to intervene?

I was used to the testy nature of Rhona Brankin's interventions when she was Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport. The nature of the intervention has not changed and neither has the content. The reality is that we are debating Mr Wilson's motion, which is meant to be Labour policy. However, there is no policy. Rhona Brankin should not attack me because Labour does not have a policy—she should attack her colleagues. We are quite used to Labour's nonsensical approach. We need action, not words. I rise to attack Labour for its motion because the document that was published contained nothing and no announcement has been made today about what action will be taken on the key points that are contained in the consultation response; there has been no announcement of action. We have heard that the policy will be promoted by means of an exhibition—who knows what will be in it; blank walls, I presume—and by the publication of works procurement guidance for civil servants. If the Labour party is not up to the job and cannot do it, I fully understand why; Labour has not been up to very much, so I can understand why it is not up to this.

No, I am concluding. We will  have a chance to listen to Lewis Macdonald later—unfortunately. If the Executive is going to produce a policy on architecture, it should bring it forward for debate. However, if the Executive wants simply to fill an afternoon with empty motions and emptier speeches, it is wasting the time of members, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people—just as it has been doing for the past two years.

This is a fascinating thesis—I congratulate whoever wrote it—but, so far, we have had six and a half minutes of it without hearing what the Executive's policy might be. Perhaps the Executive's policy is to have a thesis on architecture. It would be nice to know what the policy is that we are meant to be celebrating today.

Will the minister give way?

I am sorry to interrupt the minister, because many of us agree with him, but I want to ask about what he said about ensuring that eradication was complete. As he knows, I have recently written to him about the genuine feelings of disquiet—I will not put it any more strongly than that—in one or two places about the completion of the cull. Some cases are highly publicised and some are not, but I am thinking about the case of the animal sanctuary about which there was an appeal this afternoon. I am not asking for a definitive response now, but the minister might recognise that that disquiet needs to be taken into account at this sensitive time.

I pay tribute to Elaine Murray not just for securing this debate, but for her speech, which went to the very heart of the issue and touched on many of the problems that people in Dumfries and Galloway see around them. It is also appropriate to pay tribute to Dumfries and Galloway Council and its staff—particularly its convener, Andrew Campbell—who have done an extraordinary job in very difficult circumstances. Furthermore, for once in a lifetime, I will pay tribute to the minister. The way that he has dealt with the crisis has proved him to be the most effective and able Scottish Executive minister. It is easier for me to say that because he is a Liberal Democrat and I do not  have to praise Labour. He has done extraordinarily well. The reality of foot-and-mouth disease must be brought home to people who do not know the area, visit it or work in it. Three weeks ago, through a combination of circumstances, I passed a farm on the side of Loch Ken, near Parton, five times in four days. I passed on the day that the pyre was completed and I passed on days when the pyre was burning. It is a hideous and frightening sight, which makes us all wonder whether we could ever again tolerate that means of dealing with the disease—essential as it was. Let us hope that the situation never arises again. When the crisis is over, we must think again about how we treat animals, about how we relate to the countryside and about what our stewardship of the countryside means. Those are big issues for the future. Elaine Murray is right to concentrate on the issues of here and now, which are serious. I will focus on one example, because if we range too widely and talk about economic statistics and strategies, we lose sight of the difficulties that individuals face. John Morris, the owner of the Selkirk Arms Hotel in Kirkcudbright, is not a member of the Scottish National Party: he was an independent councillor who was much more of the persuasion of the Conservative party. Alex Fergusson can confirm that I did not ask about the privacy of the ballot box the last time I had a drink with him. John Morris runs a fine hotel. He has been an ambitious businessman and has built the hotel up, changing and transforming it into a considerable asset to the town. This year, the number of bedrooms that John Morris let for March was down by 24 per cent and the number for April was down by 30 per cent. Over a busy bank holiday weekend, he let five of his 16 rooms, whereas last year he let them all. His food and drink sales have collapsed and his bookings for the summer are virtually non-existent. He will not be taking on seasonal staff and he has shed full-time staff. His trade is down on last year not just because of tourism, but because the Ministry of Defence range at Kirkcudbright has been inactive during the period, meaning that there has been no trade from there. He says: "The help the tourist board has offered has been completely inadequate"— I want the minister to acknowledge those words— "waiving fees which only amounted to £100 anyway. The promotional efforts are not right at this time. VAT bills are a major headache, as they are a tax on turnover, not profit. The Inland Revenue are not moving an inch." John Morris has a mortgage to pay and he says that he cannot see how many businesses like his will be able to make it through next winter unless  there is a substantial improvement in trade. Although the banks are being flexible—many of us have corresponded with the banks and secured their assurance that they will be flexible—they are merely delaying inevitable payments. What businesses such as John Morris's need is an injection of money now. All the plans that we have for the future are necessary. Nevertheless, there must be an injection of money now, not just to the tourism business, but to agricultural contractors and people who work in a variety of sectors, some of whom are mentioned in Elaine Murray's motion. I like the language of the motion, because there is an urgency to it that is not being addressed. There will be no survival unless there is cash—that is the message that the debate must get across.

I appreciate the passion with which Mr Monteith argues about conservative figures, but will he answer a simple question? From what we have heard Mr Home Robertson say, it is possible that, at the end of the day, it will not be possible to cut the figures to £195 million without leaving the roof off or something. In those circumstances, what would we do?

One is tempted to say, "Here we are again." This is the third occasion on which the Parliament has debated the Holyrood project in the context of an actual or expected cost overrun. In June 1999, the Parliament came within a few votes—a few Liberal votes—of halting the project and considering, as we should have done, the alternatives to a scheme that was conceived in haste and political panic, and of which we have now to repent at leisure. At that time, the Parliament was assured that the cost would be £109 million. That was not true. In April 2000, in the light of the Spencely report, the Parliament returned to the project. Gordon Jackson—I am glad that he is here—displaying the eloquence which, according to Scotland on Sunday last week, makes him one of the top earners in the legal profession, persuaded the Parliament, indeed promised the Parliament, that the cost would be no more than £195 million. That also was untrue. I note that in David Davidson's  report to the Finance Committee—and I do not often quote Mr Davidson with approval—he says that "the motion put to and passed by the Scottish Parliament, known as the 'Jackson motion', which was for a fixed cash sum at current prices of £195 million, was somewhat optimistic and, in light of the complexity of the tender and control process ... naïve for such a complicated and indeed unique design." The Tory motion today is also optimistic and naïve, which is why I seek to amend it. Now we are told—or rather not told, because at the heart of my amendment is the concern that we do not have the figures—that the final figure will not be £109 million; neither will it be £195 million. Still less will it be the £40 million with which we started, or even the £10 million that was put about before the Scotland Act 1998 was passed, and it will not be less than Spencely's upper estimate of £230 million. David Black has estimated the total cost, including the cost of the Calton hill plan, of all the reports that we have had, of all the consultants, of answering 150 written questions to the Presiding Officer before October 2000—only 100 of which came from Margo MacDonald—of refurbishing the premises that we are in and the knock-on costs on traffic, including traffic circulation in the old town. Members will remember the architect's promise at the beginning of the project that the project would have no effect on the old town, which now turns out to be nonsense. If all those things are taken into account, the cost of the project is certainly £300 million, and is probably rising. This is a farce. It is also a tragedy, and it would have been easy to avoid if, at the beginning, the Labour party had listened, instead of insisting on getting its own way because it wanted to dish the nats. It could have been avoided if Labour and the Liberals had put reason and common sense to play instead of backing ministerial reputations and if this Parliament, not Westminster, had made the first decisions. As David Black convincingly argues, the root of the problem lies in the way in which the project was conceived and presented from Westminster by Westminster ministers. Fortunately, we know who was responsible. Parliamentary committees have worked on that. Spencely uncovered some of the information, and David Black has uncovered more. However, the shambles has victims as well as villains. Scottish taxpayers are the victims and will continue to be mugged for cash. The people who are trying to bring some order and probity to the sorry tale will have a heavier and heavier burden. I pay tribute to the progress group, which is trying to bring sense, probity and some vision to a misbegotten project. The reputation of the Parliament is also suffering. It took something approaching genius from the  Government to create the situation. What should have been the most significant public building in Scotland in a century, or certainly in a generation, has become a byword for profligacy, political obduracy and sheer folly.

That is the fault of those who conceived the project and of the way in which the project was introduced. It is most tragic that the project affects the reputation of the Parliament and our nation. I pay limited tribute to the Conservatives for bringing the matter to our attention. In typical Tory style, they spoiled a good idea with a silly solution. In April 2000, Mr Jackson persuaded the Parliament that it was possible to cap Holyrood costs at a fixed figure. That was not true then and is not true now. The Tories are trying to fit the same cap to a project that is costing well beyond £195 million. If the Tories succeeded, we would have holes in the ground. Those of us who are old enough to remember Edinburgh under the Tories—which was a long time ago—will remember those holes, which represented buildings that were started and never finished. The Tory motion would result in another useless hole in the ground and would be a wasteful solution. The motion is political posturing and would be awful value for the taxpayer.

I will address that issue in just a moment. My amendment would make the best of a bad job. Reluctantly—and for the first time—I accept that Holyrood will have to be built. To misquote Macbeth, we are now so steeped in debt that to return would be as tedious as to go o'er. My amendment would find the tightest and most responsible way in which the Parliament—the project client—can control events and bring them to fruition. The amendment asks the Parliament to accept its joint responsibility. All parties—including the Tories—have so far failed to accept that responsibility. The amendment also deals with the fair point that Mr McLetchie made. It says that the Scottish Executive must take its share of responsibility. With the greatest respect to the Minister for Parliament and the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, it is a disgrace that the front bench is not full. It is always full when good news is being trumpeted, but never when problems are being discussed. The Executive should respond to the debate, and a minister should join the progress group. The amendment calls for that.  The amendment would build into the Parliament's structures the proper relationship between the progress group and the Parliament—a direct relationship. The Scotland Act 1998 makes it impossible for the progress group to take ultimate legal responsibility for Holyrood, but nothing stops the corporate body from proposing a small change in standing orders that would allow it to establish a sub-committee to which it could give powers. We should tie the progress group into the Parliament's structures. The amendment would ensure that the Parliament was fully involved and fully informed and would take decisions relating to cost. To answer Mr McLetchie's question, I say that the difficulty is that the Parliament still does not know the final costs. They must be provided now and the Parliament must debate and decide on them with the progress group.

We could go further. My SNP colleagues want the corporate body to explore with the Executive the creation of a public service trust to pay for the building. It is daft that an Executive that will not spend capital on schools and hospitals insists on spending capital in short order on the Parliament. A public service trust, as proposed by my friend Mr Wilson, would be ideal for the project. There were and are better sites for the Parliament. There were and are better designs for the Parliament. I would rather welcome those than buttress the wrong choice, but that is not the real world. In the real world, foolish decisions were made for all the wrong reasons and were tenaciously supported by those who should have known better. Tragically, those people have won a form of victory, but we can still prevent the logical conclusion of their foolishness, which David Black says would be the endless escalation of cost, public opprobrium and the private anguish of many members. If the Parliament tightens control of the project and takes responsibility, if the Executive takes responsibility and the Conservatives join in, we may be able to make a difference. We could act responsibly—and together—to control the project. It should not be in the mess that it is in, but it is not too late. I ask the chamber to support my amendment. I move amendment S1M-1918.2, to leave out from "and now" to end and insert: "; expresses considerable concern that this figure is likely to be exceeded and therefore calls upon the Corporate Body to ensure that any revised costs above that figure, as well as any changes to quality standards and completion  dates that affect that figure, are laid before the Parliament for debate and approval; further calls upon the Conservatives to cease their boycott of the Holyrood Progress Group so that all the principal parties in the Parliament supervise this Parliamentary project together; asks the Scottish Executive to nominate a Minister to the Group, and expresses the wish that the Progress Group should become a sub-committee of the Corporate Body and that, following such a change, the Progress Group itself should report regularly and directly to formal meetings of the Parliament, rather than to informal meetings of members as at present, thus strengthening direct Parliamentary accountability for the project."

It was a pity, after the debate had been going moderately well, to hear such an anti-European and anti-democratic speech from Ben Wallace. We should pass over it without comment. [MEMBERS: "Go on."] No, it was not worthy of comment—it was, until about the last minute when it became a nasty rant, but of course that is Mr Wallace's stock in trade. The curious difficulty of the debate, particularly for the unionist parties, is symbolised by the flags that are flying from the Parliament building. If members have not seen them, they should go and look at them. On the twin towers of the building fly the European flag, for Europe day, and the union jack. No saltire flies from Scotland's Parliament today. That represents what we have heard from Labour members, even—perhaps most particularly—from those whose speeches were most passionate about Europe. That is because the difficulty for Labour and the Scottish Executive lies in reconciling an organisation of sovereign member states, and the opportunity that that offers the people of Scotland, with the powerlessness yet potential of the ancient state in which we live. That contradiction is at the heart of the debate and led to the minister's somewhat listless speech, to which I shall return. Europe is a difficulty for Labour, but it has been a difficulty for every party in the chamber. It is important to remember that. It has not actually been a difficulty for the Liberals—it just offers them an opportunity to get out more than they usually do. One of the few correct comments that Ben Wallace made was that, as recently as 1983, Labour offered withdrawal from Europe in its manifesto. I suspect that Tommy Sheridan will offer that at the next election, but life is too short to read Tommy Sheridan's manifesto. The Tories have retreated into political irrelevance, because Europe has split them down the middle. That is the great issue on which the Tory party foundered in the 20 th century and continues to founder in the 21 st century. Some of the rhetoric that we hear from the Tories—even from some in this Parliament—makes Margaret Thatcher sound like a pro-European. The SNP has also had its difficulties on Europe. In 1975, the SNP recommended a no vote in the referendum. I was a member of the party, but I voted yes. That was one of the rare occasions on which I have differed from my party.

There are no such occasions now, I am glad to say. The work that has been done in the party since then, by Winnie Ewing and a range of others, has cemented the idea of Europe into the party's thinking and an internationalist view into the SNP. That view recognises the great advantages of working within a group of sovereign states and is based on the idea of Europe as peaceful co-operation between nations and Europe as the ideal of making that peaceful co-operation not a static, once-and-for-all process, but a dynamic process of ever-closer union. Jack McConnell referred to the foundation of the European Coal and Steel Community by Schuman on 9 May 1950. However, only a decade before that, on 9 May 1940, Hitler gave the final order for operation yellow—the invasion of Holland, Belgium and Luxembourg—which started at 5.35 the next morning and involved 2,500 tanks and 75 infantry divisions in the heart of Europe. On 9 May 1941, a 500-bomber raid took place on London. On 9 May 1942, the Red Army launched its first offensive. On 9 May 1944, air raids took place against France—the first to start the process towards D day. On 9 May 1945—just five years before the Community was founded—the German forces on the Channel Islands surrendered. As members have said, Europe was a theatre for war as recently as then. Only 25 years before the second world war started, Europe was stuck in the trenches of Flanders for five years. The idea was that such events should happen never again. The only way of ensuring that was to bring nations together in peaceful co-operation as equals. That is the key to the debate. Nations were brought together to co-operate with one another.

Sorry, I have some way to go. It is curious that on Europe day, Mr McConnell took a profoundly anti-European stance. The idea of a group of nations co-operating as equals has been overturned in the Executive's mind because of the angels-on-the-head-of-a-pin argument about Scotland's status and because the Executive cannot admit that Scotland is a nation. The Executive now argues that it is better that big countries speak for small countries. That is a direct perversion of the idea and the ideal of Europe. That anti-European stance led to Mr McConnell's listless performance in the debate today. His is a weak and inconsistent argument, which does not play to the opportunity of Europe but treats Europe as a problem that the Executive must spin its way out of.  That leads us to the wandered approach that Mr Mundell showed us. Mr Mundell cannot look at this nation and see the potential and the benefit that we will get out of Europe, because he too has to hold back. That brings me to the Liberals: I look forward to hearing Nicol Stephen's speech, to see whether the Liberals are making a distinct contribution to the Executive on this matter. The only logical approach to the debate has come from the passion of the SNP and our realisation that to fulfil what Scotland is capable of, we must be at the top table. The SNP is passionate about Europe because it is passionate about independence. I am old enough to be fond of the SNP words "independence in Europe". That spirit of joining in with Europe will allow Scotland to do the things that she needs to do. There is a huge irony in the minister standing on stage, as he did last night, welcoming those who aspire to membership of the European Union, yet being unable to see that his actions, his speech here today and the Executive's actions are holding back Scotland from the potential that membership could give us. I commend the SNP amendment: it is clear, honest and straightforward. It looks forward to a European future in which we will fly the European flag and the saltire outside the Scottish Parliament, and will not have the confusion of not knowing what flags to fly at Scotland's Parliament on Europe day.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I, of course, support the amendment in Nicola Sturgeon's name. Debates of this nature are sometimes called motherhood-and-apple-pie debates and seem to be fairly mundane. In this debate, we have had a slightly different approach. I hope that the minister has been listening. She has been writing a great deal, but I do not know whether she has been signing her correspondence or writing down what is being said. The debate has, at times, allowed the ministerial team to get a flavour of concerns and ideas from all parties. To that extent it is almost consultative. There have been important contributions on certain issues, to which I hope that the deputy minister will respond in his summing up—I know that Malcolm Chisholm is closing the debate—and which I hope that the ministerial team will take away and consider. At the heart of the matter is the context in which we debate child health. Not only Nicola Sturgeon, but Elaine Smith and Donald Gorrie reminded us that the debate is about poverty. It is about the ability of people to afford good health. It is shameful that, in the first years of the 21st century, we should still be having a debate in which we have to use those terms. We must build and develop our society so that we do not have that problem in future and so that we have a rich  society that sees health, and the promotion of health, as vital. Margaret Smith reminded us that the debate is also about people. We are not talking only about statistics or intervention strategies; we are talking about people of all ages. We are talking about people and about the care that they show to one another. As this afternoon's debate has developed, people have taken such issues and divided them into particular concerns. I was struck by Adam Ingram's contribution. He told us about his considerable worry. It is a worry that many of us have heard about in an educational context, so we know the difficulties that it creates. It is a worry that requires urgent attention from ministers. I want to talk about three things. First, I want to talk about health as an integral part of our educational approach. We have warmly supported the Executive's community schools initiative, but we are concerned that there is still no long-term package of proposals to support and develop that initiative. The community schools initiative makes health a mainstream part of schooling—not just in what children learn, but in the care that the schools show for their communities. Promoting health through a community school is a very effective strategy. It is part of the joined-up government that must become the normal way of working. Without the community schools initiative, there would now be, after so few years, a major hole in health provision in many communities in Scotland. There are still some doubts as to how the initiative works. Many of us remember the nit nurse, but there is still no good policy for helping parents to cope with infestations of head lice. I have questioned the minister recently on that issue and I know that she is concerned—although from her reaction she seems to have forgotten that important moment in her day when she had to sign off questions about infestations of head lice. That is still a problem in almost every school in Scotland. Parents and teachers are concerned. A local GP in the south of Scotland advised me recently that doctors do not believe that enough is being done in schools. I hope that that is an area in which a very simple health intervention can help. The community schools initiative involves much broader interventions, and I am sure that Mr Chisholm will tell us about head lice when he replies. The second thing that I want to talk about is something that Margaret Smith touched on briefly—child mental health. At any one time, 20 per cent of children may be suffering from severe mental health problems or stress. In an investigation in recent months of the provision of mental health facilities for young people in the south of Scotland, I have been concerned to  discover how poor and patchy that provision is. Child mental health problems often lead to severe problems in later life—including addiction, broken marriages, broken households, depression and suicide. Treatment of young people is very important. However, one third of all children with mental health problems go untreated. We must look into the provision of child mental health services. The third thing is the subject of our amendment. My colleague Irene McGugan has strongly promoted the berry project as one way of bringing some fruit into children's lives. We all need a revolution in our eating habits; I know that because I have eaten with people in the chamber. We can only bring that about by sustained action in early days and we can do that by bringing fruit to young people. I hope that the minister will take our amendment in the spirit in which it is meant. It does not demand that Susan Deacon go out and set up a fruit stall today, although Nicola Sturgeon is suggesting that that would be useful alternative employment.

I am not responding to that remark. It was a good one and I hope that the Official Report caught it, but it would be rude to my colleague here to respond. Our amendment is designed to give the Executive the opportunity to set our proposal for free fruit as a target. I hope that that will come to fruition—if I may say that—in the near future. During the debate, we were asked to welcome the contribution that Glasgow City Council has made to providing fruit to young people. We do welcome it, and we want it to happen all over Scotland.

Just like in the Parliament.

There is a basic fact that the minister has to get hold of. His response to Alex Neil showed that he has not yet grasped it.

Everybody believes in promotion, everybody believes in marketing, and everybody believes in overcoming the misconceptions, but that will take time. In the short term, people require help to get them through. This afternoon, I asked about the cultural sector. Many of us are worried about that sector—the heritage and museums sector—because it is very fragile. Wanlockhead museum almost went bust last year. It was saved—not by the Executive but by a donation. That museum cannot open at the moment. It will have no visitors. The culture sector and every other sector need money to get them through. I am putting this as simply as I can. Will the minister understand and respond?

I welcome today's statement and confirm my party's support for the actions that are being taken to ensure that this year's diet produces results according to the criteria that the minister has listed. It is useful that the statement listed three clear criteria by which we may judge the success of the diet. I am slightly disappointed by the statement, which contained little that is new. All the announcements have been made before in one form or another. When Bill Morton gave evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee a month ago, he was closely questioned by all members of the committee, from all parties. I want to ask the minister a specific question about the diet, but there are also one or two details that he must consider. One of those is the commitment that was given by Bill Morton and John Ward, when I met them two weeks ago, to communicate directly with students, by means of either a targeted letter or a newsletter. That was not mentioned in the statement, but it is essential. The second detail concerns the review of the appeals process, which was promised for the coming year. There is vast dissatisfaction with what happened last year and a feeling that the process may not have been compliant with the European convention on human rights. We need to know how that review is moving ahead. We also need to know how the review of higher still is progressing. It is no great surprise that there has been difficulty in recruiting markers for English, when there has been such resistance to higher still and its concepts within the English teaching sector. The minister said, rightly, that the exam diet will start in a month's time. Over the coming month, many young people in Scotland will be revising and working hard with some trepidation. A simple  question needs to be answered. Before Christmas, it would have been foolish to give assurances that everything would be fine. It might even have been foolish to do that a month ago, but the young people of Scotland and their parents and families want to know that what went wrong last year has been clearly identified and will not go wrong this year. What is needed is not a bland reassurance about the diet, but an acknowledgement that the things that went wrong last time—many of which were identified by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report—will not go wrong this time. With the support of the SNP, will the minister find a way for himself or the SQA to directly reassure the young people who are worried?

Not yet.

To ask the Scottish Executive what immediate assistance it plans to give museums, heritage centres and historic attractions whose visitor numbers have been affected by the drop in tourist numbers resulting from the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. (S1O-3251)

I presume that that was an answer. I asked about immediate assistance. Many attractions open for the first time at Easter. This Easter, it will not be a normal opening for them, as there will be virtually no trade. Some attractions that try to remain open throughout the  year, such as Kilmartin House in Argyll, have seen their visitor numbers decimated. I hope that Mr Morrison and his friend the Minister for Sport, the Arts and Culture will put their heads together to find some way of filling the hole in museum budgets that is about to be created. Those attractions are fragile and do not generate much cash. They may find themselves unable to continue.

Will the member pay tribute to the work of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service, which is phoning each affected farmer from the control centre in Dumfries? It will continue to do that work and will increase it. The WRVS is making a major contribution, which should be noted.

Will the minister give way?

I shall oppose the appointment, but not on the basis that Euan Robson is unfit for it. Indeed, I have spoken to him and I think very highly of him. I am sorry that I cannot say that of some other members in the chamber. It is a difficult thing to be a business manager, even for a well-disciplined and well-ordered party such as the SNP, so It must be absolutely impossible for the Liberal Democrats. However, I must tell Mr Wallace that  to lose one business manager is a misfortune, but to lose two is careless. At 5 o'clock tonight we may lose a third if the piece from the Berwickshire News & East Lothian Herald that Mr Salmond quoted is true, because Euan Robson cannot, in all conscience, support today's motion if what he is reported to have said to the fishermen is true. Fortunately, however, there is a fourth candidate in the wings—George Lyon. We all heard his stomach-churning application for the post a few minutes ago, which was delivered with his customary charm. The Parliament and the Parliamentary Bureau are not a rubber stamp for the Executive. It cannot be business as usual in the Parliament if the bureau and the Executive believe that all they need to do is trot out another name, trot out another motion and try and rerun history and all will be well. My voting against Mr Robson's appointment today is not a vote against Mr Robson, but against what the Executive is doing in this country. We will go on voting against that until members of the Executive become democrats and, perhaps, until the Liberal Democrats become democrats, too.

I have a genuine point of order. [MEMBERS: "Oh."]

It will make a very refreshing change. Rule 4.8 of the standing orders requires you, as Presiding Officer, to notify the Parliament when a minister resigns. Obviously, that must happen before the Parliament agrees to the appointment of a new minister. There has been no such notification in the business bulletin, or in a statement or a message from you to MSPs. In those circumstances, I ask you to consider whether the debate can continue.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You mentioned that after you called the motion for debate. The announcement was therefore not made before the motion was called for debate, and indeed it was not made before the motion was lodged. That is contrary to the spirit of the standing orders. I ask you to consider that seriously. [Interruption.]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The chamber will note that not one Labour member is present. Have you been notified of any desire by the Executive to make a statement on its defeat this afternoon and the fact that it is the will of the Parliament that there should be a tie-up scheme? Do you know of any such statement? Perhaps the minister will enlighten us.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you reflect on the ludicrous nature of this morning's debate in terms of interventions? Some members will not take them and those who want to take them are being prevented from doing so by you.

Well, I think that the rule needs to be reconsidered.

With respect—

With respect, she was not in the last minute of her speech when you stopped the intervention, as she carried on speaking for more than a minute afterwards.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consultation it has had with South Lanarkshire Council with regard to the opencast development at Broken Cross Muir. (S1O-3028)

I thank the minister for his reply. He will be aware that opencast developments produce strong passions, both for and against. Can he give reassurance to people in the community, who are concerned that the arrangements for transportation breach the Executive's guidelines for the carrying of coal and that the nuisance and difficulty created will be considerable?

On that point—which was very well made—I notice that the Minister for Parliament is in his seat. I hope that he will note that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee has made a request to be involved in later stages of the bill, along with the Health and Community Care Committee. The fact that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and the Minister for Health and Community Care opened and closed the debate today symbolises the need for the involvement of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee in the bill.

The level of consensus in the chamber at some times today, particularly this afternoon is, although immensely encouraging, creating difficulties for people such as Mr McConnell and myself. We come from a generation of political bruisers, who are used to tearing each other's throats out at the slightest encouragement. I am sure that we can find the opportunity to do so again.

If Mr McConnell wishes to  intervene I am happy to allow that. I am older than Mr McConnell, but I have worn better. When one must listen Mr Monteith in consensual mode as well, it really does fairly take the breath away. I suspect that aliens may have stolen Mr Monteith and put a copy in his place.

Does Mr Monteith want to intervene? The importance of today's debate is shown by the fact that there is no amendment from either of the opposition parties, and by the very high quality of the contributions. I defer to Irene McGugan as the real expert on the matter; she has indicated strongly that the SNP is keen to engage with positive and constructive views from all parties in the chamber to seek the best for Scotland's children. I want to state my strong support for the Scottish youth parliament, but I have a number of questions that are outstanding to Mr McConnell about its funding. The youth parliament offers a major opportunity to have a body of people who can mirror the work that is going on in the chamber, who can speak for young people in Scotland, and who can learn about the processes of democracy without—as Mr Gorrie so eloquently and no doubt personally put it—the wrinklies being present. It is important that the Scottish youth parliament grows and develops, but it is desperately short of funding and has no full-time workers. That matter needs to be readdressed and I commend that action to Mr McConnell. My second point is about community schools. I strongly support the initiatives that are being taken on community schools. Every school has the potential to be a community school and to bring a range of disciplines to bear in a community setting, to make sure that health, social work and a variety of other disciplines work constructively with teachers for the benefit of young people. We have to build on that in every school in Scotland, not only in schools that are already so designated. I was at a meeting with Irene McGugan some days ago at which somebody referred to community schools as being "poor schools". What they were trying to say was that they thought that those schools were not as yet fully fleshed out or developed. We should put time and resources into fleshing them out, because there is a great benefit for young people and for communities in developing community schools. That is another matter in which I will be happy to support Mr McConnell as he develops it, although he is going fairly slowly at the moment—he needs to speed up a little. The question of the children's commissioner is important. Members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee will enter into that discussion in a  positive mode, and will support the idea of a children's commissioner. The debate has illustrated one or two of the many roles that a children's commissioner could perform. One particularly interesting role, which we should develop in our debates, is the way in which the Executive's child strategy—which is spreading down into local authorities—could be monitored and reported on by a children's commissioner. The commissioner could be the double lock of progress on the child strategy and I hope that we will enter that idea into the debate. I am also attracted to the idea of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee bringing forward legislation with the support of the Executive. That is something to explore. There are key things that we want to make sure happen in Scotland. It is good that a strong concern for children and young people—in all stages of their development, in the ways that they develop and in the huge variety of issues, problems and possibilities that they present to society—has been identified across all the parties, albeit with some difficulty here and there. That is something that we can build on. It is, perhaps, one of the good reasons why we have a Scottish Parliament and—as I said at the beginning—old bruisers and warhorses like Mr McConnell and myself will just have to get used to consensus.

I seek clarification in regard to the Conservative member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. The committee will consider the serious issue of a commissioner on the invitation of the minister. There is a broad assumption that we want to get it right. Is Bill Aitken indicating that the Conservatives will not be in support of the idea or that the Conservative member will engage positively in the committee to try to get the best solution to the problem, so that we can move forward together?

To ask the Scottish Executive what powers of direction it has in respect of the budget allocation to the Scottish Arts Council. (S1O-2955)

If that is so, will the minister explain why he thought fit to allocate an extra £1 million to Scottish Opera under direction to the Scottish Arts Council against the wishes and advice of so many people in Scotland?

The minister always gets full marks for invective, but none for his answers. I asked why he allocated that money. Will he answer a question for a change, instead of doing his usual impersonation of a grumpy old man?

In the process of consultation as to the appropriate date for the issuing of results, will the First Minister remind the SQA of the importance of giving adequate time for marking? The earlier the date is, the less time there is for marking. This year, there is less time for marking than there was last year. It  must never happen again.

I utterly reject the philosophy that is coming from Tony Blair—with the approval of Brian Monteith, God help us. That philosophy says that there should be privatisation and selection in schools. We need only clear that off now and we will not discuss it again.

Will David Mundell give way?

rose—

Age before beauty.

Mr Mundell was in Finland before Mr McConnell interrupted him. He now appears to have left Finland without talking about it. Finland does not publish school league tables, set national targets or use much nationally set assessment. However, education standards are higher in Finland than in Scotland. I thought that we might have a wee chat about Finland, but Mr Mundell seems unprepared to have one.

We are very much in favour of change.

David Mundell must be cloth-eared.

I am sorry that Mr Mundell has fallen into the Blairite trap of thinking more—

Was that it? Gosh, I am glad that I did not blink.

First, I congratulate the member on his change of shirt and tie, away from the yellow and red of yesterday. Let me make it quite clear, as I did to Mr  Monteith and Mr McConnell—if the member was not listening, I will make it clear to him again—that I believe that school handbooks, which contain that information and a range of other information, should be published as widely as possible. All of them should be on the internet, as the non-league tables—the ones that do not exist—are. Then we will have a rounded view. We will also encourage parents to go and see schools. That is the best way to do it.

rose—

My English prejudices include the fact that I was born in England, so I have a warm and sympathetic view of what takes place south of the border. However, I do not think that in education the English are ahead of Scotland. As Brian Monteith now approves of what they are doing, that proves that they are not.

No.

It is not "on your bike"; it is "on your shoes".

I entirely agree with the minister—

I would be very happy if the minister were prepared to take the opportunity that I have given him to refute completely that the debate that is taking place in England will have any part in setting his policies. If he is prepared to say that now, on the record, I promise that this is the last time that we will debate it.

The First Minister is never an easy act to follow, especially if one speaks English. I would like to outline the components of the motion in my name. It is like Gaul—divided into three parts. The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs is a classicist and understands these things. The first part is about what has been achieved. It is fair to give credit where credit is due. Yesterday, the minister was concerned about failing teachers. He has, of course, a series of predecessors who were failed or failing ministers—Raymond Robertson, Brian Wilson, Helen Liddell and Sam Galbraith. All of them failed to reach agreement or settlement with the Scottish teaching profession and failed to provide the context in which real development could take place in Scottish education. Where they failed, this minister has succeeded and I give credit to him. He may be in his post accidentally—the right man in the right place—but he has succeeded in achieving an agreement that will, I think, provide a period of stability in Scotland's schools and begin to provide a period in which there can be some consensus about what education is for. The great advantage of the settlement is that it gives us the opportunity to ask basic questions. What is education for? What type of educational system do we want in Scotland? How can we achieve it? The rest of my motion is about those issues. It asks the questions and it begins to give some answers. No party in this Parliament has a monopoly of educational wisdom or any other wisdom. There should be a vast debate in Scotland on what education is for. I hope that the minister will confirm this morning that he intends to bring forward a green paper on Scottish education. His department has planned to do so. We could then have a debate in the context of knowing that the major difficulty in building Scottish education has been removed and that we will have a period of co-operation and consensus in the classroom. It is unfortunate that the Labour amendment—or  the Executive amendment—to my motion cuts out the words "beneficial development", because we should be considering what beneficial developments there can be in Scottish education. I will talk about those developments in a moment, but before I do I would like to talk about the part of my motion that deals with distracting voices from elsewhere. Many people in Scotland are immensely concerned about the noises that they hear from south of the border as we build towards a general election. I do not know whether people in the chamber have read the Prime Minister's words from Monday. They make entertaining reading. We are used to the First Minister's syntax and he now appears to be writing for the Prime Minister, which is a worrying development. The Prime Minister said: "Diversity must become the norm, not the exception". That is probably impossible, but that is what the Prime Minister said. The message from south of the border could be welcomed only by bullet-headed reactionaries—which, of course, is not a reference to any member on the Tory benches. The message seems to be encapsulated in the Tory amendment. The message talks about privatisation, it talks about selection and it talks about levels of specialisation that are absolutely foreign to the Scottish educational system. Very generously, the SNP motion gives the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and the Executive an opportunity to say that they will not follow the route that is being laid out by the Prime Minister. I am happy to give them that opportunity, and I am happy to give them the opportunity to confirm that the Scottish educational debate will be one that matters and that we will not listen to, take account of or implement the type of things that we hear from south of the border. Parents are genuinely worried; teachers are genuinely worried. There are people in Scottish education who know that what is said by any Prime Minister today finds its way into the Scottish educational system tomorrow. I want to talk about one of the things that we hear about from south of the border—league tables—and about changes that we need to make. I know that the minister will tell us in his speech that there are no such things as league tables in Scotland. He may use the word that he used to describe them yesterday—mythic. If the minister would like to intervene, I would be happy to listen to him. In reality, much time and effort is expended in Scotland in producing what are essentially league tables. On the internet, incidentally, we have a Government and not an Executive—the site is called scotland.gov and not scotland.exec. No  doubt Mr McCabe will do something about that.

I think that scotland.gov sounds better than scotland.gov.uk—but then, I would. Mr McConnell is splitting hairs as usual.

Indeed. I am not going to get into an argument about lack of hair with anybody, especially not with the leader of my party. The lists of tables that are published on the internet show Scottish school costs, attendances and absences, and examination results. There is a website that asks, "How good are our results?" A league table is a league table is a league table. The information that is published on websites and published by the Government is essentially information that provides league tables in Scotland. Those league tables are damaging to Scottish education. They have found their way over the border thanks to the Scottish Conservative party and they have stayed over the border thanks to Scottish new Labour. They distort what can be done in Scottish education. A great deal of time and effort is expended by schools that are trying to get the right results in the league tables. Sometimes it happens by accident. If I were to ask members what schools in Foula, North Ronaldsay, Cliasmol, Eriskay, Iona, Torridon and Papa Westray have in common, the answer would be that they had perfect attendance in 1999. However, the purpose of publishing that information on the internet is not clear. Are there parents who are so interested in perfect attendance that they will uproot their children from Easterhouse or Pilton so that they can attend school in North Ronaldsay?

I am happy to hear a defence of Foula Primary School. I would love to have attended Foula Primary School. However, the publication of information about attendance at Foula Primary School is not necessarily of great benefit to those who live elsewhere. I am sure that the member for Shetland is interested in it, but not many others are. The information that is published is, to be frank, of little use to most people.

Mince indeed. As Kay Ullrich says, it is mince. The reason that the information was published in England was to begin to attract pupils from one school to another and to  encourage the competitive ethos between schools. There is no need for that in Scotland; it is contrary to the Scottish educational tradition and the time and effort that is expended on it is absolutely wrong. A great deal of work has been done on considering league tables throughout the United Kingdom. It is interesting to note that the best work that has been done in Scotland has been done by Dr Linda Croxford at the centre for educational sociology at the University of Edinburgh. Her conclusions are shortly to be published in an academic journal on educational research and evaluation. Her article has been subjected to full peer review. It is not an expression of opinion; it is an academic analysis of league tables. She says: "We conclude that the broad . . . targets derived using the . . . Audit Unit's methodology do not have statistical or educational validity". There is no statistical or educational validity either in league tables or in target setting. It is clear that we do not need the information that is in the league tables. Statutory instruments ensure that schools publish their own yearbooks and handbooks. That information could be made available on the internet—there is no reason why the handbook of every school in Scotland should not be made available if the Government really wishes parents to see the reality of schools. I would encourage that, rather than the present way of giving information. I hope that the Executive will listen. It could be argued that league tables should not exist at all. That is not to argue that targets and assessment should not exist.

Yes.

There is a great deal more information available than the information that is published by the Government. I am happy for all the information to be published. That is why I suggest that all school handbooks are published. That would give complete information on every school in a context that parents can understand, and would also encourage parents to visit schools.

I have seen them, read them, marked them and inwardly digested them. I am  sure that it is easier for someone who is butterfly minded simply to flick through the league tables. In something as important as education it is better to encourage parents not only to look at information on the school but to visit the school and to talk to other parents about it. That is what we should encourage. On target setting and assessment, it is clear that in any good educational system there should be targets set by teachers. Children should be continually assessed by their teachers. There is something very Stalinist, very five-year-plan-ish, about insisting that targets should be set and assessment should be imposed from the centre. Attempts have been made in recent years, as Mr McConnell indicates, to try to devolve target setting to schools. The reality is that schools still have to try to perform to criteria set elsewhere. That skews the learning that is done in schools. There is no doubt that children are being taught simply to meet targets and to pass assessments. There is more externally moderated assessment in Scottish schools than in any other schools in Europe. We do not see any benefit from it in the results. There is a place for target setting and for externally moderated assessment, but the people who sat on the inquiry into the Scottish Qualifications Authority—and Cathy Peattie was one of them—know that one of the major problems for the SQA was the burden of data that went into the system, which it could not cope with. That burden of data came from the huge range of demands made on schools by externally moderated assessment that, in evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee that Ian Jenkins will also remember, the schools said was unnecessary. All teachers—good and bad teachers, but especially good teachers, of whom there are a great many—set targets for their pupils and assess them. They know that there should be some external checking of the work that they have done. However, constantly to examine the mechanism, for ever to be taking the watch to pieces to make sure that it is working, is very destructive in the classroom. Time is spent on very narrow learning tasks rather than on the broadest learning tasks. The motion encourages the Executive to do a number of things. It encourages the Executive to celebrate the settlement in Scottish classrooms and not to complain about "failing teachers" but to work with other people to solve that problem.

That is a very simplistic approach from someone who knows the complexity of the system.

I will take no lessons in understanding from Mr Monteith. To answer Mr McAveety's question, I would need to have his definition of a school that it is not achieving. Certainly it would be necessary to look very closely at the school. As I said at the beginning of my speech, let us engage in a debate about what is right for schools, and let us try to engage in it together in the Parliament as we have done in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I am being clear about what I am in favour of: an educational system that allows people to learn, uninterrupted by over-targeting, over-assessment and without that learning being skewed by the publication of league tables that are not useful and are, indeed, damaging. As Mr McAveety knows, I am in favour of many other things in education as well, which we will debate over the weeks and months to come. The two amendments to our positive motion are extremely unhelpful. The Tory amendment is simply reactionary and makes no educational sense whatsoever. It is an amendment from a party that has learned nothing either in government or in opposition and that has a bankrupt right-wing ideology. I am more hopeful about the Executive amendment. Vague as it is, light as it is—as Mr McConnell indicates—by not saying very much, it gives me an indication that the Executive is sympathetic to changing the way in which things are done in Scottish schools. There are some good signs from Mr McConnell. When he came into office he took out of the filing cabinet the file that Sam Galbraith had put away that is marked "All the positive things that we should be doing". The things we are talking about today are also positive. I hope that Mr McConnell will consider them seriously and that, as we  debate them over the months to come, we will get to a definition of Scottish education that allows Scottish young people to learn in the way that the Scottish traditions of education have shown is the best way. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the acceptance of the McCrone settlement by Scottish teachers and looks forward to a new era of co-operation and consultation between government, teachers, parents and education authorities which could result in much beneficial development of our educational system; rejects the moves towards selection and privatisation of education outlined by the Prime Minister in recent speeches; expects the Scottish Executive to make no attempt to imitate such policies which are not only directly contrary to the Scottish educational ethos but would re-create resentment and division in our schools; calls upon the Scottish Executive to emphasise its desire to improve Scotland's distinctive education system by following the example of the Northern Ireland Executive in abandoning league tables, and further encourages the Scottish Executive to re-examine critically target setting for schools and the burden of externally imposed assessment on Scotland's young people.

I welcome the minister's statement. The SNP agrees with substantial parts of it, and welcomes the fact that over 80 per cent of the teachers have endorsed the agreement. That is immensely encouraging. Taking the Valentine's day theme further, this should have been a day on which we could have recited the rhyme, "Roses are red, violets are blue; Jack loves the teachers and they love him too." Unfortunately, it is not. I ask Mr McConnell to say whether he will distance himself from the front page of The Scotsman today, which says: "McConnell: bad teachers have to go". By substituting the name with Wilson, Liddell or Galbraith, that headline would have read the same over the past two years. In his statement, the minister said that he is seeking a change "in a culture and an atmosphere which, for a generation, has been characterised by suspicion, mistrust and entrenchment." I am sure that he wants that change, and I wonder how the approach reported by The Scotsman contributes to it. The SNP welcomes the reduction of bureaucracy, but does the minister believe that increasing bureaucracy will achieve that? There are three reviews, a couple of studies and a gatekeeper unit in his statement. Would it not be better to reduce bureaucracy by reducing the burden on schools and young people of assessment, targeting and the publication of league tables? Those are matters that we will have the chance to debate tomorrow. For most classroom teachers, the reduction of that burden would make a huge contribution to the reduction of bureaucracy.

This is a speech. Where is the question?

Come on!

To ask the Scottish Executive what process it is undertaking to seek public views on the appointment of a new chair of the Scottish Arts Council. (S1O-2921)

I think that that is the first time that I have had a substantive answer to a question, which is surprising. I congratulate Mr Boyle, but would not it have been far better had the process been handled such that the public, the artistic community and, in fact, the whole of Scotland could have been involved, rather than just the minister?

To ask the Scottish Executive what average class size in primary schools will be achieved by 2003. (S1O-2871)

I am surprised that the minister cannot project class sizes, as his figures until now have been projected. Does he accept that achievement of the target of under 30 has gone slower than the Executive expected, as indicated in the programme for government? Does he also accept that a great deal of current research shows that there is very little difference between class sizes of 25 and 30? Will he be more ambitious for Scotland's schools, starting by getting more accurate figures, so that we know where he is going?

I shall try not to show any zealotry in my speech. Mr Swinney has drawn attention to the handy nature of the programme for government booklet. Last year's document was much larger and it was a different shape; this year's is ring-bound. I look forward to a continuation of that policy—the Executive is obviously going into the publishing business, so I will make a couple of suggestions. Next year, the book could contain a pop-up First Minister. The following year, we could be offered a cut-out-and-keep Jack McConnell, made from sticky-backed plastic. The book could also be shrink-wrapped, with a CD of Ross Finnie's greatest hits on the cover or—considering the commemorative gifts that now accompany many publications—one of Tom McCabe's rubber truncheons. The reality is that the document is full of style and photos that signify nothing. We heard the soundtrack to it from the First Minister this morning, in a speech that was—I am trying to be generous, Presiding Officer—gibberish. The First Minister said: "The SNP does not believe in Scotland", but that is meaningless. Scotland is not a faith or a talisman; it is a country—we are standing in it. The First Minister went on to promise universal access to the internet—good news for the inhabitants of the planet Pluto. The Administration has no substance whatever. It is built around a cult of personality—which is bizarre, considering the First Minister's personality. He was described memorably by Alan Taylor in the Sunday Herald as a man who speaks in crossword clues. Both of the statements that I mentioned are good examples of that. The programme for government is a hollow document. It is not what the First Minister described as being an "honest compact" with the people of Scotland. The truth of that can be proved by a simple comparison of this year's text with last year's. On education, 54 per cent of all the pledges are not new, but are repetitions of aims that have not been achieved. On sport and culture, the figure is 67 per cent. The document consists of repetition dressed up with photos—some of the repetition is older than last year's document. I am worried that Helen Liddell has returned to haunt us. On 11 March 1999, Mrs Liddell said that by 2000 there would be one modern computer—I do not know what an old computer is—for every five secondary pupils and one for every 7.5 primary pupils. The target date is now 2002. That aim is simply a repetition.  The Executive has no ideas. It is a body that has no policies and simply makes things up as it goes along. It is deceiving the people of Scotland. This document, whether it is sitting on a bookshelf, being handed out in the chamber or being delivered through a letterbox—if one has a letterbox big enough—is a cynical sham. It says that everything is happening and that there is lots of good news. Mike Rumbles has given us his reasons to be cheerful—if one looks at Mike Rumbles, that is surprising—but the reality is that there is a lack of achievement. The document represents spin over substance and rhetoric over reality. That was embodied in the First Minister's speech this morning. In Scotland we need a Government that is ambitious and wants to achieve things. We need the type of Government that is described in the SNP amendment—a Government that uses the powers and resources of Scotland to achieve for the people of Scotland. We certainly need that in regard to education. On class sizes, the ambition in this document is not enough. No educational research shows that the reduction of class sizes to 30 or 25 makes the difference that we need. I know that the SNP will introduce ambitious ideas and I know that the SNP's ideas attract the people of Scotland. Our job is made easier when one compares our ideas and vigour with the Executive's nonsense.

Will the member illustrate his point about the operation of coalition government with reference to last Thursday's events? Is the idea behind coalition government to take the Executive to the brink of defeat, or is it operating well in some other way? I think that we should be told.

There are not many of them.

There is no point.

Yes!

Will the member give way?

Yes is the answer.

On a point of order, Presiding  Officer. I seek your guidance. There will be many questions about the bill and the policies that the Government is pursuing as the bill goes through the Parliament. The minister responsible for enterprise and lifelong learning is Wendy Alexander, who showed contempt for the Parliament by arriving at only 4.20 pm. To whom are the questions to be addressed: to Mr Stephen, who works in a different department, or to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning?

Not yet.

I am intrigued by Duncan McNeil's arguments. It is the first time that I have heard the argument that the best way in which to increase access to education is to charge more money for it. It sounds like something that Brian Monteith might say—it is nonsense. I will start by pointing out the significant thing about the debate. In every stage 1 debate that there has been in the Parliament, the minister with responsibility for the bill has led on it. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is not here today. I am sure that Nicol Stephen is an able minister, but he is not now responsible for the bill. The Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic has been reduced to a non-speaking role on the bill—in either of his languages. That summarises the difficulty that the Executive has with the bill: it is too hot a potato for Wendy Alexander, who is not known for being backward at coming forward. The only person whom she could get to introduce the bill was, of course, a Liberal—one of the gullible Liberals who put themselves up on any occasion, to do any job, no matter what it is.

I will come to Mr Lyon in a moment. He will not be ignored. I am glad that the Alasdair Morrison has returned to the chamber. The fact that Nicol Stephen is leading on the bill summarises the Executive's attitude. The bill is, to use a word from one of Alasdair Morrison's languages, a complete and utter bùrach—it had to be withdrawn and reintroduced.

I see that minister who has been landed with the bill is rising to intervene. I would be happy to hear what he has to say.

Indeed I do. I seem to recall 11 minutes of non-substantive points from Nicol Stephen—as usual, I am doing better than he is.  Let me come to a very substantive point: the Executive is embarrassed by the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. The bill is incompetent and is designed to cover the political embarrassment of the Liberal Democrats—it is a fig leaf. We s hould not be debating such a bill. Let me remind the minister that he was elected on the principle of free access to higher education, yet he stands before us talking about something altogether different. The serious issue of the debate is student debt. On Sunday night, "Panorama" was devoted to debt and showed us an extract from a 1987 programme in which a fresh-faced Tony Blair talked about the war against debt and poverty. Here we are listening to a group of ministers and MSPs who benefited from free access to higher education and who are content to allow a new generation of students to fall into debt. That debt turns young people off higher education, drives them out of higher education and makes them regret that they ever entered higher education. After the Scottish Qualifications Authority debacle, the last thing that we should be doing is deterring young people from higher education, yet that is what the bill does. Duncan McNeil's point about charging for access is nonsense.

No. That point is a mere fig leaf for a bill that is shameful.

No. I am sorry, but I must continue. We need to make people respect politics and the Scottish Parliament. Sadly, the bill does nothing of the sort. Instead, the bill shows that it is possible to put together a tawdry political compromise to save the Liberal-Labour Executive. That was its purpose. Unfortunately, the bill has introduced one or two measures that are worth supporting. That is a clever move—probably the work of Nicol Stephen. There are one or two things that are worthy of support, such as the provisions for distance learning and the long-awaited changes in council tax charging. However, the heart of the bill is not worthy of support. It is a shame that the bill is before the chamber and it is even more shameful that the minister responsible for it cannot come and speak to it.

Will the minister give way?

He said he would give way.

For heaven's sake.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The confusion about what we were voting on in this afternoon's proceedings—arising from the fact that we were not voting on the minister's statement and did not know whether the statement could be questioned—raises considerable questions for the chamber. I see that the convener of the Procedures Committee is in his place. I ask you and your fellow Presiding Officers to reflect on what took place this afternoon and to seek a referral to the Procedures Committee so that we are never again in the position where the procedure confuses members and—I believe—abuses the Parliament.

But where is the minister going?

I entirely endorse what the minister says about the nature of proceeding with the national audit, but I am sure that he is aware of the surprise of many in the museum sector who know of the work done by John Compton and others to undertake essentially a national audit; the work has already been substantially done. That work can be enhanced, but our going back to basics and redrawing the national audit will slow  things down. Does the minister recognise that it might be possible to speed things up by taking advantage of the work already done in the national museums?

Nor they you.

I congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate. She raises an issue of considerable importance to Glasgow and Scotland. The Glasgow collections are some of the finest in Europe. They have usually been well managed and they are eclectic. Much material has been drawn together, most importantly in the Burrell collection, which is the most extraordinary magpie collection that one could want to see. The museum sector in Scotland has enormous difficulties. As the minister will no doubt say, Glasgow museums must be considered in that context. We have not developed the right structures to preserve the artefacts and the items that are held in a range of collections. How do we safeguard and support the collections in Scotland? That question is not primarily about buildings. Sometimes, we get hung up on buildings and do not look far enough into the collections they hold. From the day it was announced, I supported the idea of developing a national audit. I do not think that that has moved far enough or fast enough. A national audit implies that there is a national collection. A range of items exists that it is probably the responsibility of the Scottish Government, in partnership with many bodies, to protect, preserve, exhibit and share with the communities in Scotland. Pauline McNeill is right to say that the items are not hidden away or there because they are there. They should live and be accessible. People should learn from them and celebrate and enjoy them. We must move towards having a national collection that is held in partnership. In Glasgow, the partnership is skewed against the local authority and the people of Glasgow, who meet a disproportionate part of the cost. The cost-sharing arrangements must involve a better partnership. Relationships are skewed in other places, as several museums must meet high costs and hold items that are of national significance, because they exist in Scotland, as well as international  significance. The long-term solution is to establish a national collection that is held by a range of partners. Some precious items can be in only one place. For example, Brownsbank—Hugh MacDiarmid's cottage near Biggar—holds a valuable collection of the items with which MacDiarmid surrounded himself in the last years of his life. It would make no sense to hold the collection anywhere else in Scotland because its particular significance is that it is in the cottage in which he and his wife lived in their declining years. There are items like that in the Glasgow collection; there are other items that, from time to time, it might be wise to share more widely round Scotland and the world. The difficulty with the national cultural strategy is that we are not moving fast enough or far enough. There are good parts of the museum sector that are falling out of national significance because they are not being supported. There is a risk in Glasgow—a risk that I am sure will be avoided, but which it is wise to point out—of damage to collections, of access closures and of a decay in the value it can put on its collections and its museums because it cannot support them financially. I hope that the minister will say what the vision is of the national collection, of the partnerships that he hopes will take place and of the finance—regrettable but essential—that will be necessary to sustain, build and develop the national collection. The funding of museums in Scotland is historically low. We have the problem in the Royal Museum of Scotland that neither the exhibits nor the exhibitions are being renewed quickly enough. Museums are a big challenge—a challenge that I enter into in the spirit of supporting what is being done and perhaps speeding it up a little. I am sure that that is what we all feel, because there would be nothing worse than finding that what we hold precious is dying and decaying before our eyes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although I am no longer the Scottish National Party's business manager, I am sure that the motion is winging its way to the Presiding Officer. Sir David, you are correct to say that the change to the motion is within standing orders. Nothing that has been done is contrary to standing orders. Mr McCabe, of all people, should recognise that politics is a fast-moving business.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given the intensity of the desire to investigate this matter, will you rule that there should be an intense investigation into how the material from this morning's statement appeared in the newspapers. That is the issue.

I shall talk about the A75 and the motion. I am sure that the Liberals will find that surprising. I commend the Tories for securing this debate; today we see the more enlightened face of Scottish Conservatism. I also commend the administration of Dumfries and Galloway Council for the work that it has done in encouraging all parties to be involved in this issue—the council has met and briefed all parties. As Murray Tosh said, we should also commend the commercial sector for the real interest that it is showing in an issue that is vital to it. The only party that cannot be commended today is the Labour party. I am sorry that the minister made a misguided speech about competing priorities; I am also sorry that Elaine Murray was so defensive. Today we have an opportunity to debate an important issue. It does not matter who brings it to the chamber; what is important is that we get some agreement on it. The minister spoke about competing priorities and said that each of us could take up one of them. The Liberals took that literally, but it was a red herring. In reality, special circumstances dictate that we take some action now on the A75. There are safety reasons for that and, as my friend Mr Morgan indicated, there is the community requirement. There are reasons to do with the designation of the road as a European route of major importance. There are interests from Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. There is the crucial fact that a large number of jobs depend on the route. The council's unpublished economic study indicates that the route directly affects something like 1,160 jobs in the community and 2,500 in Scotland as a whole. There is also a strong indication that a large number of other jobs in the Stranraer and Wigtown area are dependent on the route. Stranraer is the busiest port in the United Kingdom after Dover and is clearly a major asset to the Scottish economy. The sea crossing to Northern Ireland is the shortest that exists from Scotland: indeed, it is possible to see Northern Ireland from Galloway. The route has been much used, but there is a danger that it will decay and that the link, and jobs, will disappear. Those jobs are unlikely to move elsewhere in Scotland, despite the development in Troon. They are much more likely to move south, where transport links,  such as the improved A55 link, are vital. The message from this debate is clear. This is not an opportunity for the minister simply to say that there are lots of claims and that the Executive will do things. It is not an opportunity for her to evade reality, as her amendment does. It is an opportunity to recognise that there is all-party commitment to this unique case, which requires urgent action. For the minister simply to roll schemes forward year after year, for her officials to assure the council that action is being taken and then for nothing to happen is the best guarantee of job losses in Stranraer and of the decay and disappearance of the crossing. The matter requires urgent action, not complacency or civil service evasion. That is being said not just by the SNP, not just by the Tories, not just by the Liberals—although they have not said it today—and not even just by Labour: all parties are saying it. All communities in the south-west, and many people outside the south-west, are also saying that the route is a priority for Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I use the roads to which Mr Lyon refers and I, too, am concerned about them. We have an hour for this debate. Mr John Farquhar Munro, who is a very close friend of mine, almost sang us "The Road to the Isles" and we now have landslips in Argyll. Could we debate the subject that is on the business list?

The minister is not here yet.

The minister should be ashamed.

No.

The place that is occupied on one of the committees by, I think, Robin Harper was an SNP place that we gave up to him, so Tavish Scott's remark was ungracious. While I am on my feet, will Tavish Scott withdraw the motion, to allow negotiations to continue? He has not yet answered that question. It is the key point.

I will react very briefly to a point just made by Mr Rumbles. I have never signed up, as a business manager or an ex-business manager, to the paranoia that those in the Parliament sometimes feel about the business managers. If Mr McCabe's motion is passed today, I might take up that point of view, because it will be passed by brute strength. It will be passed not by argument or negotiation or according to the founding principles of the Parliament, but because Mr McCabe wants it to pass and is strong-arming his party and, unfortunately, sections of the Liberal Democrats, into passing it. I am glad that Mr McLeish has now arrived because I was about to quote him, and it is better to do that to his face. The foreword to the consultative steering group report, in his name as the chair of the CSG, states that "the establishment of the Scottish Parliament offers the opportunity to put in place a new sort of democracy in Scotland, closer to the Scottish people and more in tune with Scottish needs." According to Mr McCabe, that is done; the job is over. No, Mr McCabe, the job is still under way—as he himself has said, devolution is a process. If his motion is passed today, it will breach that promise and the detail of the CSG, and it will even breach the Scotland Act 1998—schedule 6 refers to the need to represent the balance of parties in the Parliament in the committee structure. I remind members that the Labour party has 43 per cent of the seats. It will end up with 53 per cent of the convenerships. That is unfair. Mr McCabe can express it in any way he wishes. Mr Scott can make his usual elegant justifications, no doubt making angels dance on the head of a pin. I am sorry about his involvement, and I am doubly sorry about Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's involvement. However, I have to say that they are not the villains of the piece. Indeed, even Mr McCabe is not the villain of the piece—although perhaps I am being too kind. Last week, Mr McCabe was not a conspicuous success in his role as the thinker of the Scottish Government; he has now returned to the role of the hired muscle of the Scottish Government. In reality, it is the First Minister who can stop this; it is the organ grinder who can say that enough is enough. If Mr McLeish insists on this course of action—if he allows it to happen—he will be walking away directly from the work that he did as chair of the CSG. That would be a great pity. Let me make Mr McCabe an offer. At the end of his speech, he offered what I hope was an olive branch of reconciliation. He said that if the SNP were prepared to accept a renegotiation of the  pick of the committees, we would be able to preserve the balance. I hope that that offer was genuine. I ask Mr McCabe to withdraw the motion on the basis that that was acceptable. Will he allow us to go and discuss the matter, or will he force the motion through the Parliament—as he can—with the help of the Tories and some of the Liberal Democrats? In so doing, Mr McCabe will get what he wants, but will destroy the principles of the Scottish Parliament.

Many people would be prepared to accept that position. However, does Lord James support the proposal that the Labour party, with 43 per cent of the members of this Parliament, should have 53 per cent of the convenerships? The Labour party would be  prepared to accept that proposal, but would the Conservatives? That is the question for Lord James, and I hope that he will answer it. If he supports that proposal, he will have gone against his own argument in the first minute of his speech.

Does Lord James support the proposal?

Can the Minister for Parliament outline those principles? The key principle of d'Hondt—this is the reason why we have the system—is to allocate places fairly, so that no party has a major advantage according to its proportion. Does the minister accept that his proposal will give 53 per cent of the convenerships to a party with 43 per cent of members? That is contrary to the principles of d'Hondt.

Will the minister give way?

Jamie Stone's point was interesting. An offer was made to the Minister for Parliament to discuss the allocation of convenerships so that exactly what he wished would take place—however, there would be an application of d'Hondt, in fairness. Can I make this point to the minister—

My point would be to swap. In other words, can I make the point to the minister that, in—

I pay tribute to the minister for accepting two years ago the fairness of the system whereby the Labour party would not have a majority in every committee. That was a creditable action; what the minister is doing today is a discreditable action.

On a point of order.

It is on the same issue. If the minister has given you an assurance that she did not provide the information to The Herald and her civil servants have given her a similar assurance, an offence—possibly a criminal offence—has been committed in that information and papers have been taken and leaked to The Herald . Will you seek an assurance that, if the minister and her civil servants did not do it, she is investigating thoroughly who did?

Does the minister agree that, whatever happens in the McCrone negotiations, there is already a developing crisis in the availability of supply primary teachers in almost every part of Scotland—a situation that will be exacerbated by winter illness? Are there any actions that the minister plans to take urgently to try to ensure that Scottish children do not suffer over the next few months because of the severe shortage of supply primary teachers?

I thank the minister for delivering that statement on behalf of what I am happy to call the Scottish Government.  Does the minister accept that Scottish National Party members are happy that McCrone is coming to a conclusion and that we share a wish for a comprehensive, just settlement in Scotland's schools, which will usher in a period of peace and stability? Does not the minister find it incredible, as do the teaching unions and many parents, that—after almost four years of discussion and negotiation; after the review that was set up in May 1997 under the Scottish Joint Negotiating Committee for Teaching Staff in School Education; after the negotiations that started in September 1998; after the failure of those negotiations in September 1999; after the establishment of the McCrone committee following a statement made in this chamber by the minister's predecessor, also in September 1999; after the report of the McCrone committee in May 2000; after 18 December 2000, when groups were meant to reach a conclusion and write up their reports; and after two weekends so far this year during which there has been speculation, spinning and doubt—he is still unable to come to this chamber and tell us anything at all? All that the minister has told us—in the closing paragraph of his statement—is that he wants "a modern education system and a teaching profession that is equipped and ready for the challenges of the 21 st century." That is not progress; it is a truism. When will the minister be able to tell the unions and the people who really matter—the teachers, the parents and the children—what is on offer and how much it costs? When will he be able to tell the local authorities whether they will be funded? When will he be able to come to the chamber to put an end to four years of discussion rather than telling us nothing at all?

That is, by the member.

In the context of the minister's discussions with representatives of COSLA on 21 st century government, has he taken a slightly narrower focus and considered the possible settlement of the McCrone talks? Has he given a cast-iron guarantee to local authorities concerning the funding of the McCrone settlement, if a settlement is reached? Worries about that are emerging in local authorities, most recently in Dumfries and Galloway Council, representatives of which I met on Monday.

Will the minister give a commitment that, when the inspector visits, he will not only speak to the acting head teacher and staff, but talk fully and comprehensively to the parents, the school board and, above all, the children and that he will reflect their views in his report to ministers? I think that that will reassure the people who are in the gallery today.

Will the member give way?

It is a short question.

I congratulate Lord James Douglas-Hamilton on securing the debate, and I congratulate the parents and pupils of Abercorn Primary School on ensuring that the debate was secured. Their campaign has been influential. They have been writing and e-mailing and have even erected signs that are visible from the motorway. I understand that the council objected to them. The Stalinism of  West Lothian Council clearly knows no bounds. I must say to Mary Mulligan that I do not accept that the chamber should not debate the issue. Mr McLetchie made the point that it is now a decision for the minister; it is right and proper that the chamber should call the minister to account for a decision that he may make. Even if that were not so, if—as when the Education, Culture and Sport Committee intervened on the Argyll schools—an injustice is being done and a group of people feel badly done by so that they do not trust the democratic process, who else should they go to but the Scottish Parliament? That is what we are here for.

Mary Mulligan will not be surprised to hear that my second point centres on the consultation process. This consultation process was as deeply flawed as the consultation process on the Argyll schools, as indeed are all consultation processes on the closures of small schools. When I visited the school yesterday, I heard the same things that I have heard almost endlessly on such matters—parents feel that the rules are set by the local authority. Dealing with local authority consultation documents is like herding cats; every time there is an answer to one of the issues, they change the argument. I agree with Margaret Ewing that we need a nationally agreed set of criteria for closing schools. Brian Wilson attempted to set such criteria at a meeting in Dunoon. I was standing outside that meeting demonstrating against the closure of my wife's school and was not allowed inside. Now that I have been allowed into this Parliament, I want to pursue the issue so that we have a nationally understood set of criteria for school closures on educational—and no other—grounds. Having spoken to parents and others, I am convinced that this is a case of gerrymandering. It is gerrymandering to fill up a school elsewhere and to affect the catchment area of secondary schools. The council, the director of education and the people around him want this school closed; they intend to close it and have found the arguments to do so, no matter what democratic opposition there might be. I am not necessarily making the point against West Lothian Council. The situation happens elsewhere and I will support the right of small schools to exist everywhere in Scotland because of the quality and intensity of the educational  experience. No evidence anywhere in the world suggests that small schools are not effective. Indeed, there is increasing evidence from all over the world—for instance, from America—that learning in smaller units is very valuable. The children of Abercorn Primary School are privileged to go to that school; although there are one or two disadvantages, there are huge advantages. We should be glad of that situation and make sure that it continues. I ask the minister to address that issue, because today is a test of the attitude not just towards rural schools, but towards the quality and vision of education that we have and want to provide for the whole of this diverse nation.

The minister indicated that the new system will not ensure compliance with the ECHR. That implies that one of the issues that must be considered over the next year is  compliance with the ECHR. Will the minister address that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The opening speeches have taken us almost to 11.35 am—the debate is due to finish at 12.30 pm. I believe that, under rule 8.14.3, I may suggest that the debate be extended by half an hour, with the agreement of the chamber. Otherwise, few back benchers will have the opportunity to speak.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. With respect, we have not voted on the issue of extending the debate because of the number of back-bench members who wish to speak. It is therefore possible for the chamber to vote on that issue.

I regret the fact that we could not have a full three-hour debate today. That would have been important for the many members who want to speak and the many views that should be heard. I regret the fact that the Executive insisted on coupling the issue with the earlier debate instead of accepting the SNP offer of using time tomorrow. Having said that, I agree with Mary Mulligan that it is important to separate the issues. We have already debated the issue of ministerial responsibility this morning. In this debate, we can take a much broader view of the unanimous recommendations of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. It is important to note that there was no recommendation in the printed report that was not unanimous. There was division on one recommendation, but the printed report presents a  unanimous view of what the committee said. That is vital because it shows the huge consensus on the issue. The committee report is a model of its kind in many ways, in particular because it takes a minority position into the body of the report, allows it to be presented, indicates how that was voted on and takes the view that a diversity of opinion on some issues does not jeopardise the unanimity of view on many others. I hope that other committees will take that stance. Like Mary Mulligan, I pay tribute to the range of people involved in the report. At times, taking part in this detailed inquiry was a rather surreal experience—I found myself enjoying debating with Johann Lamont and agreeing with Ken Macintosh and his obsessions with grammar. At times, the entire committee was in agreement and pursued questions and points as a single entity. That is a great encouragement to the Scottish Parliament, just as today's debate and the scrutiny of the SQA should be a great encouragement. I pay tribute to the clerks, who worked very hard and to the advisers, particularly Dr Hamish Long, who is sitting in the visitors gallery. Dr Long's voluminous knowledge of Scottish examination procedure was absolutely essential. As I said at Friday's press conference, if he had not existed, it would have been necessary to invent him. I welcome the minister's statement. In recent weeks, it has become almost a tradition for me to welcome what Jack McConnell says. I will take issue with one of his comments in a moment, but I think that he has grasped both the urgency and significance of the situation. We need to make radical changes, but in such a way that we can attempt—that is an important qualification—to guarantee not only a smooth diet next year, but that we get the Scottish examination system back on the rails. The announcement on the remuneration of markers is welcome. That is a huge issue. People do not mark exam scripts just for money, but they certainly need an adequate reward. I accept that the supervision arrangement has been set up, although I do not think that it will be as effective as having an individual supervising the SQA day to day. The new arrangement may be helpful and I look forward to seeing how it works. I hope that the deputy minister will keep the committee members informed about its progress. The simplification of certificates is essential. I regret the decision not to return appealed scripts. That was a matter of debate. There were different views in the committee. I know that the suggestion has met resistance from some of the teaching unions, among other groups. I am not saying that Ian Jenkins speaks for the teaching unions, but he certainly argued that case strongly in the committee, as did Johann Lamont. However, the  matter raises issues of accessibility and openness. There is no reason why the pupils involved should not see scripts that have been marked and assessed. That principle of accessibility and openness applies to the Parliament and its founding principles and should apply throughout Scottish public life. I will argue that the system that is already in place south of the border should be implemented in future years.

That is a key issue. When I visited the SQA, I asked to see several scripts to see what the marks on the paper looked like. I hope that the minister will consult more widely than just the SQA on the return of scripts. I want to stick to two issues: first, the events of yesterday, and secondly, what happens from now on. If I may fall into what might be called a McCliché, yesterday starts today. Yesterday's announcement from the SQA, coupled with the First Minister's comments, creates a problem. If, almost halfway through the period between exam results and the start of the exam diet, the Executive and the SQA demonstrate that they are not talking to each other—that was the significance of yesterday's announcement—it is clear that there is a problem. The committee's report said that one of the reasons for the crisis last August was a failure of communication between the SQA and the Executive. If that has started again, a considerable difficulty is ahead of us. I urge the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and the First Minister to re-establish communication, if it does not seem to be taking place, to find out what the problem is and to ensure that everybody is singing from the same hymn sheet. I do not consider the First Minister's assurances today and at the weekend to be leadership, as Duncan McNeil has described them, but I consider them to be a touch of playing to the gallery. I want the system to succeed. Everybody wants success next year, but we cannot stand here and will it. We must take action to produce success. I hope that the action that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and his department are taking will produce success, but let us try to keep to that level at that moment. We should put in the effort,  not just make the statements. Another issue arises from the report. It is touched on only tangentially, but it might be the most significant issue of the entire SQA crisis. Even in the huge dark cloud, there is the slightest part of a silver lining. I do not take Ian Jenkins's view that we had to have the crash to know what was wrong. That is a highly cynical view for a Liberal Democrat. It surprises me, and I am a great admirer of Mr Jenkins. A tiny sliver of hope lies in the fact that the crisis might make us question our whole system for educating our children. Professor Lindsay Paterson develops that point well in his new book on the exam crisis. I will not précis that, but I will say that we have accepted for too long that our education system requires—in the words that the English schools minister used a couple of weeks ago—pressure and support. We put substantially too much pressure into the system, and not enough support. Pupils are subject to the demands of continuous assessment, league tables, performing and even the demand that—a generally accepted view in the chamber, but perhaps not a wise one—all education is focused simply on the need to find jobs and that all education is for work. I asked the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs about that when the Education, Culture and Sport Committee discussed the national priorities last week. Even he could not answer one of my questions about what the national priorities mean. We accept those ideas too readily. Some systems in Europe and elsewhere do not lean so heavily on pressure or continuous assessment, and they are not less successful. Indeed, often they are more successful. They educate the whole child, develop the whole personality and contribute to the whole of society. Much must be done between now and next summer, and much must be done thereafter. I hope that, as we work our way through the crisis, the small sliver of silver lining will begin to grow and that we will all be able to examine the purpose of education, to make pupils, parents and teachers more satisfied and perhaps make them enjoy the educational experience more. If we enrich the experience, we will have a better Scotland. Out of the tragedy comes that possibility. I look forward to debating it over the weeks and months to come, as part of the process of change that the SQA requires and which is taking place now as a result of the reports.

The First Minister is talking about a series of operational failures. Surely he will accept that the minister who is responsible for the delivery of exam results—the operation—should have a responsibility under any theory to resign if those operations go wrong.

Will the member give way?

I must point out that Mr Rumbles called for the minister's resignation at that time as well.

Before I move the motion in my name, I must say that SNP members regret that the Executive parties—both parties—refused the offer of SNP time tomorrow to debate the motion properly. It was their decision to interfere with the proper conduct of the important Scottish Qualifications Authority debate that lies ahead. It was their decision to cut the time for that debate. It was their decision to misrepresent that situation in the press and in the chamber. Such decisions smack more of the bad old ways of South Lanarkshire than the new ways of the Scottish Parliament. Many of us regret that the bad old ways of South Lanarkshire are now also infecting Shetland. This is the first no confidence motion to be debated in the Scottish Parliament. Contrary to the view that the First Minister expressed at the weekend that the debate was opportunistic, it is a debate that is governed by clear rules in our standing orders. The procedure exists for a clear purpose. No confidence debates can take place only if the motion attracts at least 25 signatures. As of this morning, the motion had attracted 32 signatures. No confidence debates are designed to indicate that a minister has performed badly or behaved badly. They provide the mechanism by which the Parliament can say that in a way that should result in the minister being removed from office. No confidence debates are serious parliamentary occasions. They should be—and they are—used very sparingly. However, the circumstances of the summer's disaster for Scotland's pupils, teachers and parents—the disaster of the failure of the SQA—are surely serious enough for us to consider whether there is an element of ministerial blame to be attached to what took place. If such blame is attached, surely the unprecedented events of the summer demand unprecedented ministerial and  parliamentary responses. The motion is narrowly drawn; it relates to the actions of one minister between specified dates. Some people would argue that the minister is culpable for much more than I shall indicate this morning, but I shall stick to the terms and dates in the motion. The information on what took place between those dates comes from the evidence given to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, which includes evidence from the internal documents of the Executive, which were given to the committee in a cumbersome process of disclosure. I suspect that there is more information than we have now. I find it astonishing, for example, that in all those documents there was no mention of advice from Her Majesty's inspectors of schools to the minister or to his department. It beggars belief that there was no such advice; it should have been disclosed. However, we know from the documentation that on 26 June, Ron Tuck, the chief executive of the SQA, indicated in a telephone conversation with an official in Mr Galbraith's department that there were difficulties in delivering accurate and timely results. On that day, Peter Peacock, Mr Galbraith's deputy minister, received advice—which he presumably asked for—about actions that could be taken with regard to those problems. That advice indicated that ministers could ask the SQA board to dismiss the chief executive. That would have allowed the appointment of a crisis manager. Mr Galbraith was aware of difficulties at the SQA before 26 June. There had been press reports and he had received advice that indicated that all was not well. The confirmation from the SQA that a crisis was looming took place against an established background. Given the urgency of securing exam results, Mr Galbraith should have acted on 26 June. Mr Galbraith will argue, or someone will argue for him, that that would have been an overreaction. But how is it an overreaction when, within six weeks, the chief executive had gone and a crisis manager had been installed? Ex post facto, those changes were made. Would those changes, which Mr Galbraith could have made at that moment, not at the very least have provided additional help in diminishing the scale of the crisis that was looming? However, Mr Galbraith chose not to act. Between 26 June and 17 July there were regular—one might say frenetic—meetings between the Scottish Executive education department and the SQA. There was, in the words of the senior civil servant in Sam Galbraith's  department, no longer a "normal relationship" between that body and the Executive. It is clear that by 17 July Mr Galbraith's officials were apprising him of a situation that had not got any better. I will quote one of the pieces of advice. On 17 July, officials told the minister that the probability—I stress, the probability— "of a failure of some part of the system appears to remain distressingly high". They also told the minister that it was inevitable that some students would get inaccurate results. In an attempt to quantify what might be acceptable, they advised that up to 1,000 candidates with inaccurate results out of the total of 140,000 candidates should not prevent the exam results from going out on time. On 25 July, Mr Galbraith met the chairman and chief executive of the SQA—who are both now out of post, unlike the minister. At that meeting they assured him—the words "assured" and "reassured" keep appearing in this saga—that the number of candidates likely to be affected would be no more than 7,000, although they knew at that moment that they were nowhere near that figure. Seven thousand or 1,000? Do something and delay the results, or do nothing and let them go out? Mr Galbraith chose to do nothing. He allowed the SQA to proceed; he should not have done so. He should have told the SQA not to issue the results; he should have insisted upon it. He should have insisted on the checking and rechecking of the announcement details, so that at least schools, pupils and parents would be forewarned. He should have insisted on taking charge, but he did not. Instead, he said that it was all up to the SQA. However, the minister did one thing at that meeting. He told his deputy minister, Mr Peacock—to whom he is now speaking—not to attend the SQA press conference launching the results. Mr Peacock had already said that he would be there—indeed, the SQA expected him to be there—but Mr Galbraith pulled him out. Why? Perhaps he did so because the scale of the failure was now so obvious; perhaps it was time to get ministers away from the scene of the crime as fast as possible. From 25 July until the date of the announcements, Mr Galbraith's civil servants were constantly in touch with the SQA and were reassured many more times. By 9 August, even the plans to let MSPs into the secret that there would be an awful lot of disappointed young people were abandoned, because the draft letter that Mr Galbraith planned to send each of us was scrapped. We know what happened next. The unanimous report of the Education, Culture and Sport  Committee paints a shocking picture. A telephone helpline had the wrong information; schools had no information; and young people were left distressed and depressed on what should have been a day of achievement. However, at that moment, the minister sprang into action. He apologised from Stornoway, and apologised again when he got home. He then insisted on changes at the SQA and demanded corrections within days. He did things. Why could he do things such as instruct the SQA after the disaster happened but not do the same things before it happened? That is the key question.

No, I am sorry—I have a lot of material to get through. If the minister could act after 9 August—which action culminated in the resignation of the chief executive—why did he not act before that date? Why did he not insist on management changes or on delaying publication of the results? Why did he not tell MSPs and the public what was about to happen? There are three good reasons why Sam Galbraith should not be a minister today. First, as I have indicated, he failed to act at key times during the SQA crisis, which was an operational failure on his part. He failed what is called the Carrington test. Secondly, there was a failure of policy in Sam Galbraith's department while he was minister. The policy of allowing the SQA to operate not just at arm's length, but at fingertip length failed, as did that of implementing higher still by his inspectors. He failed what is called the Howard test. Sam Galbraith failed a third test. This week, Labour spin doctors and others have been saying, "Sam might have made mistakes, but he is no longer at education. There is no need for him to go now." In that case, let us apply the third test, which we shall call the Mandelson test. If Sam Galbraith had resigned on 13 August, not even this First Minister would have brought him back within two months. He would not be a minister today. Sam Galbraith stayed—so he said—to sort things out and informed us that that was his duty. His sense of duty lasted two months and during that time, he did little to sort things out. His successor has shown some commendable energy and determination—and I do not often praise Jack McConnell. Sam Galbraith showed none. No one wants a situation to get so bad that the only remedy is a motion of no confidence. However, in the light of the failures that I have pointed out, that is the only remedy left to the chamber. Sam Galbraith must go, and if he cannot  see that fact, it is up to the chamber to point it out to him. I believe that the evidence supports my motion of no confidence and ask the chamber to support it as well. I move, That this Parliament has no confidence in Sam Galbraith in his role as a member of the Scottish Executive, by reason of his failure to act decisively on the matter of the Scottish Qualifications Authority between 26 June 2000 and 13 August 2000.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it will make to broadcasting companies, Her Majesty's Government and other relevant bodies to increase the number of schools' programmes which cover Scottish current affairs. R (S1O-2670)

That is a pity. The minister and I have just taken part in an event—organised by the Parliament's education service—for Auchenharvie Academy in Stevenston. There is an interest in Scottish current affairs, but even Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools recognises that there is not enough knowledge in schools. Programmes such as "Newsround", which is a children's news programme, have no Scottish agenda whatsoever. Would not it be good to tie together joined-up government and the educational priorities on citizenship that were announced yesterday by the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs with action on schools broadcasting? Perhaps the minister might even give some gentle encouragement.

I raised a point on an issue that was in Murray Tosh's opening speech, and I would ask Janis Hughes to mention it again in her closing speech. Will she give a commitment to discuss it again before 2004? We are talking about the core function of this Parliament in Scotland, and a barrier to access to democracy is a bad thing.

I recently stopped being a member of the Procedures Committee. I miss the Tuesday morning meetings—the discussion and the brief meetings, which I see are even briefer now that I am no longer a member. The most recent meeting lasted only 18 minutes. I pay tribute to the clerks for a substantial piece of work on an important issue. It recalls the great days of the 19 th -century railway bills—recalled, I am sure, by Tavish Scott, who has an interest—

Very important public works take place as a result of private bills. Mr John Home Robertson, from a sedentary position, wants to talk about railways.

In Bressay—no. This is in danger of getting out of control. I was about to refer to the Lerwick Harbour Order Confirmation Act 1974, but I will desist.  The issue of objectors and their rights, raised by Murray Tosh, should be looked at again by the committee. There are strong reasons, given in the written evidence from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Consumer Council, among others, why no barrier should be raised to objections. That is an issue of principle for this Parliament that arises out of the founding principles of the Parliament. The Parliament is open and accessible. Individuals who have their rights questioned or affected by private legislation should have the right to come to the Parliament and make sure that they are heard. There is a financial barrier. The barrier of £20 in the report is neither here nor there in terms of the costs that the Parliament will have to bear. It is a token sum, although it may be a significant sum for some individuals. I am sorry that we did not get a firmer commitment to legal aid for full legal costs. There is also a strong psychological barrier in that the Parliament is not open and accessible in these procedures to any individual who wishes to object. There is a severe danger that the proposal is not ECHR compliant. I hope that the Executive will consider that very seriously. It is important for the Parliament to be seen to be open, transparent and accessible. A barrier of any sort in any legislative process in the Parliament would not be welcomed by any of us and would go against the founding principles of the Parliament. That said, the proposals are excellent. Private bills are likely to become of great interest in the Parliament. We should not forget the overall impact of private bills. One example is the Western Isles Council (Berneray Causeway) Order Confirmation Act 1996. It allowed a whole new chain of transportation and communication in the Western Isles. It is a pity that the local authority has to bear the cost of private legislation, but I accept that somebody has to bear that cost—which is circular, in a sense, in that it comes from the grant to the local authority. Private bills can be extremely important. I ask the committee and the Executive to consider the issue of objection to private bills. We should return to it and consider it speedily, as the first private bills come along.

Although they provide us with much fun, I do not think that anyone is arguing that there is anything intrinsically wrong with inspired questions—although I know that inspiration strikes some members more often than it strikes others. While no one—not even Richard Lochhead—is suggesting that the practice will not go on, it is important to know which are inspired questions. It would be a legitimate point of information to inform members which questions are designed to allow ministers to make statements, which is one of the ways in which ministers get information into the public domain. That should be indicated in the list of questions.

It would be a waste of asterisks.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will publish the review of implementation of higher still and, if so, when. (S1O-2519)

I thank the minister for that reply; it is essential that stakeholders are consulted. When the review is published, will it consider the role of Her Majesty's inspectors of schools, whom many now regard as the advisers on policy, the mediators of information that comes to the Executive, and the people who are responsible for implementing policy? Will he ensure that that major issue is reviewed, either in the review of higher still or in further action by the minister?

I am sorry that I missed it, too.

On a point of order—

I am sorry that the minister wants me to sit down—this will be helpful to her. At the end of question time two weeks ago I raised a point of order on the Deloitte & Touche report into the Scottish Qualifications Authority. The report, having been announced in the chamber, was to have come here. You said that you would give a ruling on the matter, Presiding Officer, but you have not done so.

I am sure that those minutes will be worth taking.

Before I welcome Allan Wilson to his new portfolio—everyone else has done it, so I will do it too—I will thank the SNP's Fiona McLeod, who has carried the responsibility of speaking on education, culture and sport with Nicola Sturgeon for some time. The baton has passed to new hands in the shape of Irene McGugan and me; I hope that we can live up to the amount of work that Fiona has done, not least in pressing Sam Galbraith on the issue of Hampden. It is good to see Allan Wilson in his new position. He is obviously a man of ambition: The Sunday Times this weekend informed us that he wishes to establish a Radio City in Kilbirnie, and one cannot get more ambitious than that. We certainly need his ambition; we need people to be ambitious for Scottish sport. I am sure that he and the Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture will feel the hot breath of ambition down their necks, because the convener of the cross-party sports group—one Dennis Canavan—is, as we understand it, about to rejoin the Executive and, I am sure, will be pushing for a place in team McLeish. We can look forward to some fun.

Mr Henry recognises the potential of such a team move. We will see what happens. I will come to Mr Henry in a moment. [MEMBERS: "Oh."] Absolutely. I would not think of ignoring him. What an illuminating debate this has been. I have managed to agree with Hugh Henry and, more unusually, with Margo MacDonald.

I am about to make a revelation to the chamber. For a long time, I have worried about my relationship with Margo, as she has no doubt worried about her relationship with me, but I discovered today where the edge comes from—I discovered that Margo was a PE primary teacher. My mother was a PE primary teacher. It is clear that, in the deep recesses of the psyche, there is a problem, which I am sure we will be able to work out together.

Time passes quickly when  one is enjoying oneself, Presiding Officer. I agreed strongly with the point that Margo made about children being the key. When she made that point, Hugh Henry intervened on her to point out that benchmarks and resources are the key. That is why I welcome the minister's acceptance of our amendment, because our amendment is entirely about that. It is not an easy amendment for the Administration to accept—so I am glad that it has —because it does not praise the Executive, but sets the benchmarks by which we can judge the Executive's progress. Our amendment states quite clearly that we must have a sporting policy that involves "as many as possible"—

A policy that encourages diversity—

A policy that sustains "not only mainstream but also minority sports, including traditional Scottish sports"—

And ensures "a high level of international standard sporting excellence in Scotland."

Mr Galbraith makes endless interventions. We will find out during the next few years whether we have got it, because now that the Executive has accepted the amendment and the motion therefore includes the benchmarks, we will be able to work it out. Finally, we give our full backing to the Ryder cup bid for 2009. That full backing extends to any co-operation that the SNP can give in working nationally and internationally to secure the bid, which, we were heartened to hear, Tiger Woods supports. The SNP's support for the bid brings another open champion into contention for support, as the former title holder of the Colonsay open—one Mr Alex Salmond—is free to help with the bid. I am quite sure that he, like all other members of the SNP, will be happy to ensure that Scotland secures the tournament and a place in the sun for the Ryder cup in 2009. I am happy about the consensual nature of this debate. We shall now see whether the Executive can deliver. I hope that it can, but the proof will be two or three years down the road. Mr Galbraith has not done it yet.

That is two sentences.

The reason that we asked the minister to repeat his acceptance is that we found it so unusual for him to be gracious. If Mr Galbraith were to stop at that point and not give what I suspect will be a somewhat cynical reason for accepting the amendment, we will not be tempted to withdraw the amendment but will be happy to have it accepted.

SQA!

I welcome the fact that the new minister has taken more decisive action in seven days than his predecessor was capable of taking in months. I also welcome the fact that he has done so on a consensual basis. In recent days, the minister has announced changes to the board of the SQA. Will he confirm that longer term and permanent changes to the governance of the SQA and to the way in which it operates will come after full discussion of the reports of the parliamentary committees and Deloitte & Touche and the statement that the minister has asked for from the new board of the SQA by 20 November? In that way, all members who are concerned about those matters can take part in helping to solve the problems that have so damaged Scotland's young people?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You will have noticed that, despite the fact that you ran three minutes over the allocated time, we reached only question 4 in the business bulletin. One of the major problems was the First Minister's misunderstanding of what First Minister's questions are. He did not really answer any questions; indeed, at one stage, he was even asking questions. Could you perhaps advise the First Minister on how to answer questions?

rose—

I know that the minister makes a stock-in-trade of unpleasantness, but I will not do so. I have welcomed the money on several occasions, but we want to see the colour of that money—people have lost their jobs. Is the minister going to do something to save jobs? Is he going to restore the money that has been cut, or is he just going to keep talking about it? Talking is not enough; people are losing jobs and Scotland is losing its museums.

The money has not been spent.

We now know who ate all the pies.

Said without a blush.

As ever, I am somewhat baffled by Mr Monteith's logic. He has just argued—and I do not agree with him—that there should not be a film studio because the market will bear it, yet he is suggesting that there should be subsidies for good novelists, such as Ian Rankin, who are world bestsellers. Is there any logic in that argument, or is it just another Tory rant?

Does Mr Munro agree that while that is true, some parts need strengthening from time to time? A commitment to secure status for Gaelic would considerably strengthen the Gaelic element. I am sure that Mr Munro will use his good offices to ensure that the Executive takes that on board.

I agree that culture should be broad and internationalist. There is nothing narrow about the nationalism represented on the SNP benches.

Ian Jenkins is more generous than his coalition partners.

I welcome the new culture team and give a regretful wave to Rhona Brankin as she leaves both the department and, I note, the chamber. I wish the Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture well in his role. Not only is he the new minister with responsibility for culture, he was the old one as well—he carries his portfolio with him. I welcome him and the new deputy minister at his side. I also welcome the cultural strategy document. There is no great harm in it, but there is no great virtue in it either. It is a disappointing document. The cultural champions involved laboured long and hard and took a lot of evidence before producing a clamjamfrie of over-design—a bùrach, to use a Gaelic word—and not much else besides. There are some major flaws in the document's proposals and I will concentrate on them. When he launched the consultative document in the chamber, Sam Galbraith—the former minister and the present minister—said that the national cultural strategy was "not an exercise in re-engineering bureaucracy."— [ Official Report , 2 September 1999; Vol 2, c 148.]  However, the people who produced this document were not listening to him, because it contains 64 pledges, including four feasibility studies, four reviews and three audits. In addition, there is a commitment to identify a contribution, another commitment to measuring and reporting progress and even the announcement of a new ministerial committee. The proposals are over-bureaucratic. I wish that those who were in charge of the document had listened to the minister, as that would have made it better reading. It is an  exercise in missed opportunities. It has no vision, no excitement and no passion. As with most things, when the Executive hears the word "culture", it reaches for its management tools. All we have in the document is a set of management tools. There are no radical solutions to undertake the real task that faces Scotland, which is to involve the whole of Scotland in creativity and to free creativity in Scotland from the burden of bureaucracy. Those key objectives are nowhere to be found. My colleagues will deal with a series of concerns, including the national theatre. A major opportunity has been missed. There have been three studies on a national theatre and it would be perfectly possible to move quickly towards the establishment of one. Unfortunately, the matter has been delayed again. The document proposes the creation of a form of educational life involving what are called cultural champions in Scottish schools. Every teacher to whom I have spoken about this has found it an extraordinary concept—one teacher described it as plain daft. There are many teachers in schools who are cultural champions and are keen to release the creativity of all their students. Cultural champions are likely just to get in the way. We should be encouraging every teacher, child and school to get involved in creativity and culture. To ghettoise culture into cultural champions in schools is a retrograde step. I hope that in summing up the minister might consider that it is a step too far. Despite Mr Galbraith's request, we oppose the Executive—as Dr Ewing rightly said, we are here to oppose—on museums, because his commitment was vague and unspecific. If he could give me a specific commitment to the future of the key industrial museums, of course we would consider withdrawing our amendment. Local authority funding is a difficult issue for industrial museums. Local authorities have been kept perpetually short of funds by the Administration and its predecessor. To squeeze more money out of local authorities for local and industrial museums would simply not be possible in the present climate. Industrial museums, of which there are only a small number, need a commitment to ensure that they have a future. Yesterday, the Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead closed for the winter season. It is unlikely to reopen next year unless an extra £10,000 can be found for the costs of running the buildings during the winter. In Wanlockhead, winters are winters. Duncan McNeil looks surprised at that—he lives down on the balmy shore of the Clyde. The museum has in its care the second oldest working men's library in Europe; if that building is not heated, the collection  will deteriorate. The museum has asked repeatedly for the £10,000. I hope to hear today a commitment to providing that money. Five staff were made redundant at the Scottish Maritime Museum in Irvine on 1 October and the museum was closed, except for the cafeteria. By the end of the year, 31 more staff will go, including its inspired curator Jim Tildesley. There has to be a solution to keep museums such as the Scottish Maritime Museum going until the national audit takes place. In its annual review, the Scottish Museums Council, which is holding its museum of the year awards next week, asks for "a stable revenue funding base for a network of museums, including non-national museums". That is what we need. The Executive strategy document contains pledges for an audit and for a fund for reconstruction, but not a penny of that money appears to be forthcoming. What will happen—in the best Sir Humphrey tradition—is that museums will close while restructuring goes on so that there will be less need to restructure because there will be fewer museums. The situation is appalling. If the minister can give a commitment today to providing money for those museums, we will not press our amendment; if he cannot, we will press it. Although the national cultural strategy is disappointing, at least it exists. It is important that the Parliament and the Executive pay attention to culture. Last year, in concluding the debate in which the cultural strategy was launched, Rhona Brankin said: "The main aim . . . is to establish . . . clear, understandable objectives."— [ Official Report , 2 September 1999; Vol 2, c 182.]  If members can find clear, understandable objectives in this document, they must be reading the Gaelic version rather than the English version. There is nothing clear in it, there is little that is understandable and the objectives are all in new Labour management speak. When I spoke in the national cultural strategy debate last year, I quoted from the document that set the consultation in motion. At the heart of that document, in the very middle pages, is a quotation from George Campbell Hay. It reads: "Fad na bliadhna rè gach ràithe Gach la's gach ciaradh dhomh Is e Alba nan Gall 's nan Gàidheal Is gàire, is blàths is beatha dhomh". The English version is: "All year long each season through Each day and each fall of dusk for me It is Scotland, Highland and Lowland That is laughter and warmth and life for me".  Culture is about laughter and warmth and life. The job of a Government is to try to ensure that the context of culture can create that laughter, that warmth and that life. I hoped against hope that the Government might manage to do that in its national cultural strategy. I was rightly sceptical; it did not happen. I want the Executive to find a way to create that context, as our amendment suggests. If that can be done, it will release the river of creativity that runs through Scotland. That is what we need to do. I am afraid that it has not been done yet. I hope that it can be done. If it is not done by the current Administration, this SNP Administration in waiting will do it, and we will succeed. [Interruption.] There was a hollow laugh from the minister. The biblical phrase is: "Like the crackling of thorns under the pot, so is the laughter of fools." The Executive's time is passing; our time is coming. I move amendment S1M-1305.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to tackle with urgency problems such as the impending closure of key industrial museums in Scotland whilst also developing and implementing a vibrant and accessible vision of the place of the arts and heritage in the lives of the people of Scotland."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order. The First Minister has indicated today that there will be some sort of event or press conference to launch decisions that are based on the Deloitte & Touche report. As the commissioning of the Deloitte & Touche report was announced to the chamber on 6 September, it is essential that the chamber hears about that report first. It would be exceptional if a study of this importance—which was announced to the chamber in a ministerial statement—were released elsewhere before the chamber had had a chance to respond to it. I ask you to think about that carefully, Presiding Officer. The act of announcing the report to the chamber in a special ministerial statement surely implies that the chamber must be involved when that urgent report returns.

I am afraid that that answer does not deal with the point of order, which concerns the right to ask questions on that report. I ask you to reflect on that, Presiding Officer.

The Deputy First Minister is avoiding the real issue. In the documentation that was provided to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, we are told that the Deputy First Minister received a paper on the position of students who had applied for higher education, but who had not received their full and final results. He received that information from the civil service—why can the Education, Culture and Sport Committee not receive it as well?

That is not true.

I do not know whether Mr Watson was in the chamber—

I made it clear, as a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, that Mary Mulligan consulted the members before and after the meeting and that there was a vote in the committee. Neither Mr Swinney—nor I—or anyone else—has said anything against her. As I said in my speech, the problem lies with the First Minister, who made an accusation against the conveners, with no justification, and got himself into hot water. There is no justification for what Mr Watson has said and I advise him to withdraw his comments. The view is not held by committee members or by SNP members; it is not sensible to repeat a falsehood.

The First Minister made the accusation.

Will Mike Watson give way?

Mike Watson started it.

It might have pipped the Liberals.

Before I begin my substantive points, I want to make two observations on the debate. Mr Rumbles gave an extraordinary speech and, for once in his life, he looked excited. As a Liberal, he has had more wool pulled over his eyes than most people—one could probably shear him by now. I wanted to intervene on him to tell him that his touching faith in the compromise that was brokered with the committee conveners was not shared by his colleague Jamie Stone, who voted with me—against the compromise—in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I am sure that one Liberal does not speak to another very often.

Not at the moment. I would like to make a little progress. I am sorry that Mary Mulligan is not here, because I think that she misunderstood the point of debate between the First Minister and John Swinney. I have a clear recollection of the fact that Mary Mulligan consulted the Education, Culture and Sport Committee members individually before she went to the meeting. She came back and consulted the committee members on the result of the meeting and then the committee voted on it. Mary Mulligan behaved impeccably, as, I understand, did Alex Neil. Alex Neil did not go talking to his party and Mary Mulligan did not talk to hers. The First Minister's suggestion that Alex Neil and Mary Mulligan should have done that is the crux of the matter. It is an outrageous suggestion and not worthy of the First Minister. The First Minister has shown that he plays in the second division of Scottish politics, just as he used to play in the second division of Scottish football. Let us go to the heart of today's debate, which is the SQA inquiry and the compromise that has been brokered between the conveners, the committees and the ministers. The majority on the committees voted for that compromise; I did not  vote for it. I disagree with it and, following the meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee this morning, other people who voted for it are beginning to have doubts. An attempt is being made to continue to withhold information. The committee has received a confidential document, which I am holding now and which I suppose that I must hide in case anyone sees its contents. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee were meant to receive that on Monday, but did not receive it until this morning. The civil service demands the responses to the document by tomorrow night. Civil servants briefed journalists about the document yesterday, yet the committee did not see the document until today. The paper lists 33 documents and gives one-sentence descriptions of their contents. To make any sense of the list, it is necessary to cross-reference the dates, the people involved and the subjects of the documents with all the other evidence that the committee has received. That evidence fills three lever arch files, three ring binders and two other files. Committee members must perform that cross-referencing in 48 hours. That is unreasonable and cannot be done, despite the committee's special meeting at lunch time tomorrow. There is an attempt to stop the committee from asking the right questions. The committee's task is similar to searching for a black cat in a coal cellar at night.

Under the arrangements, the committee cannot demand the documents. I am surprised that Mr Rumbles does not know that .  The committee can ask questions based only on the one-sentence descriptor in the document and any evidence that we have received. That does not represent access to information. Information is being obscured and prevented from entering the public domain.

The point I made, if Mr Macintosh had been listening, was that the material was delivered to us late in terms of the department's own timetable. We are being disadvantaged by its actions. The committee would be quite able to set its own time scale and to say it needs more time. Indeed, as the member knows from this morning's discussion, it may need to do so. I do not know whether it is the civil service that is attempting to suppress access to information. Throughout the entire SQA inquiry, Her Majesty's inspectorate has obfuscated day after day. It may well wish to restrict access to information—it is a real enemy of openness and accountability. Or it may even be ministers. Anyone who witnessed the glib, contemptuous performance of the former Minister for Children and Education before the Education, Culture and Sport Committee may realise—

I listened to Mr Macintosh for most of the morning. I do not want to listen to him for most of the afternoon. The contemptuous performance of the minister in front of the committee would indicate that ministers do not want to release the information. I ask people to support the SNP amendment to the motion, because it opens the debate up for discussion and allows consideration of the results of the compromise that has been put in place. So far, the results are woeful.

Will Mr Rumbles give way?

Will Mr Rumbles give way?

He did not make any.

Will the minister consider being part of the solution for Scotland's industrial museums rather than part of the problem? The museum in Irvine will close on Monday. A great deal of hard work is being done and I pay tribute to Mrs Oldfather, who is deeply involved in that work.

I am sorry that the chamber does not agree with me. The museum will close its doors this weekend. That will throw the issue of the Carrick into stark relief, as the museum will not be able to do anything. The minister has the power to ask the heritage lottery fund to reconsider the conditions and to start to help industrial museums. Her cultural strategy will not do that; it is too long term. I ask the minister to save Scotland's heritage.

Among the people whom we should welcome to the chamber today I see the figure of Michael Fry—it is hard to miss the figure of Michael Fry—the founder of the clearance-denial school of journalism. I hope that he is listening to the unanimity that is being expressed in this debate as members of all parties describe what happened in Scotland and try to find a way forward.

I know that Mr Monteith is a dining companion of Mr Fry and I hope that they enjoy their pan-fried duck, but I will not accept an intervention today. In every nation, there are moments of catharsis. Fergus Ewing has referred to the plains Indians in the USA and the Aborigines in Australia. In almost every nation, there is a moment of huge significance that changes that country for ever—the Irish famines of the 1840s are an example of such an event. Those events do more than change the course of history; they change the landscape and the ways in which people relate to each other. They are a full stop in the history of a nation, after which something different follows on. Nobody can travel through Scotland today without seeing some evidence of the clearances. In the Highlands, there is physical evidence in the form of deserted towns and villages. In the south of Scotland, there are signs too. In Bute, which Mr Lyon represents, there is Canada hill, a place so named because people would climb to the top of the hill to get a last glimpse of their emigrating relatives leaving Scotland—their last glimpse for ever. In this city and elsewhere in the south, we can  see evidence of the clearances in the Gaelic churches that were founded and in the major industries that were established with the help of labour that came from the north of Scotland. The country was changed—and changed utterly—by the experiences of the clearances in the 18 th and 19 th centuries. How does Scotland reconcile itself to an event that massive? We have two choices. Jamie Stone has referred to one, which is to blow up the statue of the Duke of Sutherland and to say that the clearances were so terrible that we should blame the victimisers for ever. Indeed, my good friend Dennis MacLeod, who is sitting in the distinguished visitors gallery, told me that he wanted to do that when he was a young man growing up in Caithness. The other reaction—into which Dennis MacLeod and many others have grown—is to reconcile ourselves to our past and learn to understand it. We should consider the benefits of that period, because there were benefits. There are people all over the world who are descended from emigrants who did well and prospered. Nobody thinks that the clearances were a good thing—I am not practising clearance denial, and I believe that the clearances were an awful event—but if we can reconcile ourselves to the past, we will learn from it. That is why the innovation of Dennis MacLeod is significant. As Jamie Stone said, the centre will be a place where we can go and reconcile ourselves to the clearances and where those from the diaspora can go and learn about what happened to their ancestors. I hope that people will not only learn about the clearances in the centre, but come away with a feeling that that period is over and done with and will pledge, as we should all pledge, not to forget the clearances but to look after, cherish and develop the country that John Munro was talking about, Highland and lowland, and make sure that it is worth living in.

I will add a question to Mr Monteith's list. He or the minister may answer it. Has any study been done of the experience of other countries that have publicly funded film studios that have turned out to be too small or too inefficient? I ask with specific reference to the film studio at Bray in Ireland.

Something funny happens to politicians when they are confronted with culture. We have seen a graphic example of that today. I am not criticising individuals—some people might take it that way—but this has been one of the dullest, most boring debates that we have ever had. [Interruption.] I exempt Pauline McNeill's comments from that observation—I will come to that in a moment. When politicians talk about culture, they get very serious and tongue-tied, and seem to forget that creativity is about excitement. One or two of us have worked in the creative industries—

I know that Andy Kerr was a stand-up comic in another life, but I am sure that even he would agree that, when the Scottish Executive describes the creative industries as including architecture, advertising, arts and cultural industries, design, film, interactive leisure software, music, new media, publishing, radio and  television, what it means is that it is about all the things that we enjoy and like participating in. It means the things—or most of the things—that give us pleasure. The debate is about the important things in life, yet it has been sombre and slow. As Mr McCabe knows, it is, in the language of the Parliamentary Bureau—and I can say this now that I am no longer a member of the bureau—a filler. It is a filler that was to have been included in the timetable three weeks ago on 6 September, but which was lost because of a statement from Sam Galbraith. Now it is back again. We knew that we were in for something problematic when we heard Nicol Stephen's speech. It was the nearest that I have heard in a political speech to "Finnegans Wake". It was simply a stream-of-consciousness recitation of all the companies that Nicol had ever heard of and, presumably, one or two that he had not heard of, added by his civil servants. He did not actually mean anything. We did not actually hear what the strategy was. We did not hear any excitement about it. What we heard was a civil service response to a document, and the document itself was bad enough—it is just some of the national cultural strategy. Lawrence Durrell once observed that the worst thing that ever happened to the world of the arts was the invention of printing, because it gave an artificial respectability to the word. The worst thing that has ever happened to new Labour was the invention of design, because all that Labour ministers do is get designed documents, such as the one that is before us today. The document is almost unreadable; it is virtually impossible to understand what is in it because it has been designed out of existence.

Mr Monteith is probably right but, shockingly enough, the document produced for the national cultural strategy cost almost £60,000. We do not know how much today's document has cost. That money could have been used on the creative industries, but producing Executive documents such as this is not a creative industry. The real problem with the debate has been a lack of vision and a lack of excitement. When Mr MacAskill talked about the proposals, he said that SNP members would support them—and we will. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with the proposals; they will assist the creative industries. However, they do not contain one shred of  excitement or vision. In fact, they do something quite damaging. They do what the national cultural strategy does. They say, "There, we've done it and it's over and done with. Let's move on to the next thing." I see Rhona Brankin shaking her head and we shall hear from her in a moment, but the reality is that this strategy is a way of shoving into a convenient drawer some things that might get some good publicity. It is nothing to do with ensuring that individual creative artists—and everyone in Scotland has the potential to be a creative artist—can develop. There is no way in which today's document or the national cultural strategy can achieve that. Pauline McNeill came close to the truth when she talked about the music industry and the way in which it absorbs the energies, time and talents of a whole range of young people who want to be creators. Those people can create in that way wherever they are, using low tech as well as high tech, just for the pleasure of it. Robin Harper made the wise point that to do that, young people must be encouraged at the earliest stages of their lives. It is really no good at all producing glossy documents while failing to remember that it is children who matter. If children learn the joy of creativity, they will contribute far more to the world than they would otherwise contribute. Everybody in the chamber was disappointed by the Conservative contribution. I am very fond of Annabel Goldie, but it was typical of her to spend her speech quoting from a kailyard cookbook and calling for lower taxes. That is what we expect from the Scottish Tories, but we would like some involvement in creativity and a vision of Scotland. Kate MacLean made some positive points about the need for unanimity on these issues. We can be unanimous; there is no point in amending the motion. It is an anodyne motion that simply says, "We'll do this. There's a document. We're spending £25 million." What we should be doing is coming together and saying that there is a whole world out there of things that we can help with—things that the Parliament was established to help with. We should be saying, "Let's go and do that." I regret the fact that the Scottish Conservatives will not join in with that unanimity today.

I yield to no one, not even to Annabel Goldie, in my admiration for the late Marion McNeill and the work that she did in Scottish cookery, but that is not what we are here to talk about today. For Annabel Goldie to have that as the main substance of her speech was perhaps disingenuous. We should be able to unite on a strategy for creating a creative Scotland. There are lots of things that have not been done. The Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport, in her reply, might address the issue of a national theatre in Scotland; it would be possible through the investment of £1 million to £2.5 million to create a national theatre, to create the people who will be involved in film and television. She might address the shortage of money in education, to do the things that Mr Harper and Irene McGugan talked about. She might address the way that investment in the creative industries is a matter not just of looking at projects such as Pacific Quay but of finding the right way to make sure that Scotland can play a full role in the world. That is not in the document "creativescotland". We have a great deal to do. Nobody in their right mind would oppose Nicol Stephen's motion—but they would say, "Is that it?" Because if it is it, other people will have to come along later and do a great deal more. Fortunately, those people are on the SNP benches.

Pauline McNeill makes an excellent point. Does she agree that it is time that the Radio Authority acted upon the discretion that it has to ensure that those who get licences cannot sell them out at huge profits within weeks of achieving them? That is directly contrary to what the Radio Authority wanted, but it does not yet have the power to do anything about that.

I have read the document. Will Annabel Goldie point out to me a bold plan? I could not find one, but she might have been able to find one among all the graphics.

For the avoidance of doubt, will the minister make it clear whether the Executive will introduce legislation to achieve secure status, and if not, does he think that his statement in June, in which he said that such legislation was on the fast track, is tenable? Would he like to apologise for that and say that he was misinformed or misbriefed, or act in some other way to overcome the difficulty that it has created?

I, too, congratulate Irene McGugan on securing this  debate and on her appointment. I am sorry that I will speak solely in English today. There are a variety of reasons for that, not least the fact that I hoped not to be at this debate. That was not because I did not support it, but because I hoped to be on my way to Nairn for the Comunn na Gàidhlig dinner and for the congress that is taking place tomorrow. However, after reading the interview with the First Minister published in The Scotsman yesterday, I decided that I would not attend, so that no one could argue that the battering that the minister may get there tomorrow, despite the civility of his reception, is politically motivated. It will be the result of the justifiable and enormous anger that exists in the Gaelic community about the betrayal of an election promise—a promise that the Labour party and Labour Governments have made more than once to the Gaelic community and that has still not been honoured. I want to say one thing about Scots. Today we have heard here repeated the calumny that Scots is not one language. That used to be the argument that was made about Gaelic: that there was a Gaelic dialect here and a Gaelic dialect there, that there were words here and words there, but that it should not be treated as a language. Let us lay that calumny to rest here and now. Scots is a language—a language that needs help and assistance. On 1 July last year, from the reporters gallery in this chamber, Tom Fleming read a poem by Iain Crichton Smith, which called Scotland a three-voiced nation. Scotland has many voices, and many languages are spoken in Scotland. However, there are three languages of which we must take particular care. The first is English, because we have a way of speaking and using English that is subtly different from that of other people. I do not say that with any pride. However, it was T S Eliot who observed that English was spoken properly in only two places in the world: one was Richmond, Virginia, and the other was Edinburgh.

He did not mention Inverness, but if he had been there I am sure that he would have. We must, therefore, have some fondness for English. However, we have two languages that we must treat with great care and love, because they exist only here. If we do not look after them, nobody will. That is what this chamber should remember. Responsibility for looking after the Scots language rests with nobody apart from the people who live in Scotland. Scots does not exist elsewhere. Responsibility for looking after Gaelic in Scotland rests with nobody apart from the people of Scotland.  We have a particularly grave responsibility for Gaelic. My friend John Farquhar Munro knows the statistics, as does the minister, but let me repeat them. All the expectations are that next year's census will show—I do not think that we will fall out over the figures—that the number of Gaelic speakers has halved in 30 years. The pre-census estimates from Comunn na Gàidhlig suggest that about 7,500 children in Scotland speak Gaelic. Those figures show that the language is perilously close to extinction. The question that the minister with responsibility for Gaelic must address is how to save that language. I admire Alasdair Morrison and I am fond of him—if I keep saying that, people will think that there is something going on. Alasdair has the language at heart. I am pleased to see Rhona Brankin at the debate. I do not think that there are any other ministers in the Government who have Gaelic at heart—Alasdair is ploughing a lonely furrow. I hope that we can give him the strength to meet the needs of Gaelic. However, we must recognise the reality of the situation: Gaelic is perilously close to extinction. Therefore, I must ask the minister what he will do to save Gaelic and to ensure that the language lives on into the 21 st century. When I asked the minister a question last month, I was shocked to discover that his department makes no estimate of the number of Gaelic speakers that there will be in five, 10 or 15 years' time. It is time that the minister's department treated the issue as a No 1 priority. Many things have been tried. We have discussed broadcasting, and tomorrow we will discover what the Gaelic task force says about that. The one thing that would make a difference, however, would be for the Executive to tell the Gaelic community, and the rest of Scotland, that Gaelic has the same parity and status in law as English—it is an official language of this country. We must build on that in the way that Comunn na Gàidhlig anticipated in its report: by ensuring that there is access to Gaelic-medium education, that one can speak Gaelic in a court of law and that public bodies must at least consider how they use Gaelic. During the national parks debate, I asked Rhona Brankin about the Gaelic situation in national parks. She asked for a written question and the answer that I received was that the decision on how to use Gaelic in national parks is a matter for the national park bodies. There is no policy and no direction. The First Minister has skived off this debate—I am sorry to use a Scots word. I am shocked that he made derogatory comparisons with Wales yesterday. I was on "Good Morning Wales" this morning and I was pleased to tell the people of  Wales the First Minister's comments. The reality is that any Gaelic act will be a remedial one to overcome the damage that has been done over the past 100 years to the language and to those who speak it. It is essential that remedial action be taken. I have no doubt that the minister will talk about ways in which to achieve secure status for the language without legislation. I put to him the same proposition that I put in a letter that I sent him in July, when I published my proposal for a secure status bill. I will pursue my bill unless the Executive introduces one of its own, but if the Executive is willing to negotiate on the matter, I will take every action, without party politics—as, I am sure will my friend John Farquhar Munro—to ensure that we all co-operate to save the Gaelic language. Gaelic is far more important than party politics. I ask the minister to take off his party political hat and to join all members in doing what is desperately needed. Let us save Gaelic by legislation in the Scottish Parliament; let us not destroy it by petty partisan politics.

Shame.

I wonder whether Alex Johnstone will reflect on the same difference in the English language. Perhaps he should go to Newcastle, then Aberdeen, Cornwall, Glasgow and Norwich. His argument is fallacious because in every language there are variations, but that does not make them different languages.

It is something to look forward to.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There appears to be a conflict between what we have just heard in question time and what the Minister for Children and Education said at column 30 of yesterday's Official Report . I ask for your advice on what procedure should be followed by the chamber if a minister appears to have misled it. I think that it is appropriate to ask you for that advice.

Presiding Officer, you might like to note that if the original plan for a 45-minute session had been adhered to, I would not have been able to ask a question and neither would members you will call after me. I presume that the minister will accept automatically that if any of the detail in his statement, particularly that relating to providing information to schools and pupils, proves to be inaccurate—in other words, if it is proved that schools and pupils are still waiting for information, anecdotal evidence for which we are receiving today—he will find his position even more untenable than it is now. Having read and listened to the statement, I note that the words "assurance" or "reassurance" occur seven times. The minister lives in a bizarre world in which, having heard the complaints, difficulties and comments from the teaching profession and others year after year, he does nothing simply because the officials he sends out come back and tell him that everything is fine. Why did he do nothing on 17 June; 7, 14, 21 and 28 July; or 2, 4 and 9 August? On each of those occasions his officials met the SQA and, clearly, the reassurances were not enough. Would the minister like to take some advice from one of his predecessors; someone I rarely quote with approval—Brian Wilson? When he ceased to be the Scottish Office minister with responsibility for education, he said about higher still: "I do accept this is an area in which I should have been more sceptical about the reassurances which were brought to me". Is not the job of the Minister for Children and Education to be more sceptical? Is it not to do something, rather than be reassured? There are thousands of pupils in Scotland today who are far from reassured.

We have all been surprised in this debate. Despite the barrage of criticism aimed at the Labour front bench, all that we have received have been the usual sour looks, the usual lectures and the usual implications that everybody is out of step except our Susan and, of course, our Iain.

And she is not here. She must have got tired of it. The real verdict on the health services in Scotland does not come from this chamber; it comes from the people we meet on the street, it comes from our own experiences and it comes from anecdotal evidence that we might get when talking to people at a party or in the pub. During the Ayr by-election, which Mr Scott won, it was not possible to walk down Ayr High Street without someone wanting to stop and talk. Three subjects came up. One was the Carrick Street day centre, which we all remember and which is responsible for Mr Scott's being here, so he has a lot to thank a Labour local authority for. Pensions was another subject for discussion, but the one that people were really concerned about was their personal treatment in the NHS. They did not speak with resentment or anger, because they knew that they were getting the best service that they were allowed to get by whatever Government was in power. In Susan Deacon's opening remarks this morning, I was horrified to hear an accusation that the SNP and the Conservatives were, in some sense, talking down the staff, or talking down the patients, or scaremongering. Those are weak and silly arguments. Iain Gray was nodding his head—he seems to agree with those arguments. However, the leadership of the NHS in Scotland, as represented by the front bench, thinks that that is the right way in which to conduct the debate—telling everybody who criticises: "Oh, no. Those are weak and silly arguments. We know best." We have heard the arguments, and we have heard the single transferable spending announcement that dots around the chamber. Richard Simpson is shaking his head—he also knows best. I like Richard Simpson, but it is that arrogant manner that people in Scotland resent. It  is that arrogant manner in which the health service is being run. I shall make no comment on any minister who may happen to be entering the chamber as I speak. The problem is that there is a lack of trust in the political leadership. We could go through a raft of statistics, or the way in which announcements are made. The other day I was looking into something called the waiting times support force. I am no expert in these matters. However, apparently the minister is not either, because the waiting times support force is a mythical concept that is pulled out from time to time when she has nothing else to announce. On 14 September 1999 the minister said in a press release: "when this national review is completed, we will set public targets for speeding treatment and reducing waiting times before the end of December." On 6 October she stated: "I will announce action based on this work before the end of this year." On 21 October she repeated that there would be an announcement "by the end of the year." On 4 November she said: "By the end of December we will set public targets". However, on 16 December—so close to the deadline, with the Executive about to go off on its holidays—she announced: "Agreed maximum waiting times in key clinical priorities will become one of the key planks of the Executive's agenda to speed treatment." We have never heard another announcement about the waiting times support force. The more people hear that type of spin and single transferable spending announcements, the less they trust what they hear. The important point is that people have lost faith in the leadership of the health service in Scotland. That leadership sits on the Executive benches. Until the people have faith in politicians and what they can achieve, things will just get worse.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. What is the procedure for calling for a quorum count in the chamber? There are, I think, 11 representatives of the Executive parties out of 71, which I think is very few for a debate of this seriousness.

I associate myself with Allan Wilson's remarks on the Carrick. However, I point out that the Carrick is  part of the Scottish Maritime Museum and that the funding of that museum is in an equally perilous position. Can the minister indicate the time scale according to which the national cultural strategy will begin to influence the work of Historic Scotland and the national heritage memorial fund in providing more secure funding for our industrial museums, which are a central part of our heritage but look like becoming history unless something is done?

I wish to speak against motion S1M-1092. This is the third time that I have opposed a timetabling motion in recent weeks, and I am mindful of what Mr McCabe said on those previous occasions. When Mr McCabe moved a timetabling motion on Thursday last week, for stage 3 of the Education and Training (Scotland) Bill, he said: "Timetabling motions—particularly the one on today's debate—are not about guillotining or restricting debate, but are the exact opposite. Having a timetabling motion with particular knives that come down at specific times ensures that specific sections of the bill are protected." He went on to say: "This motion is simply a timetabling motion that allows the chamber to know when the debate will finish. No specific sections are mentioned, and the whole time is open for debate on the amendments." Mr McCabe spoke at 10.05 am last Thursday. After 10.45 am, the Presiding Officer said that time was so short that he  "would be grateful if opening speeches could be limited to four minutes and other speeches to three minutes." Fifteen minutes later, after 11 am, he said: "I apologise to two members who, for time reasons, I cannot call." After 11.15 am, he told the chamber that he would have "to conclude stage 3 by 11.30 or time will be taken off" subsequent statements. Two minutes later, he was asking people "to give bullet points only".— [ Official Report , 29 June 2000; Vol 7, c 862-91.]  A minute after that, he was asking members whether they would mind waiving their rights to speak or respond.

Indeed, it was disgraceful. Mr Canavan is absolutely right. As he has worked out—and he is one of the sharper members in the chamber—what Mr McCabe said turned out not to be true, although I do not question his motivation for saying it. In the previous week, Mr McCabe said: "I emphasise that the purpose of a timetabling motion is not to restrict debate."— [ Official Report , 21 June 2000; Vol 7, c 476.]  I accept that that is the purpose of motion S1M-1092, which we are debating now, and of the timetabling motion that we debated last week. However, such motions restrict debate. If I can cite five instances within one hour of a single debate, of when the person in the chair has to stop members speaking; to cut speakers out of the debate; to restrict time; to say to members that they should "give bullet points only"; and to tell ministers that they have no time to respond, then the timetabling motion is wrong and should not be agreed to. I ask the Executive to think again about timetabling motions: using them as a matter of course has the effect—it might not be the purpose—of restricting debate in the chamber, and I hope that no member wishes that. I oppose the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to bring forward within the next 12 months a bill to provide secure status for Gaelic. (S1O-2044)

The provision of secure status was a manifesto commitment of the Labour party, the Liberals and, indeed, of the SNP. Given that, perhaps I should simply ask the famous question: why not?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Rule 15.3 of the standing orders allows the Parliament to regulate who enters the chamber. A subordinate regulation limits the number of advisers who may enter the chamber. I know that it is clear from this afternoon's performance that the acting First Minister needs all the help that he can get, but the Executive has today breached that rule and exceeded the number of advisers. Will you please look into that?

Now that we know that such a facility exists, I am sure that we will not require it, but the Executive will need more and more advisers.

I do not intend to support motion S1M-1065. I have given Mr McCabe notice of that and I have raised the matter at the Parliamentary Bureau. A very bad precedent is being set by automatically guillotining every stage 3 debate. No doubt, there are circumstances in which the chamber would want to curtail the stage 3 debate of a bill, and that might be opposed by any party. However, currently we do not hold any stage 3 debate without a guillotine. Sometimes that does not matter—last week, for example, we had too much time and we are likely to find ourselves in a similar situation today. However, if we get into the mindset that we cannot have a stage 3 debate without curtailing discussion, at some stage we will deeply regret it. Indeed, we almost reached that point some weeks ago in the stage 3 debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, and that should have taught us a lesson. There is no need for a guillotine today. The debate will not take a long time and there is no indication from any party or member that they will filibuster. Indeed, with the powers available to the Presiding Officer, that would not be possible. It is clearly the intention of the Executive to have a guillotine on every occasion, but if we take that approach, at some stage, democracy will be damaged. I want to ensure that every time we are presented with a guillotine, we consider whether it is required. If we do not need such a guillotine, the motion to curtail the debate should not be brought  to the chamber. I oppose the motion and I ask others to oppose it, too.

I thank the Minister for Justice for making the statement and having the courtesy to discuss it earlier in the day. Shirley McKie and her father are in the gallery today to hear this statement. I hope that it is the end of an appalling period. The only person who has apologised to Shirley McKie in this whole saga over the past three and a half years is the judge who tried her. He said at the end of her trial: "I would like to extend to you my respect for the obvious courage and dignity which you've shown throughout this nightmare. I very much hope you can put it behind you. I wish you all the best." I would like to hear the Minister for Justice make a similar statement today and apologise to her and her family for three years of torment, so that she can start to put it behind her. Will the Minister for Justice guarantee that when Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary's report is published, he will bring it to the chamber for a full discussion and debate? It will be published during the recess, but as soon as possible after the recess it should be debated in this chamber, because it goes to the heart of the Scottish criminal justice system. What will happen today—and I mean today—to Charles Stewart, Hugh MacPherson and Fiona McBride? They are fingerprint officers in the Scottish Criminal Record Office who gave evidence under oath in the case of Shirley McKie—evidence that we now know turns out to be perjured. What will happen to them today?

Like Pauline McNeill, I wish to pay tribute to a range of organisations. She mentioned one or two of them and one or two individuals who have been involved in the debate about the repeal of section 2A. I also pay tribute to my colleague, Nicola Sturgeon, who has worked hard and tirelessly over the past few months, and to colleagues elsewhere. I say to the Conservatives that even at the 11 th hour it would be possible for the Parliament unanimously to repeal section 2A, which would be much appreciated by people throughout Scotland. I ask them to consider doing that and to consider that Mr Monteith's amendment might be "too clever by half", in the memorable words David McLetchie noted in the margin of Mr Monteith's letter. I ask them to reconsider their position and to consider whether all members of this Parliament can share an opinion on this matter. I approach the end of this debate from the stance of repeal and with a considerable sense of relief. The debate has illustrated an important point that we must consider in relation to all the changes that will have to be made in Scotland in coming years. It is not just intention that is important—how one goes about acting on that intention is also important. I do not question for a moment the intention of members who have supported repeal for many years, but this has been a profound learning experience for every one of us. It is not enough to say that those with whom we agree are always right and those with whom we disagree are always wrong. This debate has shown us that we cannot change ideas, intentions and society simply by fiat, by command, or by saying, "It will be so." We must work with people starting with where they are and how they see things and we must persuade them  to change. It is an immense relief—and something to be celebrated, strangely enough, despite all the difficulties—to arrive at the moment of repeal, having reached, admittedly with great difficulty and, in some cases, at the very last moment, agreement about how we can all move forward. Today we should celebrate not only repeal but the fact that some listening has taken place. I hope that, as we move forward, we will examine all the changes that we intend to make, whether from the SNP benches, those of the Executive parties or possibly even those of the Conservatives—although that seems hardly likely. We will look forward to those changes and we will approach them by listening to what people say—

I am sorry, Mr Davidson, but I want to be brief. We will approach those changes by listening to what people say, by recognising where they come from and by working with them, rather than by simply telling them what to do. The nanny state is dead and we should not resurrect it over an issue such as the repeal of section 2A.

Would it be in order to move that the rest of the amendments be taken en bloc?

Presiding Officer, I understand that Mr McCabe and you have been made aware of my decision to oppose motion S1M-1036. Members will remember that, two weeks ago, when we had the stage 3 debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, Donald Gorrie was wise enough to suggest that such motions were unnecessary in this chamber because of the Presiding Officer's powers and the possibility that we might lose the vigour of debate. That suggestion was unanimously opposed in this chamber. However, many of us, having shared in that initial decision and then experienced what took place that afternoon, believe now that Mr Gorrie was right. There is no doubt that the advisory nature of timetabling motions is helpful to the Presiding Officer and to members in how they use their time for debate, but the mandatory nature of such motions is not helpful. It means—as it did during the stage 3 debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill—that we lose the vigour of debate on many amendments. Some members were being called to speak for 30 seconds on some amendments, there was a ministerial reply and then a division. The SNP believes that, although the consultative steering group principles called for ordered debate, they did not call for constrained debate. It is necessary to have an open period of debate on all important bills at stage 3 that is not constrained and cut up in such a way that—by the nature of the motion—were the timings to go wrong, we could lose debate on important amendments. That is important, today of all days. For many months, people have been asking members whether they will debate section 2A. The answer has always been that the Parliament has not yet addressed it. This afternoon, we will address it; and, according to the timetabling motion, we shall have an hour to do so—not a moment more. That is letting down the people who have asked for that debate. I say that as someone who has argued for repeal of the section for many months; has said that he will vote for repeal; and who will vote for  repeal. Given those circumstances, we should oppose the timetabling motion, which in future should come as advice to the Presiding Officer. There should be a freedom, not a curtailing, of debate in the chamber.

Not on this motion, Presiding Officer. I want to speak to motion S1M-1036.

The papers contain the Executive's announcements.

Has the minister not grasped that we are talking not about the fact that the Executive does not talk enough but about the fact that it constantly repeats itself? The minister has had an example of that from me, from Fiona Hyslop and from other members. Will he answer those points or simply deny their existence?

She is away again; she is not in the chamber.

I told Andrew that.

Will the member give way?

I agree with Bill Aitken about the issue of misleading and deliberately repeating announcements, but the real problem for his party is that its announcements are all too clear. That can be seen from the front page of The Herald this morning, which says that one of the Tories' brightest candidates, Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh, has joined the SNP because of the right-wing, bovver-boy approach of the Tory party—which is confirmed in her letter of resignation.

No, I will not. One hears the term right-wing bovver boy from the Tory back benches quite often. It is usually used to describe Brian Monteith, but Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh was describing William Hague's attitude. I welcome Tasmina into the SNP and I hope that she will be sitting in the chamber with us before too long, and sitting in government.

No. Let me get into my speech.

I have much to say about Mr  McAveety, but I want to get on with my speech. My amendment to Mr Aitken's motion goes to the heart of the Executive's problem. The Scottish Parliament is founded on a number of key principles, which are laid out in the report of the consultative steering group and with which Mr McAveety and his colleagues are familiar. The introduction to that report was written by none other than Henry McLeish, when he was a minister of state and Scottish Office Minister for Home Affairs and Devolution. In those days, he was higher in the new Labour pecking order than he is today. The principles in that report are worth repeating. Labour members might not like the principles, but I shall repeat them. The Scottish Parliament was meant to "embody and reflect the"—

Let me get through the principles—I will then take Mr McAveety's intervention. I am sure that he has been up all night thinking of an intervention, and he will get his chance. The Scottish Parliament was meant to "embody and reflect the sharing of power between the people of Scotland, the legislators and the Scottish Executive". The key principles went on to say that "the Scottish Executive should be accountable to the Scottish Parliament and the Parliament and Executive should be accountable to the people of Scotland". The report said that the Scottish Parliament must be accessible, open and responsive. In its operations, the Scottish Parliament "should recognise the need to promote equal opportunities for all." The CSG report went on to say that those principles were—and indeed are—the benchmark of the success of Scottish democracy. They are, as the CSG said, "a symbol of what the Scottish people may reasonably expect from their elected representatives." Measurement of the Executive and its conduct over the past year—even if we measure only how it announces its policies and its funding commitments—shows that it is obvious that the Executive is falling short of the CSG principles. The CSG said something else that the Executive finds difficult—it found in its investigations that there was a cynical disillusionment with politics. It said that Parliament should set "the highest standards" so that the Scottish people "will trust and respect" Scottish democracy and the Scottish Executive. How can the people of Scotland "trust and respect" government by illusion?  Announcements are repeated as if they are new and resources are doubled, trebled and quadrupled. Ministers not only connive in such actions—they perform them. In the course of researching for the debate, the SNP has—in a paper that we will publish—identified endless examples of double and treble counting. There is a paper trail of illusion that involves Sam Galbraith, Susan Deacon, Wendy Alexander, Jackie Baillie, Frank McAveety, Angus MacKay, Jack McConnell, Ross Finnie, Donald Dewar, Sarah Boyack and others. [Interruption.] I think that Mr Peacock wants to be included in the list. Let him be included in the list. All those ministers and more are involved in the exercise. It appears that the only minister who is not involved is the one who has drawn the short straw in answering today's debate. [Interruption.] I am sorry—Mr Smith wants to be counted in. Mr Smith and Mr McCabe are not guilty. I know their jobs well—I shadow them. The problem is that neither Mr McCabe nor Mr Smith has the opportunity to be involved in the exercise, so they are not guilty only because they cannot find a way of doing what the other ministers do. I will use an example. It is interesting that Mr McCabe used the same example in his speech, but I suspect that there is a touch of guilt involved—Mr McCabe knows where the bodies are buried. The example is this year's budget at Westminster. On 18 May, David Whitton gave a briefing to the press. He had round his neck—as Tricia Marwick noted—a red cord that was stamped "Labour", in case anybody found him and had to return him home. He told the Scottish press that the Cabinet had that day "given final approval after an exhaustive and comprehensive new method of agreeing department shares of available money". That announcement was old even when David Whitton made it. Allegedly, there had been a Sisyphean struggle within the Cabinet. Ministers had all been contending with each other. They had argued [Interruption.] —I am glad that Mr McNeil liked the word, I will write it down for him later. There had been a Sisyphean struggle within the Cabinet. At the end of that process, ministers divided the money up. Mr Whitton then gave a list of figures. Health was to receive £173.3 million—well done, Susan Deacon. Education was to get £86.6 million—Sam Galbraith is still in there. Transport and the environment was to get £15.9 million—I think Sarah Boyack is in trouble. Justice was to get £8.9 million—Jim Wallace clearly does not have any clout on that matter. That was the division of the money that was announced proudly on 18 May. The Executive,  through its spokesman, presented that as a triumph for the new system of government, a triumph for individual ministers and a triumph for new Labour. What was the truth?

Mr Rumbles does not know the truth. He has had the wool pulled over his eyes, like all the Liberals. The truth is that the figures are identical—not roughly equivalent to, but identical—to those that were announced by John Reid two months earlier on budget day. Surprise, surprise—they are also identical to the figures in the annual expenditure report of the Scottish Executive that was published on 19 April. There is another truth to be told. Those sums were trumpeted as massive increases as the McConnell gambit—exaggerate everything—came into play. The McConnell gambit presented those figures as massive, yet they did not even match the parsimony of the final Forsyth years.

I remember when Jim Wallace was acting as Mike Rumbles's party leader and not acting as First Minister. At that time he described those increases as a joke and talked about the need for more public expenditure. Mike Rumbles has swallowed the spin. I will conclude by making it clear that the figures that were announced were illusions. They were announced once, twice and three times. Susan Deacon even announced the figures on health spending a fourth time in the chamber. She called that an emergency statement, but Duncan Hamilton described it memorably as "more of an accident than an emergency."— [ Official Report , 22 March 2000; Vol 5, c 868.]  In reality, on every occasion on which the Government speaks, it breaks the CSG recommendations. Today we tell the Executive that it is falling very far short of the principles that it and the Parliament accepted. It must return to those principles and it must ensure that it speaks the truth to the people whom it represents. At the moment, it is not doing those things. I move amendment S1M-905.2, to leave out from "a new protocol" to end and insert: "and implement with immediate effect a policy for all Parliamentary, press and public announcements which is based upon the founding principles of this Parliament as  defined by the Consultative Steering Group, that is to be accountable, accessible and open, and in particular to make absolutely clear in all such announcements whether policy innovations are new or repeated, whether funding announcements are allocations or distributions and from what budget in what year these sums will come."

Behind you. [Laughter.]

On a point of order. There seem to be considerable difficulties— [Interruption.]

There still appear to be considerable difficulties with question time. For you, Presiding Officer, those difficulties relate to the length of questions, but there are also difficulties with the length of answers. I ask you to consider the answer from the acting First Minister to Mrs Ullrich's question, which must be almost a new record.

On a further point of order. I hope that you are indicating that the standing orders must begin to take account of the fact that the answers are neither brief nor are they answers. It would help the situation if ministerial answers were covered by the standing orders. I notice that the convener of the Procedures Committee is listening to this point of order; I hope that that committee will consider the matter.

Tha mi glè thaingeal gu Comunn na Gàidhlig, Comann nam Pàrant Nàiseanta agus gu Iain Fearchar Rothach.  Following is the translation:  I am very grateful to Comunn na Gàidhlig, Comann nam Pàrant Nàiseanta and to John Farquhar Munro.  The member continued in English.  Amendment 34 seeks to provide for the first time a statutory right to Gaelic-medium education. Nobody should be in any doubt about the parlous state of Gaelic. We debate the amendment in the context of next year's census, which may see the number of Gaelic speakers drop below 50,000. That would be a decline of 20,000 in 10 years. In the previous 10 years, from 1981 to 1991, the number dropped by 13,000. There are half the number of Gaelic speakers today that there were 40 years ago. More worrying still is the detail of  those figures. It is estimated that, in the crucial three to 15 age group, there are now fewer than 7,500 children who speak Gaelic. More than half of Gaelic speakers are 45 or older. It is little wonder that a distinguished European academic was quoted in The Scotsman last week as saying: "Gaelic could die out by the end of the century if more children are not encouraged to learn the language". He went on to say that "the only way for a threatened language to survive is to have at least 100,000 speakers and receive full support from the nation state." Amendment 34 seeks to start the process of providing that full support from the nation state. There is no doubt that what is crucially required is a legal right to education in the language. That right exists in Wales, where the number of Welsh speakers is increasing. That right does not exist in Scotland, where the number of Gaelic speakers is plummeting. The Executive amendment does not provide that legal duty. I stress that I am asking members to support the Executive amendment and to support this amendment as well. We have heard a lot of criticism from the minister about the drafting—civil servants are adept at picking holes in other people's amendments. However, this is not about bureaucracy or what the minister called "drafting problems". It is about survival for the language; it is very much about human rights.  Amendment 34 is not open-ended, although that criticism has been made. Currently, about £10 million is spent by the Executive and local authorities on Gaelic education. This amendment might double that sum over three or four years. Even if it did that, we would be spending only 0.6 per cent of the Scottish education budget on Gaelic education—somewhat less than is being spent to save the corncrake in the western isles. The amendment is a step towards building a right to Gaelic-medium education, although it is only a step. Regrettably, the Executive amendment is not a step, but a gesture. The Executive amendment falls foul of something that the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic announced in this chamber on 2 March—the fact that the UK Government has signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Article 7 of the charter insists on "the need for resolute action to promote regional or minority languages in order to safeguard them". It also insists on "the provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of regional or minority languages at all  appropriate stages". It goes on to stipulate: "In determining their policy with regard to regional or minority languages, the Parties"— meaning the UK and, under devolution, this Parliament— "shall take into consideration the needs and wishes expressed by the groups which use such languages." That charter is a binding international obligation, and the Executive amendment does not meet it. The Executive amendment does not represent resolute action, it does not safeguard Gaelic at this critical time and it does not provide appropriate forms for the teaching of Gaelic at all stages. Most crucial, it flies in the face of the express wish of Gaelic organisations and parents in this matter. The amendment lodged in my name and the name of John Farquhar Munro is backed by Comunn na Gàidhlig and a range of organisations. Presiding Officer, you are indicating that I should finish. Before I do so, I would like to quote from an article published in the West Highland Free Press in July 1998. One of the paper's regular columnists wrote: "Why are we still in the situation in Gaelic-speaking areas . . . where parents who want their children taught through the medium of Gaelic must prove that there is enough demand for it? This forces Gaels to their knees to beg for something so basic as education in their own language, in their very own communities." He went on to say: "I think that the Gaelic world and, especially, the groups that represent us are far too reasonable. They think it a big deal if they send 'reasonable' demands to the Scottish Office . . . And in spite of these 'reasonable recommendations', the numbers of Gaelic-speakers, especially young Gaelic-speakers, is declining. If you look at the situation from another point of view, reasonable recommendations are actually killing Gaelic." That young journalist is covering this debate today. He is John Morrison, who is now BBC Scotland's chief political correspondent. He is no wild voice of unreason, as the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic knows. His views, and his plea, are echoed by the entire Gaelic community. John Morrison finished his piece by asking the question, "Will Gaelic survive?" I hope so, but today every member of this chamber can take part in helping Gaelic to survive by voting for amendment 34. That is the right thing to do. If the amendment is not approved, the language will continue to decline.

On a point of order. As the sound system is not working, can we suspend the meeting? The timetable for debate has been set and we are losing valuable time.

Will the acting First Minister and the Executive consider including the Glasgow collections in the forthcoming national audit of collections, to enable the process to begin of having single, unified collections in Scotland, rather than the fragmented nature of the present museum system?

Here comes Kenny Macintosh, the king of the planted question.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I have not deliberately moved away from my colleagues in some split over this issue. Apparently, the Parliament's equivalent to leaves on the line is dust in the consoles, which are not all working. There is only one question to discuss today. It is a disappointment to Christine Grahame, to all the MSPs who represent South of Scotland and the Borders and to me that that question has not been answered yet today. That question is, "When will this railway line be built?" There is no other question. We know that the case for the railway line is unanswerable—it is highly unlikely that any member will rise to their feet in the chamber today to say that there should not be a Borders railway. From the strength of feeling within the Borders, from the 20,000 signatures on the petition, from the meeting held by the Public Petitions Committee on this issue, from the lobbying that we have received and from the long-term campaigns, we know that the question, "When will this railway line be built?" is the only one. Mr Tosh put that question in the correct context of a list of transport priorities—both the priorities of  UK money, which comes from south of the border, and those of the Minister for Transport and the Environment, who is not here. It is her transport priorities that she has to answer for. People who listen to or read her speech will be tremendously disappointed, because almost her first comment was that she must avoid making rash promises. It is not difficult for Sarah Boyack to avoid making rash promises—it is her lifestyle. She avoids making any promises at all. Nowhere in her speech did she say where a Borders rail link lies in her priorities. There was the usual lengthy new Labour-speak about reports, consultants, issues and taking things slowly.

I will give way to the member in a second. He always gets excited when he is defending the partnership Executive. In her speech the minister gave no indication of whether she wanted to see a Border rail link this year, next year, some time or never. That is the first disappointment.

That is a very interesting question. No 1, No 2 or No 3—it is a priority. It does not appear to be a priority of the Executive. I believe that the time has come to build the Borders rail link. Tavish Scott's colleagues believe that, too. Mr Jenkins appeared to indicate—

Not just now. I know that the member is a regular rail traveller, but he goes north. We are talking about southerly routes. At the end of his speech, Mr Jenkins indicated in his usual elegant and gentle way that the partnership might be at risk if this line was not built. However, he did not say whether that would happen this year, next year or the year after that. He is now tapping his nose as if he knows—somebody has told him when the partnership is coming to an end, thank goodness. We must know when this line will be built. By saying that this is a long-term game, the minister added insult to injury. This is a very long-term game. I will not insult the Presiding Officer, but at the beginning of this debate he revealed to us that he was on the last train from the Borders, and he is no spring chicken. This has been a 30-year game. Even if the funding for a Borders rail link were found today, it would be four or five years before it was built. We must get answers today. It is excellent that  this is the second debate on this issue to be held by this Parliament, but it is not, as Mr Jenkins said, an historic debate or an historic day. The historic day will be when the line is built, when the Borders is opened up once again to the rest of Scotland, and when the terrible mistake of 30 years ago to which Mr Jenkins referred is overcome. On that day the people of the Borders will be able to open their newspapers and no longer see a list of national transport priorities that includes tramlines for Manchester, investment in Nottingham, a Docklands light railway, double-decker trains and a Borders railway about which the Executive says, "We are committed to this, but we won't tell you when, we won't tell you how, and it won't happen." That is the problem with this debate.

On a point of order. The Presiding Officer should consider whether it is in order for a member—far less a minister—to commit herself to answering a specific question during her speech, presumably to put off interventions, and then not to answer that question. That shows contempt for the Parliament.

On a point of order. There is increasing confusion—last week it occurred on the Tory benches, this week with the Liberals—about supplementary questions. We have seen some inconsistency; a member was able today to ask a question that was completely unrelated to the subject. Other members who have tried to do that—Mr Tosh last week, for example—have been ruled out of order. Can we expect some clarification from you or from the Procedures Committee?

The acting First Minister has already mentioned police support services. Given the information, which has come out this week, that the fingerprint support services in the Scottish Criminal Record Office are in a state of crisis, will the acting First Minister commit himself to carrying out a root-and-branch review of those services? There is worldwide concern about the case of Shirley McKie.

On a point of order. I would have thought that it would be possible to rule out references to amendments, which have been lodged, before they are read by members. From what I have heard of it, it seems a very good amendment, but I do not think that it is for discussion here today.

Will the acting First Minister confirm that when he was merely the leader of his own party as opposed to the acting leader of somebody else's he made much of the fact that the figure of 129 MSPs is the minimum number required to achieve  proportionality in the Parliament, something that should be dear to his heart, if not to the hearts of Labour members?

I know that Brian Monteith believes everything he reads in the newspapers—unfortunately, even his own column—but the  reality is that Roseanna Cunningham is making a complaint to the Press Complaints Commission. She is quite clear about what she said and has circulated that quite widely. I hope that the member will withdraw his statement, as it is not based on the truth.

Withdraw the statement.

Not fuel tax.

Will the minister give way?

This has been a debate of contrasts. The strongest contrast has been on the Tory benches. We had what one can only call the William Hague, saloon bar, skinhead approach to politics, in which all the popular prejudices were displayed. Thanks to Mr Monteith, things are now even worse. We now know that Lord Shaftesbury lived in vain, that working children are to be reintroduced into society and that the school-leaving age is to be dramatically lowered. Mr Monteith's contribution explained why the Tories have been excluded from Scottish politics for so long and why they will continue to be excluded. It would have been depressing, but there was a curious ray of sunshine, and I have to describe Mr Murray Tosh as that ray of sunshine. That will embarrass him and probably hold back his progress in the Scottish Conservative party.

His contribution was excellent and distinguished. He has practical experience, and has pointed out to us many of the problems and some of the solutions. At the heart of what Murray Tosh said is the fact that serious exclusion is failure. It is a failure of children to integrate, to socialise and to be able to work with their teachers and their peers in society. It is a failure of parents to care for and to manage their children. It is a failure, as Mary Mulligan pointed out, of parents to establish a relationship with the school. That can happen for many complex reasons, not least of which may have been the parents' own experience at school. It is a failure of the school and teachers  to cope. That is not a criticism, but a moment comes when a breathing space of some sort is required for the sanity of the school staff and the smooth running of the school. It is a failure of the system, whether that be the local authority as employer or the Government or Executive as resourcer. It is the failure of the system to resource and support individual teachers, schools and families. Exclusion is an expression of failure and how we overcome that failure is the subject of this debate.

No, not at the moment. The debate should not be an excuse for a litany of individual incidents to make Scottish education appear to be a cross between "Blackboard Jungle" and "Nightmare on Elm Street"—which is what we had from Mr Monteith. Instead we must look at tackling failure. Although Mr Peacock has spoken of some of the things that are being done, he has not looked widely enough at good practice elsewhere, including, perhaps surprisingly, practice south of the border. Just last week Mr Blunkett announced more resources for learning support units and for secondary schools to take on and tackle the issue of difficult pupils. In France there is more investment in ancillary staff and counselling, coupled with more investment in policing schools. The police have a useful, if regrettable, role in assisting a school if things get out of hand. Involving parents in education is good practice everywhere. Schools do not have the sole responsibility for educating children; it is a joint responsibility in which parents are deeply involved. We must find strategies and methods to bridge that gap because, as good teachers know, to educate children without parental involvement is to invite failure. When serious exclusion takes place, it is the relationship between the child, the family and the school that is at the heart of solving the problems presented. That is not easy, but children should not be excluded from school and left to be a burden to the community. As Nicola Sturgeon said, we must not export the problem outwith the school. The family must be involved in the solution. I regret the way this debate began, but it is worth having. I hope that it will finish more positively and contribute to solving the problem, not just for schools and teachers but for families.

Nonsense.

On a point of order. Would you reflect, Presiding Officer, that during the minister's speech, she mentioned Ayrshire not once, Ayrshire central hospital not once, and Ayrshire and Arran Health Board not once? In members' debates, there should be some response to the subject of the debate. It was undoubtedly an important and interesting discourse on maternity services, but it did not address a word of the motion.

I congratulate Irene Oldfather on having the motion selected. The fact that I had a motion on the topic—she signed my motion and I signed her motion—and that her motion was selected for debate while mine was not shows how open and accountable the Parliamentary Bureau is. I agree entirely with what Duncan McNeil just said—that is his career finished. The crux of the matter is a clinically driven argument that there has to be a drawing together of services. Duncan is right to say that people do not live in neat little units. It is not simply that the lines of division are wrong but that we must question that argument all the time. As Irene Oldfather said, the record of Ayrshire central hospital is second to none. Can it be made considerably better by the proposed change? I suspect not. In such circumstances the constant desire to amalgamate, to make units larger, to cut down the periphery, is an argument of despair. It will lead to one huge unit for everything—in health and education and elsewhere. We must question that argument. I am sorry to see the Minister for Health and Community Care shaking her head. I am sure she will come up with her arguments but they are not infallible. Clinical judgments are not infallible, ministers are not infallible—the argument must be debated. Jackie Baillie indicates that ministers are infallible, so I will withdraw that remark. Men are not infallible, women are not infallible. The moment we say that any clinical judgment is bound to be correct, that will lead to more services  being withdrawn, affecting more localities and people. I support what Irene Oldfather said and Allan Wilson's view that there should be a longer consultation period. I think the behaviour of the health board in this case has been particularly poor and I would like to see the debate opened more widely so that we can return to it. I disagree with Mr Ingram, so there is a huge split in the SNP that the press can report and we will fight it out.

Has the First Minister reflected on the cut in the coverage of this Parliament that is likely to occur due to the decision to cover the proceedings with only two cameras rather than five when the Parliament moves to its temporary home in Glasgow? That decision will lead to a disruption of the archive record and an inability on the part of the BBC and others to cover the Parliament in full and it will disadvantage the public, as public access will be much more limited. Has he a view on this matter and could he help to move the argument forward?

On a point of order. I presume that that ruling does not indicate that you would never entertain amendments to a take-note motion, in case your ruling was so interpreted.

So does "never" mean "not ever"?

I want to start by refuting Gordon Jackson's closing remarks. He said that building a building would be a great enterprise; however, the great enterprise was the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, and we, the 129 MSPs in this chamber, are that Parliament—not some building with foundations that was designed elsewhere. Indeed, our great enterprise is perverted if we think that our job is simply to build a building. Our job is to serve the people of Scotland, and we will not be doing that if we go ahead with the motion before us. We have a unique chance to revisit and correct a decision made on 17 June last year that was based on false information. There is no doubt about that. The resolution on 17 June was fatally flawed in four ways. First, there was a basic flaw at the heart of the resolution. Every Parliament should have the right to choose its own destiny in terms of where it sits and what it does. This Parliament was not given that choice. The root of the whole problem is that that decision was made before we were even elected. The second flaw is the figure of £109 million on which the resolution was based, and I am sorry to hear Sir David Steel repeat the figure today. Mr Spencely's report tells the truth about the matter. The figure was not £109 million; it was £27 million more than that, even on 17 June. As the Parliament did not have the correct information, the resolution was based on a figure that was not  true. Thirdly, the 17 June resolution talked about fulfilling the contract within the time scale. That has not been possible, as the corporate body knows, for some months now. Therefore, that decision cannot stand. The resolution is flawed in a fourth regard, because it talks about doing it within the budget—a budget that was not true then, was not true at the start of this year and is not true now. In all those regards, the motion that we passed on 17 June last year cannot be fulfilled. Therefore, we have an obligation to revisit the issue and make a decision, on behalf of the Parliament, as to what we should do next. The worst decision to make would be the one that Mr Jackson proposes. He is essentially trying to repeat history. We got it wrong on 17 June, because the figures were wrong and we thought that we would just say that it could be done for that. We are now being told, from figures plucked out of the air, that it can be done for a certain figure. The Spencely report told us that there is no plan, there is no final cost. Who on earth, in those circumstances, would say, "This is the cost, this is the time scale, just go ahead"? That amendment repeats the error of last year. We must examine what we can do from now on. That is why I and many of my colleagues support the Gorrie amendment, which takes a sensible position. It acknowledges that we were wrong last year and that we now have to make a choice. The worst argument against that is the one that we are hearing again this afternoon—that a delay would cost too much. This morning, I reread the debate from last June. We were told then that it would cost £1 million or £2 million to delay; at one stage we were told that it would cost £3 million to delay. The cost of going ahead has been another £40 million. That is the difference between the real figure last June and the figure now. Failing to delay has cost us £140,000 a day. There is no question that we must stop now and consider what we should do. If we do not do so, we will compound the errors that we made last year.

That is one of the reasons why we should look for a better site. I am interested in that question because Dr Simpson has, perhaps unwittingly, referred to one of the issues that Mr Jackson raised and that I  heard the Minister for Parliament raise on radio this morning. It has been implied that profligate MSPs were demanding too much space and were even trying to change the shape of the chamber. I advise him to consult Mr McLeish—here he comes now, walking into the chamber—because it was Mr McLeish, in the debate on 17 June last year, who advised us to change the shape of the chamber and told us that it was our duty to influence the design. I say to Dr Simpson that there has been far too much spin on this, including false figures being given for other projects. This Parliament made a mistake last year; it has a chance to revisit this now. We could look elsewhere for advice. The Emperor Augustus said, "Festina lente"—hasten slowly. I am attracted to that advice in the light of another saying of the Emperor Augustus, which may apply to the First Minister and to Sir David. Augustus, speaking of Rome, "could boast that he inherited it brick and left it marble". That is where we are going. This project is out of control. Brick is becoming marble.

No, I will not give way. I want to finish within time.

No. The position that we should be in—and I am glad that the First Minister is moving towards this position—is that we should pause and look at all the figures again. That is the sensible approach. The First Minister will have the opportunity this afternoon to inquire further. If he votes for this amendment, we will have the opportunity to examine all those matters again and compare all the sites fairly. Mr Spencely has told us more in four weeks than the Parliament was told in nine months. Mr Spencely says that there should be a pause to allow us to get a plan. Who would believe that we do not even have a plan? I, for one, want to go with that suggestion, to discover what is going on. I am sorry that the corporate body, in paragraph 24 of its report, rejects that. It comes out with a very odd assertion. It says it has received assurances from the project team—we have heard those before—and that "We cannot in reality give an absolute commitment until we have signed off the scheme. Once we do so, we would report again to colleagues with a firm commitment."  Even the SPCB accepts that, in terms of Mr Jackson's amendment, it does not know if the project can be done. We are back to where we were last June. We are asking for things to be done that cannot be done, to a cost that does not appear to be possible, on a site that has difficulties; yet incredibly the partnership parties seem to believe it is a good idea. It is nonsensical. Many questions about the project must be asked of the First Minister and of the SPCB. I am sure my colleagues will ask them in the debate, but the really big question is for every member. Are we prepared to spend £200 million or £220 million? Is there another bid? How about £230 million or £240 million? Are we prepared to write a blank cheque for the Parliament? [MEMBERS: "No"] Or are we prepared to act responsibly and look at all the options, do the job we are here to do, act on behalf of the people of Scotland who want prudence and responsibility? Let us not use this debate as a fig leaf to cover the embarrassment of others; let us speak up for the Parliament and for Scotland.

Will the member give way?

In the light of what Sir David has just said, will he tell us the truth or otherwise of the story on the front page of today's Edinburgh Evening News,  which says that the architect has stepped back from the project?

It was crystal clear, but I do not wish to curry favour with the chair.

Unlikely indeed, Mr Finnie. Will notice be given of divisions? I understood that notice might be given to allow members to re-enter the chamber.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, but I understood that there was to be two minutes' notice of divisions. I think that Parliamentary Bureau members might also have understood that.

On a point of order.

I am sorry to annoy you at this time in the afternoon with another point of order. Further to the point of order that Margo MacDonald just raised, would you be prepared to entertain a motion without notice to the effect that the chamber should instruct the corporate body to publish the Spencely report when it receives it? If not, why not?

In that case, presumably it would be in order for members to raise points of order on the matter on Wednesday, if they have not received the report by then.

Well summarised.

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria  it applies in deciding on the appropriate placing of its newspaper advertisements. (S1O-1419)

As the minister was deeply involved in the election campaign last year, he will be aware that a book that was published this week provides incontrovertible evidence that the Labour party used £100,000 to try to blackmail a Scottish newspaper to take the Labour line. [MEMBERS: "Withdraw."] I would like an assurance from the minister that the criteria that he has announced today will be the inflexible—

Will the minister give me an incontrovertible and cast-iron assurance that the criteria to which he refers will be published and observed on all occasions, and that Alastair Campbell's remarks last week about the press will not influence decisions?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you consider referring the question of emergency statements, and the criteria for them, to the Procedures Committee? Members have experienced great difficulty getting emergency questions and debates, and what we have heard today is much closer to a party political broadcast than an emergency statement. The only emergency is the collapse of Labour party poll ratings.

rose—

rose—

Before I start, may I say how good it is to see Rhona Brankin back in her seat; I hope that the whole chamber will echo that. What is a shadow after all, without the person who is in the limelight? I am sorry that John Scott, the other new arrival, is not in the chamber at the moment. This must be a bizarre afternoon for him; he came to the chamber for his first debate as the bright new voice of Scottish Conservatism only to discover that colleagues all around him were banging on about all the things for which they lost the election, including opted-out schools. He must think that he has fallen into a time warp—as indeed the Scottish Tory party has if it allows Brian Monteith to make opted-out schools the centre of its concerns about the bill. It is important to consider the background to today's debate. From the minister, we heard the assertion that all is well in Scottish local authorities and that funding is in fine form. Indeed, Mr Peacock too is nodding sagely and saying that everything is fine. The reality is that the background to this debate is continual cutting in Scottish education by local authorities.

Mr Peacock is shaking his head; does he read his local newspapers? I read mine and I have with me some of this week's cuttings. The janitors in North Ayrshire are having their overtime cut and may well go on strike; their spokesman said: "I'm a Labour man through and through, but it is these Thatcherite policies"— from North Ayrshire Council— "that are killing us." Those Thatcherite cuts are going on again and again.  Maureen Macmillan seems to find that amusing—or perhaps she recognises that it is happening elsewhere and she is embarrassed rather than amused. Here is another headline: "School bus passes set for NAC cut".

Yes please—on you go.

I offer Maureen my warmest sympathy for her very bad cold. Let us go back to the cuts to school bus passes. I have a list here of the services that are being cut. This is being repeated in authority after authority, throughout Scotland. That is the background to today's debate. The committee report is quite clear; improvement in Scottish education will not come simply from the existence of the bill, nor will it come from this debate. It will come from investing in Scottish education. If the Government is not making that investment and if there are cuts day after day, week after week—Mike Rumbles has referred to the cuts in Aberdeenshire—improvement is simply not possible. Therefore, while some of this debate is sleight of hand on the part of the Executive, there is other sleight of hand in the bill. The convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Nicola Sturgeon referred to section 3. I remember, when the proposals were published, the Minister for Children and Education trumpeting the fact that any parent in Scotland could take him to court, where he would have to defend what he was doing, and that parents would find him accountable. Lo and behold, that will not happen according to the very first occasion on which the provisions in section 3 were put to the test by means of a legal opinion. Why not? Because it cannot happen, as no court will enforce that provision. Sleight of hand is at the heart of the bill. I am sure that everyone has read the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's stage 1 report on the bill, so I will read only the briefest part of it. I am glad that the committee was unanimous when it said: "The Committee takes the view that the duties on Ministers and education authorities must be enforceable if they are to be meaningful. However, we are not convinced that the duties imposed by section 3 will be enforceable and, therefore, we would welcome the Executive's further comments on this point."  We did not get "further comments" from the minister in his opening speech. We hope that we will get them from the Deputy Minister for Children and Education when he winds up the debate. I want to raise the major omission of Gaelic, which is not even mentioned in the bill. I know the Executive cannot commit itself open-endedly to Gaelic-medium education for every parent in Scotland who wants it for their child, but it is possible to start the process by writing into statute—into this first ever education bill in a Scottish Parliament—a commitment to Gaelic-medium education and to the way in which access to Gaelic-medium education can be improved, year by year. Gaelic-speaking parents are not asking for the moon; they are asking for the first step. I hope that, as we move into stage 2, the Executive will consider being responsive to those parents. I am grateful that the committee will take evidence on that matter during stage 2. I hope that simultaneous translation will be provided and that that meeting will be held in a place furth of Edinburgh. We support the principles of the bill on stage 1, but I assure the Executive that there will be hard debate on the detail as we move into stage 2.

In reviewing the survey that is to be undertaken, will the minister consider investigating the rise in insurance costs for local authorities following claims against potholed and defective roads? I hope that the minister recognises that, by robbing Peter to pay Paul—by allowing Jack McConnell to take money away from local authorities—costs are rising, inconvenience is growing, damage to vehicles is becoming more serious, and local authorities are having to pay the cost.

Like Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, I congratulate Euan Robson on securing this members' business debate. There is no doubt that the anomaly that Euan Robson has constructively brought to the notice of the Parliament is unacceptable not only to blind travellers or to members of Parliament. Most people in Scotland would be astonished to know that two commercial companies, given the opportunity to honour a commitment that exists everywhere else in Scotland, refuse to honour it simply because of an accident of geography and of history. Indeed, I welcome Euan Robson's view that the question whether Berwick should be north or south of the border remains open. I notice that the minister is tutting.

That question is not necessarily my first priority, nor have we necessarily heard the last territorial claim, so to speak. Berwick's geographical position is simply something that might require readjustment with the democratic consent of the people of the town. Indeed, they have blazed a trail by ensuring that their football team plays in Scotland. I hope that, as time goes by, they too will play in Scotland. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, quite correctly, raised a key point when he welcomed the start that has been made. I, too, congratulate the partnership on having moved towards a solution,  but we need a wider solution and we must remember the needs of blind and disabled people not only in rail travel but in all forms of transport. Last Friday, I visited Irvine railway station, which is undergoing major refurbishment. When the scheme is finished, the station will no doubt be more suitable for use by blind and disabled people. At present, however—and I quote a word that Fergus Ewing used—it is a boorach; that word is not used much in Irvine, but it is worth using here. The station is like a building site. There are very few facilities for blind and disabled people, and I suspect that the current disincentive to using that station will remain in the minds of those people long after the changes have taken place. The people who carry out such improvements must bear it in mind that, while the improvements are under way, they must remember the demands of those for whom the improvements are being made. In the area that I represent, the South of Scotland, there is considerable anger about this matter, which must be resolved speedily. I am astonished at the correspondence to which Euan Robson referred. I am also astonished that Virgin Trains should promote itself to members of the Parliament while failing to honour a commitment to the blind people of the South of Scotland. I hope that the message from this debate reaches the companies concerned. I do not want to diminish the role of the constituency member, Euan Robson, but the person who can advance that message most effectively is the Minister for Transport and the Environment. In her conversations with those companies, she must make it clear that their honouring the letter of an agreement is not the same as honouring its spirit, and that they will not be regarded favourably by the chamber nor by members, nor I hope by the Scottish Executive, until they have righted the wrong.

I will take you one day.

Although that is very welcome, it is not just explanation that is required. We would be concerned if the process did not include taking into account the views of members' staff.

I echo what Mr McCabe said: this is a Parliament that has, quite rightly, set itself the task of being in the forefront of regulating members' actions, so that it is open, transparent and accessible. It is quite acceptable that members in this chamber should set themselves the highest standards. We all welcomed—and are living by, I hope—the code of conduct that the Standards Committee introduced in February. However, the register of members' staff interests is slightly different. We all accept that staff must be regulated. There is clearly a need for openness, transparency and accountability from the staff of MSPs. However, to some extent, those staff are the civil servants of members and therefore, not only should we regulate, but we must have the same concern for their protection as we do for that of civil servants. We can accept draconian measures to apply to ourselves, but we owe it to the people who work for us to ensure that there is full consultation before we accept such measures on their behalf. The debate should form part of a pre-legislative consultation—something on which Parliament prides itself—on the code. I welcome the report of the Standards Committee. The committee is doing a tremendous job on behalf of the Parliament. However, this morning is not the right time to make a final decision on the document. I encourage the committee to listen to the debate and to consult members of staff, either through staff associations or by inviting individual members of staff to give evidence to the Standards Committee. One or two points that arise from the report require further consultation. All of us are envious—not to say incredulous—that Richard Simpson's charisma has resulted in 50 people working for him. He makes a very good point. Nowhere in the document is it made clear who is a "member of staff". The issue of voluntary staff and those who wish to give their time to assist, not just members, but the democratic process in Scotland, has to be considered differently. Some people give their time simply to assist in the practicality of delivering the services of the Parliament; the definition of a member of staff has to be approached more  carefully. I thank the staff association of the Scottish National party for considering the report and raising some points on which it wants to consult. The publication of names and details of staff is quite acceptable, but there must be some safeguards. To some extent, those people did not invite publicity and contact—unlike us—but they took on a job. That must be considered within their terms and conditions of employment. If names and details are to be published on the internet, we must reassure members of staff that that is in their interests and in the interests of their families. There is the question of voluntary staff. Many people want to get involved in the Parliament and we must ensure that they do not disadvantage themselves in doing so. We must consider how those people are treated. A real problem in the report is the approach to temporary staff. If I have read the report correctly, temps and agency workers who do more than 10 days in a year would have to register every other employer that they have had in that year. That raises issues of commercial confidentiality and more practical difficulties, because a temp might work for a whole range of people during the year. That will have an impact on members, because it will occasionally limit the services that we can get from temporary staff. The gifts, benefits and hospitality threshold is set very low. I am reliably informed that it costs more than £50 to go to a club for a night—it is not something that I do often. I do not know whether that is true—Dr Simpson or Mr McCabe might be able to tell me, and Mr Swinney could certainly tell me. However, that is not an uncommon invitation for an evening. The level is set too low. We must also recognise that staff sometimes accept hospitality because their employer tells them to—attending a conference, for example. That is not a willing action, but one taken under instruction. We must differentiate between the two circumstances. We keep returning to the definition of staff. Reading the report, I want to know much more clearly who staff are and why they are defined in such a way. I encourage the Standards Committee to take heed of the debate and to realise that there is cross-party support for regulating staff and for the strongest code of conduct for everyone in the Parliament. However, the committee should take the report away without voting on it, to ensure that consultation takes place with staff and members. We need something that answers the questions of the people who work hard for members, who are an integral part of the Parliament's work and for whom we are making decisions without giving them the opportunity to speak for themselves.

You are certainly getting through the speeches today, Presiding Officer. I have prepared a four-hour speech on the history of the census, from the earliest times. [Laughter.] However, as I know that  Angus MacKay is already familiar with such matters, I shall be as brief as possible. I am immensely relieved to see so many Labour members present, although there are few SNP members. The bracing seaside air of Ayr will be doing them a great deal of good this afternoon. As I must be the only member to speak in this debate who has not yet spoken on the census as it has worked its way through the Parliament, I thought that I should have my turn. In reading the stage 1 debate, I was struck by a remark that Tricia Marwick quoted from John Rickman: "intimate knowledge of any country must form the rational basis of legislation."— [ Official Report , 16 February 2000; Vol 4, c 1093.]  As the requirements of government have extended, so has the amount of information that is required. I want to put in a personal plea. When this matter returns to the chamber in 10 years' time, I would like us to consider widening our information base. The Deputy Minister for Communities will undoubtedly be in charge of the Labour party by that time, so she will be able to take the matter forward. By making that prediction, I have just finished her career. In Scotland there is a very honourable tradition of seeing further than basic figures. Those who created the statistical accounts of Scotland—particularly the parish ministers who were charged with that responsibility at the end of the 18 th century—realised that more was required than simply to count the heads of the people in each parish if they were to get a portrait of the country and its needs. We need a proactive way of seeing our nation and what it can do as well as a reactive way. The census is a reactive way of getting information, just by counting heads. We are glad that the census has been extended to take in a question on religion. It is regrettable that a question on the Scots language is not included. If there had been wider consultation in this Parliament—and I understand that the matter was pressing because the census has to take place every 10 years—it would have been possible to consider including other information and fleshing out the portrait of the country that we see and know. That can be done by statistical account and by the publication of economic information. I regret that the Executive is reducing the publication of economic information at this time, rather than expanding it. Many of us would like there to be a period of discussion and consultation on the information that we have about the economic, social and personal life of the people who live in Scotland, so that we can plan for the future. Planning on the basis of the census figures alone, which was originally a measure of taxation, will not be enough. As the Executive moves forward, it may want to consider  the broader question of the information that we gather in Scotland, so that we can inform the public polity of Scotland even better. I am absolutely certain that an SNP Administration will pick that up after 2003. Mr Lewis Macdonald is laughing. He should be shaking in his boots. I support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will now publish the names of the companies involved in the unsuccessful negotiations for a continuation of manufacturing at the Volvo plant at Irvine in order that the Volvo work force can make representations to those companies. (S1O-1299)

At least this chamber is being treated in the same way as the work force and the trade unions. Will the minister confirm that the Transport and General Workers Union wrote to him on 21 January to complain? Its letter said: "Should it be the intention of your goodself and Agencies to continue with the exclusion of our representatives and the failure to provide us with proper information, I have no alternative but to review the position of the T&G with our representatives and members, that we are most disappointed at the way in which our representatives have been treated and our Union ignored." In another letter—

There are 400 jobs at stake. Why does the minister not do something?

Mr Tosh made a remarkable speech, which made some of us look round to see whether there was a doctor in the house. Fortunately, there is a doctor in the house and, doubly fortunately, he has a qualification in psychiatry. As Mr Tosh rightly said, the debate is not just about water, but is about local government, and the motion deliberately draws attention to that. Water and local government are two sides of the same coin in Scotland, especially this week, when local authority council tax increases will be announced. They are two sides of the same coin for another reason. The 19 th -century improvers had a great vision—not just in Scotland, but in America and throughout Europe—of public water supplies making a major contribution to public health and to the growth of society. The municipal reformers had a similar vision of the important role of local government in developing services for communities, and especially for those who were most vulnerable and needed most help. This week, we have seen—as we have seen repeatedly with new Labour during the past  several years—that both those obligations have been abandoned. They have been abandoned in the most cynical way, because the pretence is kept up that there is a belief in improvement and in public service. The reality is that the obligation is being given to somebody else. "Spin, not substance" is the epitaph of new Labour. Everybody has a responsibility except new Labour, whose members stand back and pretend that nothing is happening. Burdens on local government are significant. New burdens are being added to local government, but there is no new support. The figures speak entirely for themselves, and I am sorry that there is no local government minister here to talk about them. Mr McConnell trumpeted the sum available this year as £5.94 billion. However, the Executive—trying to be fair—says that there are additional burdens of £120 million, so that has to be taken out of the figure. Then we begin to see the real figure. When one adds the new burdens that the Executive will not talk about—the obvious burdens of inflation and pay rises—the real figure for the local government settlement this year is £225 million less than last year's. It is not an increase; it is a cut of 3.9 per cent. What is the impact of that? This morning, I met a group of concerned residents who were petitioning the Parliament in support of the Carrick Street day centre for the elderly in Ayr. Mr Tosh should note that I, too, have been in Ayr. [Laughter.] Labour members may laugh at that. That centre is to be closed and they are laughing about it. I hope that people note that they are laughing at that. Those old people in Ayr value their centre, which is being closed by stealth and sleight of hand by a new Labour authority. To be fair to that authority, it is being closed in the context of a shortfall in South Ayrshire of £6.5 million. In North Ayrshire, there is a shortfall of £6.25 million. In those two local authority areas alone, almost £13 million is being taken out of local authority budgets. Water and local government services are, as I said, two sides of the same coin, and the Executive is avoiding its responsibilities. Who pays the price for that? Tommy Sheridan was right to say that the price is paid by every individual in this country. Mr Tosh may know the price of everything but, like the Executive, he knows the value of nothing.

I cannot give way to Mr Tosh. I have to wind up. There is a price to be paid, and it is being paid by the ordinary citizens of this country. When they come to vote, those citizens will exact a high price from the Executive and from new Labour, because  those citizens are the people who are suffering.

What is the answer?

Presiding Officer, I will make very few remarks in Gaelic. I have not quite run out of Gaelic, but I suspect that the patience of the native Gaelic speaker will have run out with my Gaelic, particularly as this debate is being broadcast live on Radio nan Gàidheal. I will be brief. I am grateful to Lewis Macdonald for acknowledging that my history was correct. However, the information was prepared by the people who work with me. I think that all the parties have dedicated teams who have an enthusiasm for Gaelic and who wish to ensure that Gaelic does well. However, before this debate ends, it is appropriate to pay tribute to those who are not with us. In particular, I think of the late Donnie Stewart, who was MP for Western Isles. I am glad that members showed that appreciation for him, as, on several occasions, Donnie tried to introduce a bill to give official status to Gaelic in the House of Commons. He spoke in Gaelic in the House of Commons and was constantly rebuked by the Speaker. Thank goodness that we live in more enlightened times. I also want to pay tribute to Margaret Ewing, who tabled an amendment to the Scotland Bill to allow debates with simultaneous translation, such as this debate, to take place. Indeed, it was a concession, after Margaret's prompting, that allowed us to have this debate today. There is a phrase in Gaelic, "mì-rùn mòr nan Gall", which means "the southerner's great hatred". I hope that the speeches that we have heard today address some of the wrongs that  have been done. Many of the attitudes that existed elsewhere in Scotland created great difficulties for Gaelic, as we have heard again and again. The minister was right to say that the great step forward has been the absence of malice. But that is not enough. We must build on the good will that is found both in this Parliament and among many people in Scotland, to ensure that, as Cathy Peattie rightly said, all Scotland's languages flourish. That should apply not only to Gaelic, Scots and English but to Pakistani languages such as Urdu and others such as Mandarin Chinese. We must redress the balance and invest in the future of Gaelic. Actions speak louder than words, and I am grateful for the actions of this Executive and for those of the Conservative Government, which I very rarely praise.

Sam Galbraith knows that the Tories always become over-excited when praised, because it happens so rarely. On this one occasion, I pay tribute to them, and to Malcolm Rifkind in particular, for their investment in Gaelic. However, I am afraid that one swallow does not make a summer. The Tory amendment is nonsense and was lodged only to try to dress opted-out schools in Gaelic clothing. I hope that all members will reject it. This Administration faces the great responsibility of investing in the future of Gaelic. Those of us who met the representatives of Sabhal Mòr Ostaig this morning know that resources will make the difference. A start has been made, but more must be done. We will return to Gaelic as the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill progresses. It is appropriate for me, in closing, to repeat the remarks that I made in Gaelic in my opening speech. We praise the minister for securing this debate today. Certainly, we praise the Executive— [Interruption.] That praise is also unusual, Mr Galbraith, but today is an exceptional day for kindness— [Interruption.] I must admit that the sight of Mr Galbraith blowing kisses at me is one of the most frightening things I have ever seen. I hope that it was picked up by the cameras. Perhaps it happened because I no longer have a beard—twice in one day, too. I will not take my eyes off him. We praise the Executive and will support what it is trying to do. However, it is our duty as an Opposition to continue to press constructively for further investment and development in Gaelic. I look forward to working with the Executive and with all members of this Parliament to secure a place for Gaelic and to ensure that it lives on in  Scotland.

A Chinn Suidhe. Feumaidh mi innse dhuibh aig an tòiseach gur e fear stiùiridh de chompanaidh telebhisean Gàidhlig beag a th' annam. Bidh sinne a' cur taice ris an Riaghaltas air a' mholadh seo. Ach tha sinn an aghaidh leasachadh a' mholaidh a chur na Tòraidhean sìos. Chan eil an leasachadh agaibh furasda thuigsinn ann an cànan sam bith, tha eagal orm, a Mhaighstir Monteith. A Cheann Suidhe, tha mi glè dhuilich nach eil mi a' bruidhinn gun notaichean. Thoir maitheanas dhomh nach eil Gàidhlig nas fheàrr agam. Tha mi dìreach ga h-ionnsachadh, ged a tha mi air a bhith feuchainn airson bliadhnaichean a-nis. Ge-tà, 's docha gum bi a' Ghàidhlig agam a' fàs nas fheàrr le cothroman mar seo airson a bhith ga cleachdadh. Co-dhiù, tha mi gu math taingeal do dh'Alasdair Moireasdan airson a' chothroim seo. Cuideachd, tha mi toilichte gu bheil Buill Pàrlamaid eile a' bruidhinn anns a' Ghàidhlig an-diugh, Iain Fearchar Rothach agus Winnie NicEoghainn agus Seòras Reid. A Cheann Suidhe 's e samhla mòr, cumhachdach a th' anns an deasbad seo. Cuin a bha an deasbad Gàidhlig mu dheireadh ann am Pàrlamaid na h-Alba? Uill, anns an t-seann Phàrlamaid—am Pàrlamaid neo-eisimileach— bhiodh Buill Pàrlamaid a' bruidhinn ri chèile ann an Albais anns an t-seòmar. Anns a' chòigeamh linn deug agus an t-siathamh linn deug, bha an geàrr-chunntas—na mionaidean oifigeil sgrìobhte anns a' chànan sin cuideachd. Roimhe sin, bha a h-uile rud sgrìobhte ann an Laideann.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I should declare an interest, as I am the director of a small Gaelic television company. The SNP will support the Executive and oppose the amendment lodged by the Tories. I am afraid their amendment is not easy to understand in any language. I am sorry that I am unable to speak without notes. Please forgive me for not speaking better Gaelic—I am just a learner, though I have been trying to learn for many years. Perhaps my Gaelic will improve with more opportunities such as this to practise. I am very grateful to Alasdair Morrison for this opportunity and I am happy that other members, such as John Farquhar Munro, Winnie Ewing and George Reid are speaking in Gaelic today. This debate is a great symbol. When did the Parliament of Scotland last have a debate in Gaelic? In the old Parliament of Scotland—the independent one—members spoke Scots in the chamber. In the 15 th and 16 th centuries, the official report was written in that language too. Before that, everything was recorded in Latin.

Uill, seo a' chiad deasbad againn anns a' Ghàidhlig bho choinnich a' Phàrlamaid—no pàirt Pàrlamaid—ann an Airde a' Chatain ann an Earra Ghàidheal ann an trì cheud deug 's a naoi. Bha an Rìgh Raibeart Bruce anns a' chathair agaibhse, a Chinn Suidhe, agus 's e saorsa na h-Alba a' chiad rud air a' chlàr-gnothaich. Ach chan e dìreach samhla eachdradhail a th' againn an-diugh. 'S e cothrom a th' ann airson na Pàrlamaid a bhith a' smaoineachadh air àite is inbhe na Gàidhlig anns a' Phàrlamaid agus airson Alba fhèin. Tha mise a' creidsinn gu bheil feum mòr ann airson Gàidhlig a bhith ann an cridhe Riaghaltas na h-Albann. Chan eil mi dìreach a' ciallachadh facal no dhà air puist seòlaidh no dhà ann an togalach no dhà ann an Dun Eideann. Tha mi a' creidsinn gu bheil feum is àite ann airson na Gàidhlig ann an gach roinn den Riaghaltas, agus gach gnìomh is poileasaidh an Riaghaltais. Anns  a' Bheurla, tha am facal "mainstreaming" againn air sin. Mar eisimpleir, tha mi 'n dòchas gum bi àite airson postan seòlaidh Gàidhlig anns na pàircean nàiseanta ùra. Co-dhiù, tha an suidheachadh a' tighinn air adhart, gu cìnnteach. Tha Ministear na Gàidhlig ag obair gu math cruaidh son na Gàidhlig, agus air an taobh seo den t-seòmar, tha sinn a' cur fàilte air an obair aige. Mar eisimpleir, bha daoine òga a' gabhail pàirt ann an deich fèis air fhichead anns a' bhliadhna a chaidh seachad. Tha Gàidhlig ann an tòrr sgoiltean far nach robh e fiù 's deich bliadhna air ais, àitean far am biodh clann a' dol don sgoil gun fhacal Beurla aca, ach far nach biodh facal Gàidhlig anns a' chlas. Ach, an-diugh, tha ceist mhòr aig mòran phàrant: Carson nach eil facal mu dheidhinn foghlam na Gàidhlig ann am Bile Foghlaim an Riaghaltais? Chuir Comann nam Pàrant Nàiseanta iarrtas a-steach chun na Pàrlamaid seo, a' cur na ceist sin. Tha na pàrantan aig Bun Sgoil Tollcross ann an Dun Eideann a' togail na ceist sin—tha clann còmhla rinn an-diugh, agus tha iad ag iarraidh freagairt. Tha am Pàrtaidh seo a' togail na ceist sin cuideachd. Tha feum ann an-dràsda airson lagh air ceartas nam parant airson Foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Bidh mi a' sgrìobhadh an t-seachdainn seo gu buidhnean aig a bheil ùidh anns a' Ghàidhlig air a' Bhile seo. Bidh am Pàrtaidh seo a' smaoineachadh mu dheidhinn leasachadh a chur ris a' Bhile, airson Gàidhlig aithneachadh. Dìreach mar a tha mòran a' tachairt ann am foghlam, tha mòran aobhair ann airson dòchais ann an craobh-sgaoileadh. Còig bliadhna deug air ais, cha robh dad air an telebhisean anns a' chànan—ach glè bheag—ach a-nis, tha àite suidhichte aice. Ach, a rithist, chan eil a h-uile rud ceart gu leòr. Tha an t-airgead aig Comataidh Telebhisean na Gàidhlig a' dol sìos, bho bhliadhna gu bliadhna. Tha feum ann airson bunaiteachd agus, aig deireadh an latha, airson seana Gàidhlig. Thuirt Brian MacUilleam dìreach seachdainn no dhà air ais nach eil an t-airgead ann air a shon. Chan eil mise cho cinnteach. Mar a tha fhios agaibh a Chinn suidhe, chan eil a h-uile duine anns an t-seòmar seo uamhasach toilichte leis a' chumhachd a tha fhathast aig Westminster ann an Alba. Ach, nach eil e neònach nach eil cumhachd aig a' Phàrlamaid seo laghan air craobh-sgaoileadh Gàidhlig a dhèanamh? Ach, mar a bha mi ag ràdh aig an tòiseach, a Chinn Suidhe, 's e samhla cumhachdach a th'  anns an deasbad seo. 'S e àite eadar-dhealaichte a tha ann an Alba a-nis bho àm an deasbaid mu dheireadh againn anns a' chànan seo. Ach ann an Alba ùr cuideachd, tha Gàidhlig beò—ann an cunnart—ach beò. Ma tha na geallaidhean againn air cultar na h-Alba fìrinneach, feumaidh sinn spèis a thoirt dhan Ghàidhlig, Albais agus a' Bheurla—eadhon mur eil an Riaghaltas a' creidsinn gu bheil spèis gu leòr ann airson ceist mu dheidhinn Albais anns a' chunntas sluaigh. Bu chòir dhuinn àite aithneacheadh airson a h-uile cànan eile ann an Alba cuideachd—na cànain à Sìne, is Pagastan is na h-Innseanaich a tha ga bruidhinn anns an dùthaich seo. Na cànain is na cultaran a tha a' toirt ar cultair beò. Ma tha sinn aig obair airson Alba mar sin, 's dòcha gum faigh sinn an seòrsa Alba air an robh am bàrd Ruaraidh MacThòmais a' smaoineachadh nuair a sgrìobh e: 'S ma ruigeas mo dhùthaich-sa slànachd cha seachainn i dànachd 's cha chaill i a nàir' airson gealtachd is crìonachd a dòigh, ach cuiridh i sròn ris a' gharbhlaich, 's ri crìdh na droch aimsir ag èirigh air sgiathan neo-chearbach a-mach às a' cheò gun coisinn i fhughair  na grèine air mullach nan sgòth.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Well, I think that this is the first debate in Gaelic since the Parliament, or part of it, met in Ardchattan, Argyll in 1309. King Robert the Bruce was in your chair, Presiding Officer, and freedom for Scotland was the first item on the agenda. This is not just a historically symbolic occasion; it is a chance for the Parliament to think about the importance of Gaelic for the Parliament and for Scotland itself. There is a great need for Gaelic to be at the very heart of government in Scotland. That does not just mean a word or two on a signpost or on a building or two in Edinburgh—there is a need for Gaelic to be present in every Government department and every Government policy and decision. In English, the word for that would be mainstreaming. For instance, I hope that a place will be found for Gaelic signposts in the new national parks. Things are certainly getting better. The Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic works hard for Gaelic. We welcome that. Last year, for example, young people took part in 30 fèisean. Gaelic is now taught in many schools where, even 10 years ago, children used to go to school without a word of English and got not a word of Gaelic in class.  Nevertheless, today, many parents have a significant question: "Why is there nothing on Gaelic education in the Government's Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill?" The National Gaelic Parents Association has submitted a petition to the Parliament putting that very question. The parents at Tollcross Primary School in Edinburgh, whose children are present today, put that question, and the Scottish National party puts that question, too. There is an immediate need for legislation to make clear the right to education in Gaelic. This week, I will write to many of the bodies with an interest in Gaelic regarding the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, and the SNP will consider an amendment to the bill to recognise Gaelic. As in education, there are many reasons for hope in broadcasting. Fifteen years ago, there was nothing—or nearly nothing—on television in Gaelic, yet Gaelic now has an established place. However, once again, not everything is satisfactory. The Gaelic Broadcasting Committee's funding is going down year on year. There is a need for stability and, at the end of the day, for a Gaelic channel. A week or two ago, Brian Wilson said that he does not think that there is the money; I am not so sure. As you know, Presiding Officer, not everyone in the chamber is greatly happy with the powers that Westminster still exercises in Scotland. Is it not strange that the Scottish Parliament has no power to make laws on Gaelic broadcasting? As I said at the beginning, this debate is a great symbol and Scotland is a different place compared with when we last had a debate in this language. However, Gaelic is alive in today's Scotland too—in danger, but alive. If our promises on Scotland's culture are to mean anything, we must make a space for Gaelic—and Scots and English—even though the Government does not believe that there is space on the census for a question on Scots. Furthermore, we should recognise a place for the other languages in Scotland—the languages from China, Pakistan and India which are spoken in our country and which give welcome life to our culture. If we work for a Scotland like that, perhaps we will reach the kind of Scotland Derick Thomson was thinking of when he wrote: And if my country attains wholeness it will not shun boldness it will not lose its shame for the cowardliness and barren wisdom of its ways but will turn its nose to the heights and the heart of the storm, rising on confident wings out of the mist. It will win the hope of the sun above the clouds.

Did the committee consider making that section section 2.1, thereby showing that the people of Scotland are the primary duty of members of the Parliament?

First, I pay tribute to the Standards Committee. I am a member of two thankless committees. I serve on the Procedures Committee with Janis Hughes, and on the Parliamentary Bureau with Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Mr McCabe. The bureau is not so much thankless as blamed for everything, so I bring thanks from those thankless committees to the people on the Standards Committee who have worked so long and hard. I want briefly to cover a number of points that were raised in the debate. I will start with the question of the oath. The debate on that matter was going well, until Karen Gillon spoke. She returned to a rather aggressive way of treating this matter—which I know was evident in committee, because I have read the Official Report —and that is unfortunate. She knows, I know and other members know that there was opposition to the oath prior to this Parliament being established, when it was suggested that there should be a more appropriate form of words. Several members  inserted some of those words during the oath taking. It is a pity that this issue has become a symbol of what this code is about, because it would have been much wiser to have walked away from it. I have some sympathy for Dennis Canavan's position on this matter. We now know at least some of the limits of what one can say as a result of Tommy Sheridan's speech. As nobody appeared to arrest Tommy to take him away for treason, we know what we can get away with. My party would have been sympathetic to Dennis Canavan's amendment, had it not been for the classic consensus Liberal position that Mr Rumbles has adopted throughout. He has spoken some very good sense and assured the chief whip of the SNP in writing—I think the letter has been released and is not privileged in any way—that the Standards Committee would not judge members on the basis of whether they stood for the national anthem or spoke in favour of republican principles, but would be concerned only about treason. As I suspect that the courts would get members before Mike Rumbles would, I do not think that we have much to worry about on this matter. However, I think that it would have been better for the Standards Committee to leave it alone and I believe that several members of the committee feel the same way. I agree with what has been said about committee reports—those should be confidential and kept that way. However, that raises a wider issue, which is how the Standards Committee enforces that and other parts of the code. The lack of a standards commissioner within those proposals—I know that the committee will examine that matter—is significant. As time goes by, one will have to seriously consider the proposal that there should be a commissioner, and I suspect that that proposal will come to this chamber. The commissioner should have the ability to work on behalf of the Standards Committee to find out facts, investigate, report and be an arm of the committee. It would be impossible to give that role to the Presiding Officer, to any of the clerks or to members of the committee. The rules on paid advocacy have not been raised in this debate, but they are worthy of consideration. Some members have found themselves, surprisingly, reminded by the Standards Committee, or by clerks, that they may encounter difficulties under those rules, which have been drawn very tightly. An example of that is Linda Fabiani, who went to East Timor for a referendum and found herself constrained from speaking on behalf of the people of East Timor about what she had seen when she came back to this chamber. Those rules were not meant to do that. We will have to consider the rules of paid  advocacy again, so that we do not make a farce out of passionate and strong concerns of members. In general terms, this report is supported by the SNP. It is supported in spirit as much as in detail—the spirit of this report is important. We should regard ourselves as very privileged in being members of this Parliament. We should be determined not to let our voters and the people of Scotland down in any way. These rules indicate what may happen if we do let them down, but our determination not to let the people of Scotland down should be the most important motivating factor. As members know, I have just returned from a visit to India. In some of the state Parliaments in India, up to 20 per cent of the members are under investigation for crimes ranging from corruption to murder. That comes out of the situation there within the democracy, which they are fighting hard to defend. We have a vigorous and flourishing democracy and we are the people who can protect it. That is our privilege. We should not need rules, but if they are there, they should ensure that those who fall short of them are found guilty and removed quickly.

I want to follow up the question about the First Minister reshuffling his team. Will he investigate and reshuffle whoever advised him to go to Irvine on 14 February to announce the creation of 700 jobs at Fullarton Computer Industries? Those jobs were highly speculative when he went, and within seven days the company announced 148 redundancies. Will he reshuffle the adviser who gave him that advice and apologise to the people of Ayrshire for misleading them in such a way?

On a point of order. Given the speculation concerning the figures, which is rife, I presume that the corporate body has received some estimates. What procedure would the Parliament follow if it wished to question the details that the corporate body has already received and to have an early debate on the costs, the estimates and the time scale, some details of which have already appeared in the public domain?

But what procedure could the Parliament follow? Presumably, a question could be put to the corporate body.

For the avoidance of doubt—and particularly Mr Harding's doubt—I shall make the SNP position quite clear. In September 1990, I proposed a motion at the SNP conference in Dundee. That motion was in favour of repealing section 28 or 2A, and it was overwhelmingly adopted by the SNP membership at that conference. That was the position in 1990; that is the position now.

Perhaps Mr Monteith will allow me to begin my speech before I take any interventions. I have never seen the Tories so animated. I hold that position, fully conscious of the fact that there are people in Scotland today who are genuinely afraid of the present situation. We have heard from many of those people in our constituency mailbags. I have answered every one of those letters positively and sympathetically, but saying what my position is: I shall vote for repeal. I have given my reasons, and they are the reasons that have been well outlined in the chamber today. Our job is not to fear the fears, nor is it to scaremonger and fan up those fears with documents such as have been published by the Keep the Clause campaign. It is quite legitimate to argue to keep the clause; that is a considered position. It is not legitimate to head that document "Protect your children: Keep the Clause!". That is scaremongering. Our job as parliamentarians is to discuss, consult and reassure so that those fears should be assuaged. I suggest to the Conservatives that that is what political leadership is about. Their motion today is not about political leadership. The fears centre around the reference in the legislation to "promoting homosexuality". Those words are unique in legislation; they occur only in section 2A and nowhere else. In no other legislation is there any mention of promoting any type of sexuality. That gives the clue to what section 28 or 2A actually is; it is not about sex education or about protection, it is about prejudice and discrimination. That is why it is there and why it has to be removed. It was put there to discriminate, but equality is indivisible. As I have said in this chamber before, one cannot believe in one form of equality and reject another. In these circumstances, we must remove that inequality.  What distresses me is that section 2A was not only put there to discriminate; it was also put there as a ticking time bomb of discrimination. It was designed to continue fear and prejudice. We must have the courage to defuse that time bomb. That is what political leadership is about, but we cannot do that in a vacuum. We have to accept that there are reservations, and we have to bring forward ideas and arguments about what will happen after repeal. I commend to the chamber six principles for discussion that I received in the mail the other day, and which are important. The first is: "Indoctrination, whether it be political, religious or sexual, has no place in . . . schools." That is a fair principle. Secondly: "Homophobia and its expression in abusive, violent and bullying behaviour in our schools must be challenged and eradicated." Thirdly: "All young people should be given accurate information on sexual relationships, regardless of their sexuality." Fourthly: "All young people, regardless of their sexuality, should learn about the importance of commitment, trust and respect in sexual relationships and the dangers of risk taking behaviour." Fifthly: "Young people should be made aware of the teaching of religious faiths on homosexuality." And sixthly: "Teachers should respect differing family backgrounds among their pupils. All young people should learn the importance of the family, recognising that families come in many different shapes and sizes, and the importance of marriage within heterosexual family relationships." That does not seem to be wild, radical material. Indeed, the organisation that sent it to me made the point that all of those points must be taken together in balance. Those principles are from Stonewall's charter on education in schools. I commend it to the Conservative party as a responsible approach—an approach from people who are being demonised in this debate, but who are putting forward constructive ideas on how we might take this issue forward. I will conclude by saying that it is an obligation upon everybody who was elected to this chamber to be involved in making laws that are fair to all members of our society. One cannot lift and lay that; it is an obligation upon us. Laws have to be based on the founding principles of this Parliament—as dictated by the consultative steering group—one of which is equality. That is what we are here for, and if we fall short of that out of fear of those who are not being helped by us, we do not do this Parliament, Scotland or  democracy any favours.

Will the member give way?

Even after only seven or eight months of this Parliament, one recognises some things in the chamber the moment a debate starts. I predicted earlier this morning that we would see panic among those members who have a common interest in defending the union. We saw it first from the unusually agitated Mr Tosh. I have never seen him like that before, but then he is due a visit from Mr Hague later this afternoon—clearly the Conservatives are trying to put the ideological iron into his spine before Mr Hague appears. There has been panic, too, on the Labour benches. One always knows when there is fear among Labour members, because—

That is certainly true. Moreover, Henry McLeish is put in charge to attack the SNP for talking about things that are forbidden. Then, to ram home the message, a loyalist is found to read out the new Labour line. Today, the lottery was won by Mr Des McNulty, who read out the new Labour line with great aplomb. He also gave me the most unusual opportunity of my political life. [MEMBERS: "No."] Absolutely—and there is more to come. After all Mr McNulty's affirmations that there would be guarantees and safeguards, I am able to quote, with approval and total agreement, the words of Mr Brian Donohoe, the MP for Cunninghame South, who is a member of the Transport Sub-Committee, as members will know from recent publicity. This is an historic moment. It is the first time that I have done this. He said: "It doesn't matter what guarantees there are. We've all seen the past history of golden shares. They are worthless". We are talking today about three vital matters. First, we are talking about public safety. Opposition to privatisation of the National Air Traffic Services has come from across the spectrum and has even involved loyalists such as Mr Brian Donohoe. It was fascinating today that Mr McLeish did not mention once in his speech any defence of the Government line on national air traffic. The line is indefensible. It is a piece of worthless ideological baggage, scraped from the bottom of the Tory barrel and taken over by new Labour and Gordon Brown for financial reasons. There is no support  for the Government line in the United Kingdom or in Scotland.

Not just now, Mr Kerr. The only defence is that the Government needs money from a get-rich-quick scheme. I am ashamed for the Tories that they cannot see that and that they cannot put public safety before ideology. It is shameful.

It is not scaremongering of the basest kind. It is reflecting the public concern about the railways, for example. We need safety first, second and third, not profit first, second and third. If the Tories have not learned that, they will be in the political wilderness for even longer than expected. The Tories' amendment is worthless. It is designed from ideology and adds nothing to the debate. At least they have lodged it for a reason: to please Mr Hague, who will be here later today.

Well, I am delighted to turn to the Liberal Democrats. The only reason that the argument is coming from the Liberal Democrats is that they have been let off the leash today. They are being let out a wee bit today to take part in this debate—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I just like to see the whites of their eyes. [Laughter.] I notice that a Labour member, Allan Wilson, has joined them on their benches today. The partnership is moving a stage towards completion. The Liberal Democrat amendment is not an amendment; it is an apology. If the Liberal Democrats were really interested in ensuring that Scottish air transport was effective, they would vote for the motion. They cannot vote for it, however, just as they could not show their principles on the agricultural business improvement scheme.

We have read it. [Laughter.] Well, as I said in a recent debate, I enjoy reading Liberal Democrat motions and reports—they lull me to sleep. Their amendment is all the usual material, with all the usual inaccuracies. It has all the hallmarks of a piece of work by Government spin-doctors. It was clearly handed to the Liberal Democrats in the same way as speeches are handed out to Labour members. It was handed to the Liberal Democrats because they were given the wee bit of freedom and licence to be dissenters today. For the Liberal Democrats, principle is the vice that dare not speak its name. They have no principles; they have sold them. Instead of being involved in the argument, they are running away from it. I would like to think that they would want some accuracy.

Mr Morgan attempted to intervene several times when Liberal Democrat members were speaking, but was not allowed to. It is true that five SNP MPs were not present at the transport debate at Westminster on 20 December. Exactly the same number of Scottish Liberal Democrat MPs did not vote in that debate, including the now Deputy First Minster. I think that we could call it a tie.

If, as I heard, Mike Rumbles used the word "hypocrisy"—I am sure that it will not be in the Official Report —I think that it will have to be sent back as a return of service. There is a most serious situation in air traffic control, which threatens jobs and safety. It should not continue. In passenger transport, the lack of services from Scotland is inhibiting the growth of the Scottish economy. There is also a great difficulty with freight, a business that Prestwick needs. I said that I was always conscious that, when the Administration was in trouble, we would see Mr McLeish panicking. An indication of that was his old argument: "If you criticise the Administration, you talk down Scotland." The people who are failing Scotland sit on the Labour benches. No amount of spin or bluster—

Let me just finish, Mr McLeish. No amount of spin or bluster will get Mr McLeish round that fact. The letter from FedEx is real. The meeting that  Mr MacAskill had with FedEx was real. If Mr McLeish wishes to put the points to FedEx that he made earlier—rather than hoping on the off-chance that FedEx will read the Official Report —he should meet its representatives, something that he has so far refused to do. I urge members to support the motion. If members support the Conservative amendment, they will be dancing to Mr Hague's tune. If they support the Liberal amendment, they will be dancing to Labour's tune—that is the reality of Liberal amendments. Members should support the motion because it stands up for vital Scottish services.

I want to give Mr Tosh a chance to pause for breath. May I make the point that, as a South of Scotland MSP, he will have had a letter from FedEx, which says: "We continue to be surprised that a Government so committed to ensuring that the UK is globally competitive remains firmly wedded to an aviation policy clearly focused around a small number of interests concerned with access to Heathrow to the detriment of Scottish jobs". Will Mr Tosh condemn the Government for that policy, instead of defending it?

I support John Swinney's amendment. It gets to the central issue of this debate. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning tried to define the central issue in about five different ways in his opening speech. The central issue of the debate is clearly the principle of free access to education. That is a principle which our predecessors, to their credit, in all the Scottish Parliaments before the union, strongly defended. Scotland was the first to have free access to education. Even in the Westminster Parliament, which I do not refer to often, there was a consistent attempt to continue that principle, largely by the Labour party now in government here. Of the 10 members in this chamber who were MPs when student grants were abolished in 1990, only two in this chamber voted for it. As a little historical footnote, one was, of course, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. The other was that stout defender of the rights of students to finance, Mr Keith Raffan. The Executive's proposals breach the principle of free access to education. That is what this debate should be about, and we should restate that. I am sorry that the minister is not in his seat because I have a lot of admiration for Mr McLeish. He can put in some nifty footwork when called on to do so. However, what we heard from him yesterday and today was not so much nifty footwork as bare-faced cheek. He is trying to  present himself as the caped crusader, rushing to the aid of the Scottish student population, which is being threatened by the awful imposition of tuition fees, but he is more like those fantasists who set fires and try to get the credit for putting them out. Who imposed tuition fees? Henry McLeish and his colleagues. The reality is that Mr McLeish is not Batman and Nicol Stephen is not Robin. Mr McLeish is the Joker—he created the problem that he is now trying to take away. Mr McLeish is guilty of another bit of cheek. He is not doing what he claims to be doing. There is a three-card trick going on—find the lady. It is a trick designed to fool the gullible, and the gullible have been fooled. There sit the Liberal Democrats, content in the belief that tuition fees are being abolished. As Fergus Ewing pointed out, tuition fees are not being abolished. The Executive's sleight of hand has taken in those who want to be taken in.

The point is simple: certain courses cannot be studied in Scotland. The course at Loughborough was an example of that. I am sure that Mr Swinney will be able to furnish Mr Jenkins with a long list of courses that cannot be studied in Scotland.

Mr Jenkins does not want to understand this point because gaps appear in his argument once one starts to think about it. We hear that the problem is due to a legal opinion, but nobody can produce the evidence. Mr Wallace let the cat out of the bag and revealed that it was all about money. Access to free education is an inalienable right and the Executive is prejudicing that by the actions that it is taking. The honest position would be to say that tuition fees should go. The Liberal Democrats said that endlessly in the election campaign. In May 1999, Jim Wallace said that the people of Scotland had made the scrapping of tuition fees non-negotiable. We have since had the longest period of non-negotiations that we have ever seen. There have been six weeks of non-negotiations designed not to help students but to ensure that the makeshift  coalition goes on as long as possible. The principle of free access to education is dear in Scotland and produces great results. We are used to the shifting sands of new Labour, but the Liberals—although known to be vacillating and vague—once had principles. As I was falling off to sleep last night, I was reading the Liberal party's 1945 election manifesto. [Laughter.] I find Liberal manifestos to be more effective than any sleeping draught. It said: "Our place in the world will depend on the character of our people and on minds trained to understand and operate the complex technical achievements of the modern world. We cannot afford to neglect talent which lies unused because of the poverty of parents." If the Liberals had stuck to their principles, today we would be voting down tuition fees, not imposing new ones.

It's the way he tells them.

I do not want to speak against the motion but I must say that members must be astonished to find themselves in this chamber today with a meltdown in the Administration taking place—

I will speak against the motion, but I will not move a vote against it. I want to speak against the motion on the grounds that—

The standing orders allow me to do this.

I speak against the motion on the ground that, since the business motion was put together, there has been a meltdown in the Administration. There is, as we speak—

Events are moving so fast—

I understand Dr Simpson's point, but wish simply to reiterate what I started to say. Events have moved on substantially since yesterday; it is a fast-moving world if one works for the Executive. Taxpayers are paying for a number of highly paid advisers, one of whom is being forced to retract remarks made about an ex-employee as we speak.

The Executive should explain to members what is happening about that.

To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Executive is planning to make to the BBC in connection with the BBC's previously announced May 2000 review of the need for a Scottish edited and controlled 6 o'clock news programme. (S1F-44)

The First Minister has the virtue of consistency, at least. He has taken a supine position on the matter since it was first raised. However, in the light of that position, perhaps it would be advisable for the First Minister to tell the First Secretary in Wales about it. In the excitement of his election on 12 May 1999, the First Secretary said in the Welsh Assembly chamber, during his acceptance speech: "The BBC was right to decline to break up the six o'clock news."—[ Official Record, National Assembly for Wales; 15 May 1999.] In the circumstances, there is no consistency in new Labour's position and there has been bullying and interference. I hoped that the First Minister and his Administration might address the potential of Scottish broadcasting and help it to develop, first of all in the BBC and, in the emerging crisis, in Scottish Television, as that would be welcome. I hope that the First Minister will be active in the matter.

I strongly support what Roseanna Cunningham has said. The Scottish National party is pleased to support this motion. We have our concerns about Westminster legislation, but there is no doubt that not only is this the only way to take this item forward, it is the right way. I start with a comment or two about Mr Gallie's amendment. I was struck by the words of Norman Shanks, who spoke earlier. He quoted a poem by Ben Okri, which said that new worlds await to be discovered by free minds and that we should begin here. The poem went on to say that we should "consign prejudices to the past". A genuine belief in the Scottish Parliament and in Scottish democracy should make certain that we discover new worlds. Two elements of Mr Gallie's amendment are worthy of great criticism. First, it cloaks, in a pretend belief in Scottish democracy, what is essentially a prejudice of the past. I would admire Mr Gallie, and those who support him, more if he were able to admit to that prejudice and to debate it openly.  Secondly, given the opposition to the Scottish Parliament and Scottish democracy that came from Mr Gallie and his colleagues over many years, suddenly to discover the virtues of consultation has eerie echoes of Margaret Thatcher's promise, in 1979, that people should reject constitutional change because something better was coming along. For the Scottish Tory party, which gave us the poll tax, without consultation, there should be a period of silence and reflection, and not such a hypocritical amendment. Equality is indivisible. It is impossible to believe in a socially just and progressive society without believing that it should apply across the board. It is not possible to say that discrimination on the grounds of religion or gender is wrong, but that we should discriminate on the ground of sexual orientation. That position cannot be held with honesty or integrity. I hope that members will reflect upon that in the weeks and months to come. Many people in this chamber believe, as I do, in building a new Scotland and that that Scotland has to be based on equality and fairness. The SNP believes in a bill of rights and a written constitution that guarantees those things for the people of this country. However, it is impossible to approach that from a pick-and-mix perspective. We cannot say that we should discriminate in one way but not in another. We have to be absolutely, totally and rigorously fair to all people in our society. I believe that the right way forward is a written constitution and bill of rights. However, until we have that, we must take a bit-by-bit approach: today it is the age of consent; in some months' time the prevention of discrimination against homosexuals will be written into legislation. Let us remember that we cannot favour one group over another, or pretend that we are in favour of equality while clinging on to the prejudices of the past. Presiding Officer, you will know of Pastor Niemöller and his famous words in the American Congressional Record . It is worth quoting them: "When Hitler attacked the Jews I was not a Jew, therefore, I was not concerned. And when Hitler attacked the Catholics, I was not a Catholic, and therefore, I was not concerned. And when Hitler attacked the unions and the industrialists, I was not a member of the unions and I was not concerned. Then Hitler attacked me and the Protestant church—and there was nobody left to be concerned." We cannot have a society in which we decide that one group is acceptable and another is not. We must not leave discrimination on the statute book or ignore the progress on human rights that has been made elsewhere and the demands that that places upon us. I urge members to support the motion. Unusually, I urge members to support  a Westminster route to justice.

To ask the Scottish Executive what safeguards for ownership of public assets will be put in place when local authorities wish to transfer ownership of leisure facilities to arm's-length trusts. (S1O-882) I think the croakiness of my voice indicates that I need some nicotine replacement therapy now. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I look forward to my free treatment.

If and when the Executive is approached by South Lanarkshire Council on this matter, will it ensure that there is no risk that, by such transfer, such public assets will become unavailable as a result of financial failure by the trust, as has happened in other areas?

rose—

How would Mr Kerr feel about a local authority discussing the matter? In particular, how does he feel about Glasgow City Council having done so, as it did two weeks ago? It passed unanimously a Labour motion that was in stronger terms than the one before Parliament today. Was that discussion a waste of time?

Perhaps we should pause for a moment to allow the smoke of battle to clear, because this morning we are considering an issue that is not only significant, but historic. It is important that we apply our minds to that rather than to the difficulties of the past 15 minutes. First, I thank the 77 MSPs who signed the motion that I lodged on 1 September. Given the convention that ministers, Presiding Officers and Deputy Presiding Officers do not sign motions, 77—70 per cent of MSPs who were able to sign the motion—is a substantial number. If Ian Jenkins's criticism is the worst that can be made of me this morning—that I have brought to debate in this chamber a motion that was not for debate—that is fair enough. I plead guilty. The reality is that I lodged the motion on 1 September with the support of five other MSPs because I felt that, if the Parliament's expression and will could be given on the business bulletin, over a period of time there might be some change south of the border that might move the issue on. That has not happened, which is why we are debating the issue today. We have had rumour and counter-rumour, spin and counter-spin. We have heard allegations that the First Minister was in favour of change pre-Rafferty, but against change post-Rafferty. We have heard a variety of rumours. However, what we have not had is any commitment to action. I hope that we will debate the issue constructively and respectfully to say that this is a blot on Scotland which requires to be changed and that, by letting its voice be heard, the Parliament can be instrumental in such change. Let us consider what the Act of Settlement 1701 and the following Act of Union 1707 actually are. They are extremely offensive pieces of legislation that stipulate that those who "profess the popish religion" can neither be monarchs nor marry into the royal family. Although the issue of who is or is not the monarch is not something that keeps me awake at night, I am concerned when any individual is told that the profession of his or her religion disbars him or her from anything. Most of us thought that such times were over in Scotland; many people are surprised to find that such times are still here.  As the Church of Scotland said yesterday, the Act of Settlement is a product of its times, as is the Act of Union. When those acts were passed—somewhat narrowly in the case of the Act of Union—the killing times were still within living memory. Profession of the Protestant religion had been injurious to health and even to life. Within living memory, a monarch had been removed from the throne for the profession of a very aggressive form of Catholicism which was felt to threaten the nation's unity. In such circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that such provisions were made. However, that was then, not now. We should not carry the prejudices of the past down to this and future generations; if we are to carry them down, we need a good reason for doing so. What has surprised me in the debate over the past three and a half months—and indeed in the debate over the past 20 to 30 years—is that there are no good reasons for failing to change these offensive provisions. I had hoped that the reasons would at last be given when I read this morning's The Scotsman, which outlines the formidable constitutional obstacles that Lord Hogg of Cumbernauld came up against when he attempted to introduce a 10-minute rule bill on the matter in 1981. The obstacles included the Coronation Oath Act 1688, the Union with Scotland Act 1706, which is indeed a formidable obstacle, but not in this context, and Princess Sophia's Precedence Act 1711—I suspect that even the First Minister could not tell us what that is about. They included the Royal Marriage Act 1772, article 2 of the Union with Ireland Act 1800—Lord Hogg is obviously unaware that that is not particularly relevant any longer—section 4 and the schedule to the Regency Act 1937 and the Statute of Westminster 1931. None of us here could tell anyone what those laws are about, but what they should not be about is institutionalising discrimination. If any of them are, they should also be changed. Far from those laws being a reason for inaction, they are a spur to further action. That is what we should try to achieve in the chamber today.

I am sorry that Mr McMahon is not better informed. There is a motion and our members have raised the issue. Mr Salmond has raised the issue and spoken to it on a number of occasions. Even if Michael McMahon were right, his  intervention would not be in the spirit of today's debate, in which we are trying to change something that needs to be changed. With respect to Michael McMahon—I know that he supports the change—the best way to get change is for people in this chamber to agree that it is needed, rather than for them to make political points, which will get us no further. The act will remain unchanged if the matter is seen as party political. I am sorry that Mr McMahon is waving his hands in a rather odd fashion. There is not a shred of political advantage in this issue for any party in the chamber. There is an advantage for the people of Scotland, however, if, today of all days, the Parliament comes together to say that the act is wrong. There need be no wild words or statements, but together we should add our voice to the voices of the Church of Scotland, the Catholic Church, the Baptist union, the Hindu community, the Muslim community, distinguished historian Tom Devine and James MacMillan, who from the reporters' gallery conducted a fanfare for the opening of this Parliament on 1 July. If the Parliament adds its voice to those voices, we will do the Parliament credit. If, however, we comb through the minutiae of history to find a reason not to change things, they will not change. I want to hear one simple thing from Mr McCabe: that there is an intention to move forward. The amendment says simply that this is a terribly difficult matter and that it is somebody else's problem. We should remember Burke's words: "It is necessary only for the good man to do nothing for evil to triumph." I am sorry that the First Minister laughs at that, that he does not regard institutionalised discrimination of any description as unacceptable and that he does not want to join us in moving forward.

In a moment. Yesterday, Mr McAveety raised the issue with me in the tea room. He made a joke about me standing up for the poor Catholics of Glasgow, as if in some way it was a patronising action. I do not particularly want Mr McAveety to marry a monarch—the idea is pretty frightening—but I do want a society in which we can all say that there is no law that prevents anybody from doing anything because of religious discrimination.

I apologise. Mr McAveety and I have a number of private conversations. I will not—

I will not quote any of them again, Presiding Officer. I should say to Mr Henry that the motion is not a challenge to anybody. The argument that I put out arose because of representations made to me from the Labour benches—that this would be a challenge to Westminster. This is a challenge to decency in Scotland, not to Westminster. I acknowledge that Mr McCabe's amendment states the facts as they presently are and not as I would like to see them. I hope that, in those circumstances, the chamber would like to hear some positive intention from Mr McCabe. I hope that members can then move forward together. I do not support the constitutional settlement as it is at present. I hope that we will move on to a written constitution and a bill of rights. They would make this debate completely irrelevant. In such circumstances, it would be impossible to have discriminatory legislation. I regret that one of the excuses that has been given for inaction is that there would require to be change in 15 Commonwealth countries. Members will know from the material that we have been releasing over the past few days that that is not true. Any country with a written constitution and a bill of rights will automatically override the Act of Settlement. With a written constitution and a bill of rights, we could transfer the matter to the history books. We can do that today if the Parliament unites to say that we are in a process of change and of making Scotland a better country to live in. In those circumstances, we are in the process of removing any offence towards our fellow citizens. I hope that the tone of this debate will be one in which we can make those points. If we do not have a debate of that tone, the matter will not go away. We can take the matter away today. United, we can say that discrimination is wrong. Let us end it. That would be a suitable Christmas and millennium gift from this Parliament to the people of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament believes that the discrimination contained in the Act of Settlement has no place in our modern society, expresses its wish that those  discriminatory aspects of the Act be repealed, and affirms its view that Scottish society must not disbar participation in any aspect of our national life on the grounds of religion.

I am grateful to Mr McCabe for clarifying the matter. It is important that we know what we are voting on. I apologise for croaking, but I am croaking rather less than I was yesterday. This will be a long  morning, so I will be brief. Two issues are at stake—one is the issue of principle and the other is the issue of practice. The issue of principle is that this morning's time in the Parliament is Opposition time, which has been allocated to the Scottish National party. Yesterday, we chose to bring forward an urgent motion that was lodged on Monday, which seeks to redress an injustice that is being done to some 4,000 people and which involves £22 million. It is a matter of real hardship in many sectors of the agriculture community in Scotland. With the report from the Rural Affairs Committee strongly recommending that action be taken on ABIS, it seemed only fair to give Parliament the opportunity to have its voice heard, particularly as the cut-off date for the scheme—

Thank you very much. Obviously, Mr Smith's long train journeys from Fife, to which he referred yesterday, are preying on his mind. The report, which is in the hands of everyone in the chamber, clearly indicates that an injustice is being done. In those circumstances, it is right that we consider the motion. If members had listened to the evidence in the committee, it would be surprising if they did not know that an injustice was being done, even before the report came out. Perhaps Mr Smith should read the evidence more often. There is a wrong to be righted and this is the last opportunity to do so. It would be a huge failure of the Parliament if it did not take that opportunity and I am glad that the SNP is offering that opportunity. A decision on the matter involves all of us, particularly Liberal Democrat members, who should recall that at Westminster—and I am not  fond of many Westminster conventions—there is a convention that the vote must follow the voice. We have heard many voices raised by the Liberal Democrats against the injustice of ABIS. I hope that they will bear that in mind when they decide whether to vote for the motion.

Obviously, the Deputy First Minister's vote will not follow his voice—that is a matter for his conscience. The second point that I wish to raise this morning— [Interruption.]

The Deputy First Minister is unusually animated this morning. The second matter of great importance for the chamber is that this morning is SNP Opposition time. If we choose to bring a motion for debate, it should not be subject to veto by the Executive. There is a basic principle about allocation of parliamentary time, which I have addressed repeatedly in the Procedures Committee. In the circumstances, it would be wrong for the Parliament and any member on those benches to vote not to allow the SNP to use its time in the way that it wishes. If the Parliament were to do that, it would be a great blow to democracy here.

It is a killer point.

We have heard another Liberal Democrat whose vote will not follow his voice. I regret that, because this is an issue of parliamentary privilege; it is an issue about how the Parliament operates—whether the Executive dominates it or parties have a shot at things. If members vote against the motion, they are not only condemning 4,000 people to considerable financial hardship—remember that—but voting against Scottish democracy. I ask members to  bear that in mind when they vote this morning. I move, That motion S1M-392 be taken at this meeting of the Parliament.

Presiding Officer, I have given you notice that I would like to move a motion without notice, in my name, about the agricultural business improvement scheme. I submitted the motion to you this morning and I want to address the issue of whether it should be taken.

Can I speak against the motion?

I do not intend to suggest a division. However, an issue has arisen that relates to the recess. Members will be aware that the agricultural business improvement scheme has caused much consternation in recent months and has been the subject of an inquiry by the Rural Affairs Committee, which will report tomorrow. It is essential that the business of the ABIS be settled by the end of December, as European legislation payments have to be approved by that time. Currently there are 4,000 outstanding payments, amounting to £22 million—many people have expended money under the scheme. At lunch time today, the Scottish National party gave the Executive notice that we wished to use the last hour of tomorrow's Opposition time to debate motion S1M-376, in the name of Fergus Ewing, to allow the Parliament to discuss the matter before the recess. If we do not discuss it before the recess, many thousands of people will be disadvantaged. The Executive has refused that request. That interferes with the right of Opposition parties to nominate the way in which they wish to use Opposition time. I ask Mr McCabe to reflect on the matter. I hope that when we meet tomorrow, the Executive will have accepted that the Opposition can bring the matter for debate. The issue has a direct consequence for thousands of people and, given the commitment made by Lord Sewel to pay the money, for the integrity of the Government.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At 12.20 this morning, the Deputy Minister for Parliament said that there would be no statement on the matter of John Rafferty. A press statement was issued at 12.52 announcing that Mr Rafferty would leave the Executive's employment. Have you had notice that the Executive will make a statement, and do you think that the Executive should make a statement on the matter?

I repeat what has become a constant theme: gratitude to Murray Tosh, my fellow members of the committee and John Patterson and his clerking team for making the Procedures Committee a pleasurable experience. I know that members believe that people on the Procedures Committee are anoraks of parliamentary procedure who enjoy nothing more than dissecting rule 15.1(b). Their impression is correct. There are many sad people similar to ourselves in the world, but at least the Procedures Committee keeps us from train-spotting; it also contributes to the greater good of the Parliament. The committee has worked well, in no small measure because of the leadership of Murray Tosh. A colleague said to me last night that, now that this report was before the Parliament, the work of the Procedures Committee would be over and we could go and do something useful. The reality is that the work of the committee has only just started. Today's debate is about making the ideal standing orders that the consultative steering group gave us into something workable. There were elements of the CSG standing orders that were impossible to make work practically in the Parliament. The job of the Procedures Committee from now on is to take the workable standing  orders and make them better and perhaps, through the work of the chamber and the committees, to convert them back into something ideal. A number of issues still need to be addressed. There are the abstruse but important issues surrounding the allocation of parliamentary time, a matter to which Tommy Sheridan has referred. To whom does the time of the Parliament belong? Does it belong to the Parliament, which can give it away to the Executive or to others? Alternatively, does it belong to the Executive, which simply doles it out in small amounts to the Opposition parties? I stand firmly on the side of the argument that the time of the Parliament belongs to the Parliament and that the Executive should be allowed to use it, but not all of it. There is a great need for that time to be used by Opposition parties and by individual members in bringing their concerns to the Parliament. We heard two statements this morning, both of which overran and neither of which contributed a great deal to the parliamentary debate, leaving many members feeling frustrated. I would like the Procedures Committee to discuss the way in which the time of the Parliament could be put at the disposal of the Parliament's members, not just at the disposal of the Executive. There is the question of private members' bills and committee bills, a process that we have not really started yet. We have a great deal to learn; as we do, and as those pieces of legislation go through, we will have to return to the standing orders and look closely at the best way in which to assist individual members to bring legislation through. We do not know precisely how that will happen. We have to consider the relationship between the Parliament and other institutions. As we speak, the First Minister is taking part in a committee in London on which the Parliament has never been consulted. The joint ministerial committees will be important to the work of the Executive and the Parliament, yet the issue has been debated neither in the chamber nor in any of the Parliament's committees. It is extremely important that the Procedures Committee looks at such issues, makes a judgment on them and brings its recommendations to the chamber so that Parliament can be consulted. The committee can also discuss the bizarre ideas that emanate from individual members, including the First Minister, who seems to think that there is a role for the House of Lords in scrutinising the work of the Parliament, an idea so odd that it must have been some sort of joke that simply fell flat on its delivery.

In such circumstances, I welcome scrutiny from James Douglas-Hamilton, whom one might call the acceptable face of the House of Lords. In reality, there is no place for an unelected or appointed chamber furth of Scotland to scrutinise the work of this Parliament—we should say that formally and strongly. The Procedures Committee has made a good start in the work that it has done. More is to be done, and I look forward to working with my colleagues on that. I believe that the committee is putting in place the ways in which the Parliament can serve the people of Scotland within the limits of the legislation; from my perspective as a nationalist, I hope that it is also putting in place the ways in which a fully independent Parliament can serve the people of Scotland without such limitations.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Railtrack regarding safety at railway level crossings in Scotland. (S1O-689)

I thank the minister for his answer and express my gratitude for his versatility, as he represents a constituency that has no railway level crossings and, indeed, no railways. Are he and Sarah Boyack aware of the railway level crossing at Stevenston in Ayrshire, which is closed 114 times a day for a total of nine hours a day? It is causing such frustration to residents that, unfortunately, many of them are trying to cross the track, despite the fact that there is no footbridge. That is a railway disaster waiting to happen, in which Railtrack shows no interest. Will the minister consult Railtrack and try to persuade it to use some of its profits to help the community of Stevenston?

rose—

On a point of order. Is the minister entitled to mislead the chamber and then refuse to accept an intervention that would correct his mistake?

That is old technology.

It is with some regret that I congratulate Mr Peacock on his motion. I hope that he did not draft it. My regret is that I like Mr Peacock. This is an exciting subject; however, the motion is not only bland but rings with new Labour buzz-speak words: partnership, social well-being, championing and all such matters are in there. Modernise is not there—that must have been deleted from the dictionary today. However, the motion does not say anything. Mr Peacock dealt with this exciting subject in the manner in which an accountant might deal with a North sea caravan rating order. It is all dullness. We have to have some excitement about this subject as it is about nothing less than changing the world. Connections between individuals will be, and are becoming, entirely different, because of the advent of digital technology and the information society and world. A key issue is how to engage people in this. A range of people have stood up as if they were giving testaments at an Alcoholics Anonymous  meeting to say that they cannot use computers and need help. The oldest member—the mother of the Parliament—cannot use computers. Neither can Mr Jenkins. Maureen Macmillan is trying to use them, and I see that another member cannot use them. We are all going to stand up like revivalists and ask for help. In their houses, people have one piece of equipment that they can use and that can connect them to the world: a television set. Almost everybody here can switch on a television set—nobody is putting their hand up to say that they cannot. Digital television changes the world for everybody. With digital television operating effectively across Scotland, we can begin to access a range of different things: not just television programmes, but interactive television programmes. I watched the Scotland v England game on Saturday on interactive television. It allowed me to watch the game from any angle. I have to tell members that it did not make the game any better.

Unfortunately I could not. That would be fantasy television. Because there is a much bigger opportunity to transmit—I am sorry Alasdair Morrison is not here—Gaelic and Welsh television channels, and television channels in every other language, can be made available. There is more: we can shop, use e-mail, play games—in fact, we can have a computer on our television set. Some years ago, there was speculation that the internet would be available on television, although people did not know how to bring the two together; that has now happened. We have to find a way to bring people into the information age. The box in the corner of people's rooms is the way in which that can be done. At present, the charge for the basic digital television service on satellite is about £12 to £13 a month. That is less than having a computer or subscribing to certain internet services. We have to ensure that people have the maximum access to digital television. The great tragedy of this debate is that the UK Government is considering the conclusions of the Davies report, which would make it more difficult to get access to digital television. The prospect of a digital levy—under which people would pay extra to subscribe to digital services—is lunacy. It puts back the time at which the whole television service can move to digital. Last week, Duncan Hamilton asked Mr Galbraith about access to digital television in the Highlands and Islands. We want a dash to digital, which  would require Government help to fund it. The Government can help to fund that dash to digital, because it will receive at least £10 billion from the sale of analogue frequencies when digital takes over. When developing its strategy, the Executive should think of ways in which it can put Scotland really—not just in yet another motion—at the cutting edge. It should encourage a quick switch-over to digital television and assist people to switch over. We can then open up the world from the corner of everybody's living room. The opportunity to do that exists. While we are doing that, we can encourage the providers of other digital services, such as BT, to be more generous in their provision. In Northern Ireland, there was an overnight switch-over to digital. In some parts of Scotland, it is claimed that because of technological difficulties we have to live within 3 km of a digital exchange to have a digital line, and customers are being quoted up to £200,000 to install a digital telephone line. There cannot be an abdication of responsibility. No number of task forces, even if chaired by people as amiable as Mr Peacock, will make any difference unless there is investment. In the 19 th century, Governments knew that they had to invest to change and develop society. It is greatly to be regretted that, on the verge of the 21 st century, that basic truth has been lost by new Labour, in particular, and sadly by the Liberals, too, and the partnership has no desire to invest. The UK Government will receive £10 billion, a share of which will come to Scotland. Let us spend the money on the future. The future is digital television. If we do not spend that money, all these fine words will mean nothing. Finally—I have anticipated you, Presiding Officer, and promise that this is my final point—I say that the amendment is profoundly necessary. The Executive has not demonstrated a desire for a national strategy and plan. I ask those who have open minds on the matter to support such a desire, so that the Government prepares itself in the way that other countries in Europe are preparing themselves, rather than in the quixotic manner of new Labour.

Please do not take out your pacemaker.

rose—

It is an indication of how restrained Parliament has become that when members have had the opportunity for the past 40 minutes to murmur about Scottish judges, not a single murmur has been heard. That might be because of fear or reticence or because not enough members are here, but it testifies to the respect in which the judiciary is held in Scotland, not simply because of its actions, but because of its long and distinguished contribution to our society. The issues that we are discussing are not without their concerns, and I pay tribute to the speeches of Pauline McNeill and Des McNulty. There is strong public concern in Scotland that the system of judicial appointment is not transparent, democratic or fair and that it is not a system that produces—to some extent—a cross-section of Scottish society to sit in judgment. I am heartened by the remarks of the Minister for Justice this afternoon that the Executive will bring forward for consultation ideas on a new system of judicial appointments. I hope that when we have that debate in the chamber we can move Scotland forward into a more transparent and democratic era. There was not even any criticism this afternoon when we heard the astonishing figure that a fully rigged judge costs £140,000 a year. I suspect that if a fully rigged politician cost £140,000 a year, we would be in considerable trouble. Obviously, judges are worth the pittance that they receive and I suspect that the approval of that money will go through on the nod. Members may have noticed some behind-the- scenes activity; I am glad to see the Minister for Parliament in his place. Strong concerns have been expressed in the past 24 hours that there are difficulties in getting the timetabling of debates in the chamber correct. All members of the Parliamentary Bureau should share those concerns. The clock shows that it is only 4.25 pm. To take us to 5 o'clock, the Lord Advocate and I would have to speak for 35 minutes—the Lord Advocate is, of course, quite capable of that, although I might not be. That is a compliment to the Lord Advocate's eloquence, as I am sure he will show when eventually he is worth £140,000 a year. The reality is that we do not have a debate that will take us to 5 o'clock. I am pleased to say that the Minister for Parliament will move a business motion that will move the business of the chamber on. The Parliamentary Bureau—I speak as a member of it—will have to reflect on this matter and ensure that the timetabling of all business meets the demands of the chamber. It was never in question that the order would be approved by the Parliament. There was never any question but that this would be a matter of consensus between the parties. We could have achieved this more promptly. I am happy to support the increase in the number of judges in Scotland, as is my party. We look forward to it and we look forward to the high reputation of the Scottish judiciary being maintained by the new members of the bench.

In the light of Mr Wallace's remarks about the inability to foresee things, it is my feeling that it is frequently not so much justice that is blind in Scotland, but the Minister for Justice and the Lord Advocate. The political point of today's ruling must surely be the policy that the Liberal Democrats at one time espoused, which I believe is even mentioned in the partnership agreement, on judicial appointments. The Scottish National party, as Mr Wallace knows, has outlined its policy of having a judicial appointments commission. The  Administration should bring forward proposals for a truly independent judicial appointments commission as soon as possible. That would not only solve this problem, but would introduce a much needed new level of democracy into Scotland.

There is no doubt that, throughout the Borders, there is a tremendous desire for an improvement in the quality of life, for jobs to be created and to enter the 20 th century, if not the 21 st . It seems that, when development takes place, other places are given priority and Borders people feel left out. The fact that we are having this debate symbolises the fact that the Borders deserves attention from the Parliament. If one were to poll the people of the Borders on what issue they would like attention to be paid to, the No 1 issue would be that their area should feel connected again to the whole of Scotland and particularly to Edinburgh. There are questions about the viability of a rail link that would go all the way to Carlisle. The essential nature of the debate, however, is the ability of the Executive to give the people of the Borders an indication that they are being listened to and that there is a desire to help them. I am always nervous when we get to a debate and the Executive has not leaked anything. It makes me think that we will not hear anything from it in the debate. It is possible, however, that the minister is holding on to a nugget of information that she will allow us to have. If that is the case, we will be immensely grateful. However, if the people of the Borders hear nothing, that will send a message that will not be lost on them. There is a great deal of resentment about what happened with Viasystems, a matter that my friend Christine Grahame was deeply involved in. There is resentment over the continuing erosion of traditional industries, not only in textiles but in farming. If, today, the people in the Borders hear that nothing, or that the minimum, is to happen, that message will be pressed home strongly in the area—not just by the minister's party, but by a party that is in partnership and seems to have gained little out of that partnership. I ask the minister to give us some hope.

Is the minister—as the minister who is responsible for this matter—prepared to pass the  Official Report  of this debate to the Secretary of State for Scotland so that he can consider the views that have been expressed in this debate when he undertakes his review? The Parliament might be able to pass a motion on that without notice, or it might require the permission of the Presiding Officer. I am sure that it would be useful to the secretary of state if the minister made that undertaking.

The European Parliament does not permit its elections to be held on the same day as other elections in any of its member states. There must be a reason for that. The reason is that it causes confusion in the counting process. That is a good European example that we should follow.

On a point of order. When the Minister for Communities wound up yesterday afternoon's debate, she made the major announcement of the debate essentially in the last two minutes of her speech. That was contrary to procedure and to the way in which debates should be conducted. Would you rule that that is unacceptable and should not happen again?

Will Richard Lochhead give way?

I wondered whether Richard would, in his summing up, reflect the fact that, some moments ago, interest rates were raised by a quarter of a per cent. Surely that will be enormously damaging for rural Scotland and we should condemn it in this debate. [Applause.]

I am very happy to concur with the minister's view that they are businesses. How are any businesses in Scotland helped by the fuel duty escalator?

The important thing about the motion is that it seeks to unite rural and urban Scotland. In fact, it seeks to do what this Parliament is tasked to do. I  do not often quote Liberal Democrats with approval, but I want to quote Tavish Scott, speaking in the debate on the consultative steering group report. He said: "There is still concern in areas such as Shetland"— the concern is shared throughout Scotland— "that the Parliament will concentrate on the needs of the central belt, not on those of peripheral, rural and island areas. It is up to the Parliament to demonstrate that that is not the case and that there are ways in which peripheral, rural and island areas can be at the heart of what goes on in here."— [ Official Report , 9 June 1999; Vol 1, c 387.]  We are all aware that the flow to urban Scotland is a phenomenon that took place in the late 18 th century, throughout the 19 th century and into the 20 th century. Scotland had the fastest rate of industrialisation of any country in Europe in the 19 th century. However, that flow has been reversed to some extent during the second half of the 20 th century. Indeed, as Alasdair Morgan said, the population of rural Scotland is growing. Rural Scotland accounts for about 89 per cent of the Scottish land mass and about 29 per cent of the population. The population in Scotland's rural areas has been growing at a rate of up to 3 per cent, partly because it is easier to get to those areas; people can commute into towns and cities. In addition, many people desire—or find it necessary—to work and live in rural Scotland. It is ironic that while the population is increasing, the problems of transport, housing, provision of utilities and education are deepening. I am glad that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee took the issue of rural schools on board yesterday and appointed Jamie Stone as a rapporteur. I hope that the Parliament can begin to make a difference on that issue and many of the other issues in rural Scotland. There have been pioneers—including from the Labour movement—who have looked at the gulf between rural and urban Scotland and attempted to solve it. Two of my all-time heroes of the 20 th century in Scotland are Tom Johnston and Bob Grieve. I worked for Bob Grieve at one stage. Both of them saw the necessity of uniting rural and urban Scotland and put substantial parts of their lives into achieving that aim. Bob Grieve memorably said that he would support an independent Scotland after the problems of Glasgow and the Highlands had been solved—a position similar to that taken by Edwin Muir in his Scottish journey in 1934. We have to create unity in Scotland. The motion would achieve that. Tragically, that is not being done by the actions of this Government. Nor was it done by the actions of previous Governments. They are also guilty. The fuel price escalator is one example of policies that have deepened the  gulf and made it more difficult for people to earn a living in rural Scotland and to have sustainable communities there. The Parliament is failing Scotland unless we see it as one of our primary duties to increase the ability—

No, I have only four minutes and I want to finish this point. It is vital that we bring together urban and rural Scotland to make a united whole. This motion seeks to do that; it is a tragedy that the actions of the Executive and the previous Tory Government failed to do that. Crucially, they have failed to make a united whole in the agricultural industries. The Tory amendment is quite bizarre. The Tories are the guilty people. One of them—

No, I am sorry—if Mr McLetchie is guilty, he will get the chance to make a plea in mitigation. One of the Tories—I am very fond of him—was a minister in the Government that took those decisions.

No. The Tories failed rural Scotland in the same way as this Administration is failing rural Scotland. I am very fond of Mr Finnie, but there is something immensely perverse in putting such a charming accountant from Greenock in charge of the whole of rural Scotland and giving fisheries to a farmer from land-locked Berwickshire. Perhaps they are nervous that sitting behind them is a farmer from Bute whose ambition is to shepherd the Liberal Democrats and, in so doing, to make his way to the front bench.

This Administration has to take rural Scotland seriously. It may speak a good game, but it is not playing a good game. The difference between urban and rural Scotland is deepening day by day. There must be action—not the smug satisfaction of the Executive amendment or the Tories' attempt to evade responsibility. Action is what the Parliament is for and what the motion is about. I ask members to support it.

I think that the Ayrshire economic forum is extremely important. It is regrettable that the list MSPs for Ayrshire are not invited to attend—certainly the SNP ones are not. I hope that the minister will encourage the Ayrshire economic forum to involve list MSPs.

I am interested in the vote Ms Oldfather mentioned. I am unaware that any such  vote was held. Can Ms Oldfather produce a record of it? Ms Oldfather is being disingenuous, because she knows that I offered my personal support and said that I was prepared to differ with my party on that issue. I hope that she regrets what she said.

Which vote are you referring to?

Which vote are you referring to?

I move, That the debate be extended by 15 minutes.

I could speak in a raised voice until members have left, but I will not do so. I am grateful for the opportunity to raise my concerns about the problems of unemployment in North Ayrshire. The sponsoring of a debate such as this, however, is a mixed blessing. I was alarmed, not to say frightened, to receive in the post today an envelope that was franked with the words "Beattie Media". I opened the envelope in the presence of a number of witnesses whose names and addresses have been provided to the Standards Committee. Inside the envelope was a press release about Enterprise Ayrshire's involvement in the Investors in People awards. On the basis of that press release, I have a word of advice for businesses and organisations in North Ayrshire: they should not put their trust in spin and Beattie Media. The fourth paragraph says: "ALERT has joined the x (fill in number here) organisations in Ayrshire that have achieved investors in people status". That shows us Beattie Media at its best. It tells us something about the state of public bodies in Ayrshire that many of them rely on spin, not substance, in tackling the issue of unemployment. Unemployment is a human issue, not an abstract issue or a matter of statistics or press releases. There are families in North Ayrshire today who, by the end of the week, will have discovered that their breadwinner no longer has a job and who will be facing the immediate future and Christmas without any money. That is the reality of unemployment. This Parliament has to address the real issues, not spin and hype. The reality in North Ayrshire does not make pleasant reading. A huge number of problems  faces the economy of the area. The jobs base is declining with the decline of traditional manufacturing industries. Official sources confirm that. The demise of Irvine's new town status has left unresolved economic problems. There is an underdeveloped service sector. There is below-average participation in self-employment and start-up businesses. There is underperformance in the attainment of educational qualifications. The skills training that is available is skewed towards lower-skilled occupations. Of the 12 major local enterprise companies in Scotland, the one in Ayrshire fared second worst in terms of job losses between 1991 and 1996, and the situation has got worse. As the motion states, unemployment in North Ayrshire is the second worst in Scotland. Although Scotland's employment levels are gradually rising, unemployment for the whole of Ayrshire is expected to fall by 1 per cent, and the situation in North Ayrshire is worse than that. Compared with the Scottish economy as a whole, North Ayrshire is under-represented in service industries and financial services—two big growth areas, internationally—and in tourism, particularly high-value tourism. Although there was a modest national rise in VAT business registrations between 1994 and 1997, in North Ayrshire the figure fell by 4 per cent and there has been virtually no growth in the number of self-employed workers in the area. At the end of 1998, North Ayrshire was the third worst area in Scotland for unemployment; it is now the second worst. The gap between the employment figures in North Ayrshire and those in Scotland as a whole has worsened in the past year. There is only one strategic site for incoming investment in North Ayrshire—Riverside: a site that has had some problems. Those are huge structural problems to contend with, and the day-to-day difficulties are even worse. Members who are present know what those difficulties are, but I shall recite one or two of them. Since January, there has been the threat of 450 job losses at Volvo. I say with no pleasure that the cynical way in which promises were made to Volvo workers up to 6 May, by the Labour Government, and the lack of action thereafter are a ringing condemnation of previous ministers, if not of present ones. Jobs have been lost at the Caledonian Paper mill. There have been job losses in Beith and Irvine. Jobs have been lost all over North Ayrshire, and it is a continuing process. We must find the right method to move forward. This Parliament is often criticised by people who say that it should not being doing this and it should not be doing that. The one thing that people always say that this Parliament should be doing is finding ways in which jobs can be secured; finding  ways in which human dignity can be restored; finding ways in which there can be hope. Unemployment in North Ayrshire is a central problem for this Parliament, as is unemployment in every part of Scotland. We must be positive and encourage people to work together. We must also create the right image for areas that want to grow. That is the subject of a great deal of work. The image of North Ayrshire has not been helped by the front-page story in the local paper last week, which detailed an incident in which one councillor attempted to assault another at a trades dinner. That type of image does not attract anyone. The trouble with North Ayrshire Council is that its image has not encouraged people to come and invest in North Ayrshire. That is not the sole problem. There are problems of transport infrastructure. In the roads review, tomorrow, we must push for investment in the roads infrastructure in North Ayrshire. I have a terrible feeling that we will be disappointed, but we must encourage that investment and look for action by the key players. Who are the key players? North Ayrshire Council. I am grateful to it for providing information for the debate. I have received some interesting, if rather defensive, information from it. There are good people in North Ayrshire Council, who are trying to attract employers. Unfortunately, their work is hindered by the history of unemployment in the area and by the history of a council that lacks ambition—it is the second worst council in Scotland, according to official figures. There must be action from the Scottish Executive. In spite of the image of Lord Macdonald of Tradeston—when he was responsible for employment—and that other professional mummer for jobs in Scotland, Brian Wilson, constantly wringing their hands over unemployment, nothing was done by the previous Administration. I look forward to Nicol Stephen telling us today of things that will be done. I would have been delighted if he had leaked that information to the press before the debate—he must be the only minister who has not done so. Let us have an announcement on action. In this Parliament, what can we do? We can come forward with ideas—and there are many ideas. We can lodge motions to back up those ideas and we can, as members of this Parliament, with honest intention say, "This is not good enough." We can put the spotlight on the failure to achieve in North Ayrshire and we can encourage the relevant bodies to do so. Following today's debate, I would like there to be another summit in North Ayrshire, which would involve all the MSPs, all the relevant ministers and all the organisations in drawing up an agenda and an action plan for employment in North Ayrshire. If we start that  process—if we try to work together—we can make a difference. However, there will be an awful price to pay if we do not make a difference. The statistic that North Ayrshire is the second worst area for unemployment in Scotland is, as I said at the start of the debate, much more than a statistic: it is an indication of human suffering. More than three people are chasing every job in North Ayrshire. On present projections, that can only get worse. If this Parliament does not take it upon itself to force the issue forward, people will suffer in North Ayrshire year on year, and this Parliament will have let them down.

It must be a feature of age that ministers, like policemen, look younger every day. On behalf of the SNP, I thank the ministerial team for accepting the amendment. The gentlemen of the press should note that this is the second day in a row that an amendment has been accepted. That tells us something about consensus politics. I have two points to make. First, the amendment is important. I am glad that it has been accepted, as there must be an element of scepticism about initiatives that are proposed in the manifestos of political parties—I speak as a former campaign director. It is important that initiatives that are to be funded from the public purse are carefully scrutinised. Over the years in training and education, we have had a large number of wizard wheezes—particularly the Manpower Services Commission from the Tories—which crumbled like dust when they were closely examined. This initiative is far too important for us to allow that to happen, so the most rigorous criteria must be applied in assessing the work of the university for industry. I look forward to that rigorous approach, so that we can ensure that the university adds value. My natural scepticism was heightened a little yesterday when I read the document "Scottish University for Industry". It takes spin into the  realms of fiction and kailyard fantasy—a cultural development that we should probably welcome. The remarkable stories about fictional individuals that are contained in the document are gripping. I was particularly attracted to the story on page 12 about June Russell. I am of a certain age, and I thought that it might be Jane Russell, but it is not. Some care needs to be taken over presenting the information on such an important development. There might be an advantage in taking a soap-opera approach when selling the university— [Interruption.] Is Alasdair Morrison indicating that he wrote the document? I did not write it, if that was what he is trying to indicate. It might be useful to take the soap-opera approach when selling the university to students and others, but we would have liked something more rigorous when selling it to Scotland and this Parliament. My second point is that this is an exciting and innovative project. It is a new way of thinking about connecting people to the needs of a changing market and a changing society. It is a new way of bringing people forward, of doing what education does by definition, which is to draw people out. There must be new thinking in terms of where the university is based and how it operates. I welcome the appointment of Frank Pignatelli. One of the factors that distinguished Frank Pignatelli's reign as director of education in Strathclyde was a keen concern for the rural areas. We now have an opportunity in Scotland to establish the headquarters of the university for industry—it is not learning centred in the sense that pupils and students have to attend the venue—at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. Crichton College has an enormously innovative approach to education. I had the honour to give the inaugural lecture at the new college some weeks ago. I have visited the campus twice and I think that it is a most exciting place. Various colleges and universities are coming together to look at education in a new way. There are facilities and buildings there. I know that the Crichton Development Company Ltd and Dumfries and Galloway Council have been in touch with the civil servants in the relevant department. I hope that Mr Pignatelli, the board and others, will go to the college.

If I take the intervention, will I be allowed to get my last sentence in?

I am never averse to being rude to George Lyon, but on this occasion it would be gratuitous. I want to be certain that the university for industry has the best location and I think that Crichton College would be best. I ask the minister to give a commitment to visit the college and talk to people there, because I think that it is the right place for the university to be based.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received from North Ayrshire Council about the impending deficit in the council's direct labour organisation. (S1O-472)

I am not sure that Mr McAveety will win debater of the year with that speech. You know as little about this as the trade unions and the workers. Despite their efforts to find out why those decisions have been made, the trade unions and DLO workers have not received any information. In the light of the fact that you know nothing about this, will you join me and the trade unions in trying to get information by asking North Ayrshire Council to delay the decision until there has been an independent audit, discussed with those who are involved?

I am concerned that you use the words "absolutely delighted" about the loss of 40 jobs in North Ayrshire—an area that has the second worst unemployment in Scotland. Will you encourage an independent audit so that the workers involved can understand the reasoning behind this decision? Although modernisation may mean a lot to you and your colleagues in new Labour, in these circumstances it means job losses to people in North Ayrshire.

I want to address two issues: the working hours of teachers and the structure of the profession. Before I do that, however, I must declare two interests—as the husband of a teacher and as a parent. There are many parents in this chamber who are concerned about the future of their children and of children such as those in the public gallery this morning. That is what this debate is about. Many teachers will take severe offence at what the minister has said today. At the beginning of the debate, he attacked the SNP by saying that our motion has nothing to do with children. Every teacher puts children first, second, third and right the way through. By protecting, supporting and encouraging teachers, we intend to get the best out of children. It is extraordinary that society exhorts our children to listen to their teachers, but that the Government remains deaf to the teachers of Scotland. The structure of the profession is a vital matter for teachers, but it is a vital matter for children too. As Murray Tosh correctly and very movingly pointed out, it is the teachers in schools who can get the best out of children. I have not heard of or read about one teacher who supports the restructuring of the profession as the offer suggests. Yes, teachers support the restructuring of the profession and do not want the best teachers to be distanced from the classroom, but Kevin Nolan, a principal teacher in a Dundee secondary school, writing in the current issue of the Scottish Educational Journal , says of the proposals: "The plans to remove all Principal Teacher posts lack coherence, present an ill-defined method of progression  from one stage to another and have little to do with improving educational provision for young people." He goes on to describe the plans as "unworkable, divisive and woefully ill-thought out." I encourage the minister to listen to the teachers and not simply to his advisers. Nicola Sturgeon has described what the proposals will do in terms of career blocking. Rather than encouraging people into teaching and encouraging them to move through the profession and aim ahead, the proposals will stop progress in the profession and result in an even worse recruitment crisis. At a recent meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, Sam Galbraith moaned on about teachers not reading professional journals. Sam Galbraith is a professional and I hope that all of us in this chamber are professionals. What underpins professionalism is constructive self-management of time. One might argue that that is what differentiates professionals from others. However, in the proposed hours for teachers, there is not a moment for such constructive self-management. All time is to be allocated; all the time, teachers are to be told what to do. That rigid control will result in two things: in the best teachers working even longer hours for their pupils and the worst teachers giving up all hope that they can do better. If that is at the heart of the proposals, they are deeply flawed. I encourage the Executive and all the members sitting behind them, who are trying to defend the indefensible—including the Liberal Democrats, who have a choice on this matter in the partnership—to listen to the teachers. In the Educational Institute of Scotland ballot, 33,678 people voted no and 656 voted yes. There were 10 spoiled papers. Only 656 people voted in support of the proposals. That is a damning refusal. The figure is only slightly more than the number of votes polled by the Liberal Democrats in the Hamilton South by-election—which shows just how low it is. I say to Sam Galbraith, as many members do, "Play it again, Sam." I appeal to him to rewind from where he is and pick the right fight—a fight on behalf of teachers in Scotland—to get some money out of Gordon Brown's war chest. Sam Galbraith is involved in a fight with Scottish teachers that will damage our children.

I am not quite sure that being excused by Brian Monteith is a privilege. I am sure that he will confirm the points that I made to the convener of the committee and others that such conflict of scheduling is a difficulty that is found throughout the Parliament. I would like to see a little more understanding about that for all members.

Will the minister give way?

I hear the minister's point. Will he, however, respond publicly to the official letter that he received from the Scottish Trades Union Congress? The letter says: "Our General Council is extremely surprised and disappointed at the complete lack of balance in the Committee's composition." It goes on to say: "It is, therefore, quite staggering that of the seven members of the Committee announced so far, not one comes from a Trade Union background or from a constituency that suggests that they may be able to take an employee's perspective on pay and conditions issues." That is the view of the STUC, which is, ostensibly, one of your friends.

On a point of order. Presiding Officer, you are aware that this is our third non-Executive day, and that the Procedures Committee has been discussing the issue of who should wind up on such days. On the first occasion, when allowing the Executive to wind up, you said that you had not set a precedent. Will you consider allowing the Opposition to wind up on this occasion, so that the Procedures Committee can make a judgment based on both precedents?

I appreciate Michael McMahon's point, which is valid. These prayers will be public, and, as Tom McCabe has said, they will be prayers for the whole of Scotland. We should focus upon the reflection and not on ourselves. It raises also the issue of television coverage and I hope that we do that in a way that focuses on the reflection itself rather than on the members' reflection on the reflection. The bureau has discussed the way in which the reflections might take place—

That is an issue that has still to be resolved, but I would have thought that, if it is done, it cannot be in the conventional way with a wide picture. The reflection will be recorded in the Official Report . There is an argument for televising it, because in the motion we are saying that this is an event that would, we hope, lead the people of Scotland to reflect with the Parliament. If it is to be televised, it should be done in order to lead the people of Scotland. That is an issue for another day. What we want to do here is begin the process. I say to Phil Gallie and two other Tory speakers that there is an issue of tolerance here. The ecclesiastical history of Scotland has been a move from toleration to tolerance. Toleration means saying that other people are entitled to their religious beliefs, but that that must not interfere with the primary position of a particular faith.

If Mr Gallie will let me finish my point, I will let him intervene. There is a way to move from toleration to genuine tolerance, and that is to say that, while one may not share other people's views, they must be listened to. This motion is moving Scotland, at last, from a position of toleration to one of tolerance, and that is a position that most of us in this chamber would agree with. This is an inclusive matter. We should be tolerant of other faiths. I will give way to Mr Morgan, because Mr Gallie seems to have given up.

Yes, the Humanist Society of Scotland is on the list of organisations that have been consulted and it will be involved, and that is important.

Absolutely, and that is the point that I am making, but there is a difference between toleration and tolerance, and I am asking this Parliament to show tolerance. Today, we can show an example of tolerance.

As ever, Mr Salmond has anticipated me, because I was going to say that in my last sentence. It makes a change for Mr Salmond to write for me. [Laughter.] When we move from toleration to tolerance, we end up with celebration. We should be saying to the people of Scotland that this is how we should celebrate our inclusiveness, our new nation and the way that we envision this country. I ask members to support the motion.

Will Ms Brankin give way?

Your propriety as regards the names of parties was never questioned, Sir David.  I welcome this debate. The opportunity to discuss cultural matters is an example of why there should be an effective Parliament in Scotland. I have never been a member of the Westminster Parliament but, as I am sure the minister will confirm, the discussion of Scottish culture could never be central to the work of Westminster-that is not a criticism-although it can be central to our work.  I give a broad welcome to the Government's proposal, as culture is a subject on which there could be bipartisan support. I hope that that will develop. However, I am critical of this motion and lodged an amendment, which, unfortunately, was not called for debate. One of the difficulties I found in trying to amend the motion was its anodyne nature. Another difficulty was the reference-buried in the middle-to the national cultural strategy. There are many areas of cultural policy in which the Scottish National party would want to work with the Administration, but the national cultural strategy presents difficulties, on which I will concentrate today.  The Government's document is stylistically attractive but, as we will discover during this debate, lacking in substance. It opens with a quotation from the partnership agreement document, which the Government seems to believe is a work of art-it is certainly a work of fiction. It says:  "We believe that arts and culture have a central role in shaping a sense of community and civic pride in the new Scotland."  None of us would have any difficulty in endorsing that. We believe that arts and culture are central to our lives. Another quotation in this document, however, is even more accurate. It is from A L Kennedy, speaking in the Poets' Parliament. She says:  "I think Scottish writing has contributed to the moves that set up a Scottish parliament, but it did that by being non-aligned and anarchic and critical and all the things it is and I hope will remain".  The important nature of cultural activity of all sorts is that it should be anarchic, critical, non-aligned and exciting. Anybody who has been in Edinburgh in recent weeks will have found that even this douce city, which can be grey in the heart of winter, has its existence touched, transformed, shaken and enlightened by the intense application of the arts-even if some weeks ago the First Minister called some of the performances "fair hellish".  There is an enormous range of activity apart from the festival: the fringe, the television festival, the film festival, the book festival and a range of other activities. An early step that the minister might take would be to persuade the festival authorities that it is fundamentally daft to have a festival continuing without a fringe and that the festival period should be intensified, not diluted.  Creativity and culture should touch our national life. It should touch everyone because everyone can be transformed, shaken, enlightened and excited by creativity and everyone is creative. The real question in a cultural policy, therefore-and I do not want to talk about strategy-is what a Government can do to make that happen. What is  the Government's proper role? Its proper role is to encourage and support excellence, diversity, creativity and inclusion-those are all things that a Government must aim for. How is that to be done? It is to be done by consultation, discussion and financial support.  The question we have to ask of this strategy is: will it achieve its aims? I have to say that-at the moment, with the jury out-I, like many people, have severe doubts. The strategy is off to a bad start, because the right way of starting the search for the answer to those questions would have been to consult the other parties in the Parliament before the document was published.  For example, I am worried about the composition of the focus group-and about focus groups in the arts. I am sure that many of the people are well qualified, but the group does not seem to be particularly inclusive. If there had been an attempt to consult the other parties, we might have agreed on how we could contribute to the process.  So here is the document, fully formed. Indeed, the document is almost ironic, because although it contains Scottish Office prose, it also contains the most wonderful pearls-not written by the Scottish Office, of course. One of those pearls is this superb quote from Hugh MacDiarmid:  "He canna Scotland see wha yet Canna see the Infinite".  There is not the slightest sign of the infinite in this document-it is all far too definite already. We have to have a strategy to get a strategy. The strategy should be to discuss how the Government takes a proper role in the arts, and that is not being done.  Many issues are not even mentioned in the document. There is hardly any reference to education, language and local input, and only one word on broadcasting. I can imagine the embarrassment of the Administration and why it may want to avoid talking about broadcasting. The BBC regards itself as one of the biggest, most important cultural organisations in Scotland-it cannot be excluded. Broadcasting has to be included.  There is nothing on sport, strangely enough. Many people would argue that to treat sport as a separate subject is daft. Sport is one of the biggest influences on our lives. We should not be dividing those influences; we should be looking at being inclusive as we go forward.  The worst thing about this document is that, by its very existence, a national cultural strategy will exclude people-it is a sort of five-year plan for the arts. We need an approach that includes people. Before we go ahead, I would like some  thought to be given to that problem.  The Executive will come up with a plan next year, and no doubt there will be many words about consultation. No doubt the Executive will tell us that people are responding only when the consultation periods are over, and things of that nature. The reality is that the strategy is going to exclude people. It is also going to use a methodology that says nothing about anarchy and the need to have diversity of opinion. Unfortunately, it is going to be a new Labour approach to cultural strategy, and that is the last thing that Scotland needs.  There are many good things happening in Scotland across the spectrum of culture, the arts and the built heritage. I have called for a review of the Scottish Arts Council-which Sam Galbraith has refused-not because I do not think that good things are happening in the Arts Council. Many good things are happening: crafts, traditional music and excellence in support for publishing. There is a wonderful new scheme for novels. Books such as "The Voice of the Bard", by Tim Neat with Dr John MacInnes-I have a copy here-were published in the past few days with the support of the Arts Council. There are excellent things happening, but the structure puts people off applying and is unnecessarily bureaucratic.  Scottish Screen is doing great work. Its presentation to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee last week was excellent. Many artists are achieving things in Scotland. We want to find a proper way of supporting them, opening what they do to others and infecting others with a sense of creative purpose. We do not want to define a national strategy that can be set on a shelf and which-by definition-will exclude.  I welcome this debate because there is a way forward. The way forward would have been to have had a proper consultation before the document was published. Although that has not been done, there is still time for the Executive to consult the other parties to establish whether we can come to a common mind on encouraging Scottish culture. Would that not be a great achievement? We could encourage people to be touched, opened up and changed.  That is certainly the purpose of the Scottish Parliament-no matter whether it is devolved or, as I hope it will be, independent. Change in Scotland can be achieved to give people new life and new hope but, reading this document, I fear terribly that that is not the direction in which we are going. We are closing things down and that is not what should happen.  What does culture mean to people? In the middle of the document is a quotation from  George Campbell Hay:  "Fad na bliadhna rè gach ràithe Gach la's gach ciaradh dhomh Is e Alba nan Gall 's nan Gàidheal Is gàire, is blàths is beatha dhomh".  In another language, that means:  "All year long each season through Each day and each fall of dusk for me It is Scotland, Highland and Lowland That is laughter and warmth and life for me".  That is what culture in all its aspects is about. It is laughter and warmth and life. It is neither a five-year plan nor something for control freaks. If only I felt a touch of laughter, warmth and life in this document, I would be more confident that the strategy on which the Executive has set out will be successful. The Executive does not have to rush ahead; it could stop and think again. If it rushes ahead now, it will not produce the laughter, warmth and life that Scotland can have in its new democracy.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it still endorses the contents of "The Scotland Bill: A Guide", published by the Scottish Office in December 1997. (S10-203)

I thank the First Minister for his reply. Indeed the guide was widely welcomed, particularly the section on the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament. Will the First Minister advise his colleagues at Westminster-particularly Mr Brian Donohoe, with whom I am having a series of tedious media debates about the issue-that section 19 of the document says:  "The Parliament will have the power to debate both devolved and reserved matters".  As that statement from the First Minister-and from his previous incarnation as Secretary of State for Scotland-seems definitive, let us hope that, as far as this Parliament and Mr Donohoe are concerned, the matter is at an end. [Applause.]

The First Minister may also have some applause if he answers properly.

I shall be brief. I speak as a resident of Cowal and as somebody who shops in Dunoon, drinks in Colintraive, and whose son goes to Dunoon Grammar, although I hope that he will do better politically than other people from Dunoon Grammar-notably Brian Wilson.  I welcome the speeches of Jamie McGrigor and my member of the Scottish Parliament-although I did not vote for him-but I am surprised by Maureen Macmillan's contribution. She is a signatory of this motion. This campaign is being run by a distinguished newspaper in the community, which knows the community. I am inclined to believe Cowal residents and the people who write in that newspaper when they say that there is a crisis.  No matter what official spin-I hope that my  friend Alasdair Morrison will be positive-there is from Highlands and Islands Enterprise or officials of Argyll and Bute Council, there is a crisis of confidence and an economic crisis. It does not help to hide from that fact. Duncan Hamilton has outlined some of the elements of that crisis. Let us consider some of the positive solutions. I welcome Jamie McGrigor's conversion on the question of local authority aid. It seems to me that that was always blocked when the Secretary of State for Scotland was a Tory, but I always welcome lost sheep into the fold. If he now supports this campaign, that is well and good. The Government has a duty to recognise the special circumstances-the island circumstances-of the local council, and to take action on them.  I say to Maureen that the question is not one of refurbishing a pier. We cannot refurbish something that is falling down. We must rebuild the pier and get the breakwater. The distinguished pier that celebrated its centenary last year is the life-blood of Cowal and must be preserved. It was a dereliction of duty by the local council before the change of administration-I have hopes of the new administration, as my party and Mr Lyon's party are in it, and we have a chance to change things-to allow that pier to collapse. The worst thing that ever happened to Cowal was the election of a so-called independent administration, which was led by Councillor Dick Walsh. It was a disaster for the town.  Fortunately, in the new politics we have decided to let bygones be bygones. The Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard is leading the way with an all-party campaign. Let us get behind a campaign for island status for Argyll and Bute, restoration of Dunoon pier and investment in transport links. Let us get some energy into the local enterprise company and let us ensure that the ideas that Maureen talked about-the good ideas that appear every week in the columns of the Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard -are translated into reality by a sympathetic council and a sympathetic enterprise company, both supported adequately by this Administration.  I hope that we will hear an enthusiastic message from Alasdair today. He will be very welcome in Cowal again and I shall welcome him into my own house-that was not a bribe-as long as he has something to offer to the community, which feels in crisis, wants assistance and has a community newspaper that is pushing the issue. We can solve the problem, but we can only do so together. We must recognise the problem that exists.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Like other members, I am somewhat embarrassed at having been awarded a medal. I was unaware that I was worthy of a medal, but I think that this is a serious issue. The medals, according to the business bulletin, are a presentation from the Parliament. I am unaware of the Parliament, or any of its committees, ever having discussed the matter. I think that it is somewhat premature to award medals; the people of Scotland may want to award medals after we have done our job of work. Will you inquire into how this has happened?

Will the corporate body let the members know how this happened? I think that most members are concerned about it- [Interruption.] Well, they should be concerned about it.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. As this is the first day that the Parliament is invested with its powers, I was interested to hear the Minister for Communities talk about a spirit of consultation. Will you rule on the fact that the statement that we are about to hear was given, substantially, to the nation at quarter to 8 this morning on Radio Scotland? That was an hour before the statement was made available to the Opposition who have to comment on it.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to bring forward proposals for a review of the structure and function of the Scottish Arts Council. (S1O-82)

I thank the minister for his answer, although it was not the one that I was hoping for.  I draw his attention to the information bulletin from the Arts Council, a document which, as he is the minister responsible, I am sure he has read. It lists the council's committees. There are around 180 people on the list, of whom only 30 are working artists. Does the minister agree that it is important, even if the structure and function are not to be reviewed, that we find a mechanism whereby working artists can feel some ownership of the Arts Council, rather than seeing it owned by people who might have a more limited involvement in the arts?

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. I have raised the matter of the procedure for Opposition day debates with you before. There has been discussion about whether we should follow the Westminster precedent of the Executive winding up and having the last word in each debate, or whether we should apply a different rule, similar to that applied in local authorities and elsewhere in such circumstances.  I understand that you have ruled today that the Executive should close the debate, but I ask you to consider how we could examine the matter at greater length and come to a conclusion. Will you assure us that today's decision is not a precedent for Opposition day debates-of which this is the first-but merely a convenience at this stage?

I was surprised to hear that there was no knowledge of individuals going on to committees, because discussions about that have been taking place for some time. I am sure that Mr Harper will acknowledge that I told him 10 days ago what the proposal was in terms of individual committees. It was suggested that the proposal should be discussed amongst the three members. That does not seem to have been done and I regret that.  It is rather arcane, perhaps, but if members count the number of places on each committee they will find that there is one vacancy on the European Committee, one vacancy on the Equal Opportunities Committee and one vacancy on the Transport and the Environment Committee. In the absence of other members rushing forward to fill  those places, the obvious intention is that the three members should sit on the committees in which the other parties have vacated places.

Will the minister confirm an important additional point? Now that the principle has been established that individual members or members of parties that have only one member should have committee places, we hope that it will last not just for this session, but for all time.

I commend the First Minister on the passion of his speech. I have seldom, if ever, seen him so passionate. It is admirable that he has such passion for architecture, if indeed that is the cause. However, I suspect that the cause is a passion for getting his own way.  It is obviously necessary to pause at this stage in the project. I will reply immediately to the First Minister's question about why we need a whip on this matter. Had this debate taken place last week, there might not have been a need for it; but the majority of SNP members went to the presentation given by the design team and others and when they came back, they were utterly convinced that the terms of this amendment were right. There had to be a pause on this project.  We are not talking about cancelling this project, but pausing on it. There are three very strong reasons for doing that. The first reason is that the project has financial flaws. A Scottish Parliament  that works and works well is almost beyond price, but this project contains no guarantees about what that final price will be. With every passing day, we hear different figures. Mr Gorrie was right to say that the price of a pause started off at £1 million. At the meeting on Tuesday, we were told that it would be £2 million. The First Minister now says that it is £3 million. If the cost of drawing a breath is rising by £500,000 a day, who knows what will happen to this building. We must look at the figures and the cost again because, in terms of cost efficiency and cost control, this building is out of control.  A second reason to pause is the concept of the building in almost every regard. I hope that Mr Harper will speak on the environmental issues, which are important and have been neglected. The question of traffic access has not been answered. We were confidently told at the briefing meetings that with 2 million visitors the increase in traffic would make no difference to that end of the High Street. That is nonsense and we must consider that matter again.  The issue of the chamber is essential. I will briefly quote from the report by Mr Miralles. Mr Miralles talks about the chamber as being somewhere where MSPs could embrace each other. I see little sign of that happening here. He complains about the tendency for Parliaments to seat members of the assembly facing a wall. Presiding Officer, you are not a wall and we sit like this so that you may control the debate. Mr Miralles also calls members in the chamber performers. Clearly, he has seen Mr Raffan at work, but most people here are not performers.  We should oppose this on the simple grounds of error in thinking. The building that we are talking about will not make us a Parliament. All the comments that we have heard so far suggest that we will miraculously become a Parliament in two years' time and that the problems we have with the new politics and the style of debate will change because we have a new building. That is not true. We must think about what we should be doing and how we, as men and women, should make ourselves a Parliament and not imagine that a building can do that for us. We must pause, consider the future and the costs, then come back in the autumn and decide where we go. We must not be rushed into this decision, because it could be the wrong decision.

I congratulate Mr Mundell on securing this debate. One of the most important parts of debating in this chamber will be the debates under rule 5.6(c), in which members can express concerns from their area and receive assurance, which I am sure that there will be, and possibly even promises of action from the relevant minister. We look forward to that.  I also want to commend Dr Elaine Murray, who has already taken a useful initiative by inviting members for South of Scotland to meet from time to time to discuss issues. I have been slightly tardy in replying to her, but have done so now and hope that she will take the lead in convening the first of those meetings. The members from the Scottish National party will be happy to attend them and to find a consensual way of addressing the problems in the south of Scotland as far as we can.  Mr Mundell is right to say that when one talks about rural deprivation, as with land reform and other matters, the emphasis is always on the Highlands. All of us who know the south of Scotland know that there are many problems there that are similar to or more grave than the problems in the Highlands and Islands-an area that I know well-but which receive little direct attention.  However, we must not take a simplistic view of  any region of Scotland. Alex Johnstone talked earlier about there being a stark difference between rural and urban Scotland. That stark difference does not really exist. There are certainly different problems in rural, urban and small-town Scotland, but they are all problems to do with people. Often they are to do with how people earn their living and how they can continue to live and work in the area that they choose or in which they were born. We must find a way to address that issue. It will be a major job for this Parliament in the next four years.  There must be concern, but also action. Mr Mundell has put together concern with a requirement and a request for action. This Parliament will be better served, because it will focus more closely on the regions of Scotland. Certainly, the fight in the south of Scotland will be helped immensely by the fact that the Government's professional mummers, Mr Brian Wilson and Lord Macdonald, who were always on hand to mourn at the funeral of jobs in the south of Scotland, are no longer with us. Mr McLeish, who will be, I am sure, of a much jollier countenance-

Yes, and bar mitzvahs no doubt. Mr McLeish will focus strongly on the need for jobs of the whole of Scotland and on the particular needs of the south of Scotland, in many areas of which there is, unfortunately, a cycle of decline. Job losses lead to job losses and to a feeling that such things cannot be reversed, which leads to an outflow of population.  I hope that all the members for South of Scotland will concentrate on the issue of not only saving jobs but creating them and on finding new ways in which to attract new jobs and to find indigenous industries to bring in jobs. That is this Parliament's job. I welcome Mr Mundell's initiative and look forward to the minister's response.

I have to say that I am disappointed by the debate this afternoon. In my opening remarks, I talked about the need to have a dignified debate. I discussed that in a telephone conversation with Jack McConnell on Sunday night. It is a horrific thought that on Sunday nights Jack McConnell and I have to speak to each other, but we agreed and this morning I made the same point to Mr McCabe.  It is to be regretted that there has been no such restraint and dignity in most of the speeches that we have heard, especially from Labour members, and particularly from Mr McConnell. Like Robert Brown, I do not recognise Mr McConnell's account of the allowances group. I remember that after giving a lecture on the need for public prudence-shortly after his appointment and before his department spent £600,000 on special advisers-Mr McConnell left the building and got into his chauffeur-driven car. Being lectured on prudence by a man who leaves in a chauffeur-driven car sticks in the craw.  I regret the way in which Labour members have treated most of these matters. I am sure that Ms Whitefield has a passion for Airdrie-she expressed it in lengthy terms-but she has no passion for democracy. That came out in the  memorable words of Johann Lamont. She said that self-interest dressed up as principle is still self-interest. I think that a number of members condemn themselves out of their own mouths. There is an important principle, which was embodied by something Mr McLeish said on 28 January 1998 during the committee stage of the Scotland Bill. He said:  "Once elected, a regional Member will have the same rights and responsibilities as any other Member."-[ Official Report, House of Commons , 28 January 1998; Vol 305, c 444.]  It is impossible to know exactly how things will turn out, but look at that pile of correspondence on Mr Harper's desk. There is no doubt that there will be a heavy weight of constituency responsibility on list members, who have a constituency. I stress that they have a constituency, which is obvious from the debate that we have had and from debates on the Scotland Act 1998. In the circumstances, it would have been better-and wiser-if the Labour party had not indulged in what Tommy Sheridan called an act of political spite. That is what we are seeing today and it is regrettable.  The motion is worthy of support in its own terms. It preaches equality and transparency and those things are in it. I will say one thing to Irene Oldfather. I am flattered that I am at the centre of her attentions and that she follows every movement that I make in Irvine. I promise her that for the next four years I shall be in Irvine regularly and shall hold surgeries in Irvine, as the code allows me to do. I shall work in Irvine and I look forward to the next Scottish Parliament election in Irvine as, on Irene Oldfather's account, I have gained a 10 per cent swing by doing nothing. Who knows what will happen when I get to work?

I am not proposing the amendment-I am proposing the motion.

Listening to "Good Morning Scotland" today, I was informed that this was likely to be a tawdry debate, which was the opinion of all those people asked to comment on it. I hope that the debate will not be tawdry in any sense. If it is conducted properly, I think that it will show the great strength of the parties here to debate a point of principle no matter how much we disagree with that point-and I profoundly disagree with the terms of the amendments to be discussed.  However, it is important at the outset to stress what has been achieved rather than what remains to be achieved. I want to start by paying a very strong tribute to the people who have taken part in the special sub-committee on allowances, which is responsible for the motion in my name on the business list. Four weeks ago-although it seems like four months ago-that small group was asked to convene to discuss the possibility of bringing forward a scheme of allowances to the Parliament on behalf of all the parties. That group has met on innumerable occasions to examine in very great detail the items contained in the motion.  Thanks are due to everyone on that group: Andrew Welsh from the SNP; David Davidson and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton from the Tories; Robert Brown from the Liberal Democrats; Jack McConnell, who was preceded by Patricia Ferguson and Kate Maclean from the Labour party. I know that the new politics has arrived when I am prepared to offer thanks and congratulations to Jack McConnell. That should be noted carefully.  I also need to thank others who have worked on the motion: the clerks and lawyers who have worked very long hours, the secretaries and others who have typed up endless drafts, and the couriers who have taken versions of this motion round Scotland on various weekends. I particularly thank one who came all the way to my house in Argyll and managed to make it at 2 o'clock in the morning. That was the Scottish equivalent of a Marco Polo journey.  We have produced a detailed motion out of all that work and deliberation, but there is one extremely important area still unresolved and it will affect the ability of many members to do their jobs.  I will talk first about what appears to have been agreed. This motion is a revolutionary motion. It establishes what is, I hope, the best, most comprehensive and most transparent scheme of  allowances that currently exists in any elected body.  At the outset of the discussion process, it was obvious that what this Parliament, every member and every party, had to do was to sign on to a system that would be completely transparent. This system requires those in this chamber to account-to the penny-for all of their allowances. It makes sure that allowances are provided on the basis of what is expended. The purpose of providing allowances is to support members in the work that they do. All those points are enshrined in this motion. I am glad that in the scheme there will be a clear schedule of publication. That will cover the work and allowances for each member of the Parliament and for the staff who work for them.  The principles of openness and accountability run through this motion, and are intended to do so. As the years go by and the allowances are published, I hope that it will become obvious that members of the Parliament are using the resources provided to them to do the job that they have to do because these resources are provided by the people of Scotland for the people of Scotland. Those resources are only available to members of the Parliament to allow them to undertake the role for which they have been elected.  The motion is complicated and I do not want to further complicate the matter by going through every paragraph. There is a detailed scheme for publication. There is also a scheme for enforcement so that if any person thinks that allowances are being misused, there is a way to pick up on that at the earliest notice, and that is in the interests of every member of this Parliament. There is a scheme for virement so that money is not misused or is drawn in the right way and to ensure that we make the proper use of resources. Where we can use resources more effectively by pooling with one or more members, we should certainly do so.  There is a scheme for uprating, as it is important that we do not have this debate every year and that once we have set the scheme of allowances we leave it alone, unless it does not work properly. There is a requirement in the scheme that within 18 months it should be reviewed by an independent group for the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. That will let us see how well it is working. It would be wrong for members to return to consider this scheme year after year. We want a scheme that works well and can move forward.  The final two rules are important: these are the rule of equality and the rule of general allowances. The issue of general allowances is self-explanatory. There need to be allowances for resources for staff to assist members in their work, allowances to make sure that offices are run  properly, and travel allowances. There must be an Edinburgh accommodation allowance, which is always difficult to decide on and was probably the area where there was the most vociferous debate. Whichever method is used, whether postcodes, residence in constituencies or drawing a circle on a map is used to decide the limits, those methods all create anomalies.  Another principle that runs through this scheme is that there should be the right of appeal on any decision that appears unfair. So if members feel that they are being treated unfairly, for example, if they are two minutes or a couple of miles from one of the limits in this scheme, they can discuss that with the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body.  There is provision for an exceptional needs allowance where constituencies are too large to be serviced in a single journey and there is a scheme for an overnight subsistence allowance. There are travel allowances for staff and family, for we should not forget that this is a family-friendly Parliament and must be so for members who come from some distance away. There is a disability allowance, a winding-up allowance and provision for an independent review.  Then there are some radical innovations. The allowances code seeks to define and police the way in which allowances can be used. That will be extremely useful to every member of this Parliament in ensuring that the scheme works for them.  The scheme provides everything that members need to do their jobs. It arose from the members of the allowances group, where there was considerable agreement. However, in one area agreement has not been possible. I greatly regret that, because the issue at the heart of the disagreement is the issue of equality. Equality of treatment does not mean, as I have heard endless people say in television and radio debates, equality of treatment for members of this Parliament. What strikes at the heart of this motion is that the amendments might prevent equality of treatment for voters.

I am sorry that the member for Cunninghame South could not contain herself-I was into only the second sentence of this section, so I am glad that I did not go any longer. I do not want to pay any attention to that unhelpful intervention. I refer Ms Oldfather to the point that I made at the beginning of the debate. We want to have a debate about principles, and we do not want to have that type of old politics. Let me return to the matter that I was addressing.  Equality of treatment is at the heart of this motion: not equality of treatment for members, but equality of treatment for voters. By definition of the Scotland Act 1998, every member here is a constituency member. If people write to this Parliament asking who their member of the Scottish Parliament is, they get a letter back informing them that they have eight members. I received such a letter this morning, which was also copied to Mr Jack McConnell and the Parliament information office.  A very senior member of the front bench put it rather well when, in a letter to Lord Neill in August 1998, he wrote, talking about the Neill committee:  "I drew the committee's attention to the additional provision we have made in the Scotland Bill for individuals to stand for election at the regional level. The position of these individuals will technically be the same as a party list, although they may in practice perceive themselves more as 'super constituency' candidates"- not constituency candidates, but super constituency candidates.  The letter was written by Mr Henry McLeish, and he goes on to say:  "We will of course need to be able to apply expenses provided to them in a way which is seen to be fair."  What we are trying to do is to provide a system that is fair. It is fair to say that every member will work as a constituency member. Indeed, members from lists will work over much larger constituencies-super constituencies. I could not have put it better myself. There might well be a  need to provide more resources for those people. However, we are fair people-

No, please allow me to continue. We are fair people, and we want equality. I have heard three arguments against-

Please could I continue? I will give Mr Home Robertson a chance in a moment.  I have heard three arguments against treating constituency and list members as equal. The New Zealand example is much quoted, especially by the Labour party. It is a false comparison. There are no list constituency members in New Zealand; they are national members. The German system makes no differentiation between members. The Welsh system is the same as ours, and the Labour party has now agreed that allowances should be the same for all members there.  In a television debate at the weekend, I heard that it did not matter what happened in Wales, because it was important that Scotland had the freedom to do what it wanted. Even if Scotland was to get it wrong, it was important that it had that freedom. As far as I am concerned, the decision that was taken in Wales was correct. It was based on a principle that I would ask be used here. There is no allowances system in the world that is based on the interpretation by one party of what members of the other parties are likely to do. There is no allowances system in the world that is based on an interpretation of the electoral system after the vote. That simply does not work.  In the circumstances, I think that both amendments are unhelpful and I would urge the movers of both amendments to withdraw them as Mr Andrew Kerr has withdrawn his. Those amendments will impede the work of this Parliament. We should encourage every member in this chamber to work as hard as possible for the people who put them here. The system that is proposed in either of those amendments will damage that.  While I think that the Liberal Democrat amendment seeks to help, it is rather curious. It seems to favour parties that have only one member elected on a regional list, let alone one member elected on five regional lists. I do not think that is fair. If we are to have a debate that is honest and straightforward and of the new politics-and I sincerely hope that we will-we must address that principle. Is there a principle or not in the Liberal Democrat amendment? I do not believe that there is.  We should reach the final point of agreement so  that we can have a debate that is positive and that will move us forward. We have managed to agree so much. All this motion has been agreed. It would be very good to find us agreeing at this last stage, which would take this issue out of the chamber. It would not return to the chamber and the people who put us here would be assured of being well served because we were able to do our job.  I move,  That the Parliament in accordance with section 81(2) of the Scotland Act 1998 (c.46), make provision for the payment of allowances to members of the Parliament and that the following provisions should have effect:-  There shall be a Members' Allowances Scheme ("the Scheme") which shall make provision to be implemented by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body ("the SPCB") for the payment of allowances to members of the Parliament.  The following Parts A, B and C together with the Annexes attached shall be the Scheme:-

On behalf of the SNP, I welcome the motion. Mr Gorrie is right to say that the committees will be the building blocks of the Parliament's success. The committees have their own dynamic and, as Mr McCabe outlined, if they work productively and strongly they will inform not just the future of the Parliament but the future of everything that the Parliament does.  I also welcome the role of the Parliamentary Bureau in drawing up the committee proposals. The bureau's work will be undertaken, as much as possible, by consensus; this motion shows that it is possible to produce detailed proposals about how the Parliament should work. That has been achieved through the work of the business managers, who have produced a set of proposals that meets all the requirements of all the parties. In the subject committees, the proposals provide for detailed scrutiny and innovation across the whole range of work that is to be done. They also provide for the mandatory committees, which will have an important role in supervising what takes place in the Parliament, in making recommendations and  in dealing with what one might call the second level of legislation with which the Parliament might be concerned.  I echo James Douglas-Hamilton in saying that it is important that the Procedures Committee makes an early start on the process of examining the standing orders. Clerks and members have raised a whole range of issues on which the standing orders, ambitious and optimistic as they are, do not relate to the manner in which day-to-day work is already proceeding. Although the Procedures Committee is obliged to review the standing orders by next May, I hope that it will move forward quickly, look in detail at the complaints and recommendations that members may have and return with a set of revised standing orders sometime in the autumn.  Andrew Wilson's motion, of which I was a signatory, has widespread support among all parties and all members. It is important that the Parliament and its committees are seen all over Scotland, outside Edinburgh. I hope that we will be ambitious about where we wish our committees to meet. There are some very lovely parts of the south of Scotland where committees would be immensely welcome. I do not mean just Dumfries and Ayr-I see Mr Gallie nodding-and not just Stranraer, but the lovely town of Kirkcudbright, and elsewhere. In Lanark and in the lovely town of Irvine, we will have the opportunity- [Laughter.] Now, members should not laugh; I notice that Ms Oldfather, the member for Cunninghame South, is laughing. In lovely towns such as Irvine and Kilwinning, and in towns throughout the south of Scotland, we could have meetings of committees and I hope, in time, meetings of the Parliament.  I welcome the motion, which has the support of the SNP. I know that all the business managers have worked hard to bring forward the motion and to establish the principle that there will be an opportunity for members of the smaller parties and the independents, as well as members of the major parties, to sit on the committees.

I do not want to get a reputation for moving amendments or for being negative about business motions. I propose a technical change to motion S1M-35 and have lodged motion S1M-41, which deals with information technology and office equipment. We were advised that those matters could not be covered by the allowances motion because they did not come under the heading of allowances. However, all parties felt that information technology should form part of today's debate, as there will be support for members in that area. Accordingly, and with Mr McCabe's agreement, I seek permission for debate on that issue to be included in this afternoon's business, as was originally intended.  I move amendment S1M-35.1, to insert after "Tuesday 8 June 1999", "motion S1M-41 in the name of Michael Russell to be debated together with S1M-40 also in the name of Michael Russell."

I repeat what I said yesterday afternoon when I responded to Mr McLeish about these orders. The SNP gives a general welcome to the orders and to the fact that they move forward the transfer of powers to this Parliament and to the Scottish Executive.  I hope that that general welcome is accepted in the spirit in which it is given. One might call it the spirit of the new politics, although the fact that there is no common definition of the new politics seemed to affect yesterday's debate. Perhaps members could move towards making such a definition, rejecting Mr McAllion's definition of new politics as being about Opposition members simply keeping their mouths shut. The Opposition has a duty to welcome progress and to scrutinise in detail-

Yes, I will.

I will accept Johann Lamont's definition of the new politics as being where we have consensus and we work together. The basis of consensus is, of course, consultation. The issue that we were debating yesterday was that there was no consultation. I had the advantage of seeing Mr McAllion's performance from the front, whereas Ms Lamont had the disadvantage of seeing it from the back. It was not only the words, but the spirit of what he said that was the problem.  The general welcome that I give to the orders does not exclude detailed scrutiny of them. This order has notable omissions. I yield to no one in my enthusiasm and support for the controller of plant variety rights. I have no doubt-and I speak as someone who once worked for the Scottish Bedding Plants Association-that the work of the plant varieties and seeds tribunal is extremely important, but I would have thought that there were other bodies that required consideration because they work in reserved areas across both Parliaments and meet the definition given in the white paper of being bodies operating in reserved areas in relation to their activities in or affecting Scotland.  It is interesting to note that the white paper-published, it seems, so long ago now-listed a number of other bodies that have not made it into the order. Those bodies include the energy regulators; the Office of Passenger Rail Franchising; the Health and Safety Commission; the Commission for Racial Equality, which wanted to be considered in this way; the Employment Service; the Benefits Agency; the Post Office and broadcasting and telecommunications organisations such as the BBC and the Independent Television Commission.  For schedule 1 to the order to omit those bodies is to produce a piece of legislation that is seriously defective. Those bodies affect the everyday life of everyone in Scotland. All the people whom we represent are touched every day by the activities of those bodies.  The Parliament and its committees will have the  opportunity to invite representations from all those bodies. The controller of plant varieties can come and talk to us, but it is a deficiency of the order that he cannot be required to come and give evidence and tell us the truth of what is happening. I am sure that an invitation from Mr Dewar or Mr McLeish or even Mr McConnell is not something to be treated lightly, but it would be much more important if the Parliament and its committees could say, "We require you to attend" and, "We require you to give information on what is happening."  I will confine my comments to broadcasting. It was clear from last year's debate on the Scottish Six that it would be vitally important for the Parliament to question those making the decisions. Some of the people in this chamber were present at the BBC governors' dinner, which was held in Glasgow at the end of the governors' meeting last year. That was a remarkable event. Those who were invited were soft-soaped with warm words by a hard-faced group of people who had already made up their minds about what was going to happen. No amount of debate or discussion would make any difference. What actually happened was that there was no real consultation. The Broadcasting Council for Scotland made its views known, and was ignored. The political parties in Scotland made their views known, and were ignored, as were the listeners and viewers organisations.  Virtually the whole of civic Scotland argued for some change in the way that the BBC treated Scotland. What they got was a typical BBC fudge-the offering of something that is referred to north and south of the border as "Newsnet". It is an appalling way to treat audiences in Scotland, because it removes that programme of great quality, "Newsnight". It denies part of that programme to the Scottish audience while substituting something else. That is an unacceptable compromise, and it is not I who says it, but the broadcasters who work on those programmes. The committee of this Parliament that is responsible for broadcasting should be able to call the chairman of BBC Scotland, or the director general of the BBC, or any of those responsible for similar decisions and to scrutinise the decisions as they are made.  The failure to give this Parliament the power to demand attendance is a major weakness of this order. That applies right across the spectrum. I am glad that many of the Liberal Democrats agree that the Parliament should have this basic right. It also applies to the ITC. Some members are concerned that the honouring of licences in certain places in Scotland has not come up to public expectation. In such circumstances it would be vital to demand the attendance of officials from the ITC to examine them on the issue. That is a major  defect in the order, and it applies not just to broadcasting, but to all the bodies that are mentioned in it. I hope that serious consideration will be given to strengthening the powers of the Parliament and the powers of the committee so that this Parliament can ask real questions.  The Scottish National party has considered the orders and, as yesterday, we will support them because we wish to move the process forward, and because it would be unreasonable not to do so. That does not mean that we do not regard parts of the orders as not effective enough. Mr McLeish is nodding his head. I hope that consideration will be given to some of these issues, both in terms of the bodies that touch our lives but which are not in the order and in terms of ensuring that this Parliament can be an effective voice for the people of Scotland. I hope that it will not be a Parliament that receives the odd annual report or letter from the director general, but one which can ask him what is going on, and ensure that he understands the strength of opinion and passion in Scotland for the Parliament to work.

rose-

Will Mr McAllion give way?

I am disappointed by Mr McAllion's comments. He and I were founder members of Scotland United-we believed in the new politics. Even if I were to accept his point about Short money and the point that Mr Chisholm and others made, surely what matters is that there should be consultation about setting the level of any resources available to Opposition parties. That is the main conclusion on the matter by the Neill committee. How does Mr McAllion defend the fact that the order was published at Westminster with no consultation whatever? His and similar arguments might have won out, but publishing it without discussion is certainly subverting the  future of this Parliament and the new politics in which he and I believe.

Will Allan Wilson give way?

I give a general welcome to the orders. It is not a specific welcome as they contain a great deal of detail and, as Nicola Sturgeon said, items need to be teased out from the vast bulk of documentation that has been presented to us. However, anything that moves forward the Scottish Parliament and the process of decision making in Scotland is to be welcomed, although there are many things to watch out for. In Mr McLeish's contribution, one thing particularly to watch out for is that we must see the draft concordats published before they go anywhere near a fountain pen held by a member of the Scottish Executive or of the United Kingdom Government.  In commencing the debate, I will concentrate on one set of articles in the first of the orders. In articles 2(1) and 2(2) of the Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999, there is a means by which the Scottish Parliament is able to set the allocation of moneys for registered political parties-in other words, the Scottish Parliament can implement the system  known as Short money. These two paragraphs are important-although I will come to how Short money might be operated later. The amount of money available is minuscule in comparison with what was contained in the three pages of the equivalent order that was laid before Westminster. However, this order, which was laid on the last day before the Whitsun recess in what was essentially an attempt to sneak it through Westminster, is very worrying. It not only ignores the conventions on Short money and how it is paid, it runs in direct contravention of the recommendations of the Neill committee report on party political funding, and I will concentrate on the ways in which the order does that.  The Short money that was paid from 1975 to last week was, on the very day on which this order was tabled, increased substantially for the Westminster parties. That was in recognition of representations made to the Neill committee by every political party and by many others. The purpose of Short money is to enable Opposition parties to fulfil more effectively their primary duties. In the words of the Neill committee report "we believe that the Short money scheme is founded on the sound principle that, in a parliamentary democracy, the party in Government should be held to account and kept in check by a vigorous and well-prepared Opposition".  I think that every member of this chamber accepts that principle. However, like all principles, it is how it works in practice that becomes the issue. There is no doubt that by dramatically reducing the amount of Short money available to parties, which is, in effect, what the Westminster Government's order does, the Labour party is attempting to ensure that the work of the Opposition parties is undermined. If that measure is put alongside the way in which the discussion on allowances has taken place, there is a concerted attempt to undermine not only the work of Opposition parties but the democratic process. The Westminster order should be most strongly objected to, and I hope that arrangements will be made to have the order debated in full at Westminster and not in the dark recesses of a small committee.  It is also important to see whether there is any way to restore a democratic method of funding Opposition political parties. The Neill committee's recommendations on such matters were very clear to this Parliament. The committee said that there should be consultation and discussion between the parties. That has not taken place and certainly did not take place at Westminster. The committee also recommended that this Parliament should have the opportunity to set the Short money, which is what the two paragraphs in the order seek to do.  From 2 July, we will have the opportunity to  produce primary legislation. I understand that it will take such legislation to put in place a scheme for setting the Short money for this Parliament. There are a number of ways of achieving that aim, but I want to bring one particular idea to the debate. The SNP intends to table a motion soon that will ask this Parliament to refer the matter to the members of the Neill committee for their binding views on what the amount of Short money should be.  I cannot imagine why the Executive would object to that proposal. The Labour party was strongly in support of the committee. Indeed, I note that when Ann Taylor was Leader of the House, she objected to the present Short money arrangements-which was one of the reasons why the amount was upgraded-saying that the money was not nearly enough for Opposition parties. That was when the Short money for Labour was £1.5 million.  I hope that the Labour party-and every party in this Parliament-will accept that the Neill committee, which has put forward strong views on the matter, should arbitrate on the issue. That will also give the committee the opportunity to arbitrate on which parties should receive that funding. The order at Westminster allocates the funding to the Liberal Democrats, which is clearly in contravention of the recommendations of the Neill committee report. I have to point out to members that the Labour party, in its evidence to the committee, suggested that the governing party itself should also get the money, so I suppose we should be grateful for small mercies that it was not quite as barefaced as that in this Parliament.  However, the Neill committee could take a considered view on the matter and could consult with each of the political parties in this Parliament rather than force through the matter. Ominously, the order at Westminster anticipates arrangements which recede into the far distance, and I suspect that the Government may feel that, once the Westminster order is passed, it should sit there and undermine the Opposition parties.  I am glad to say that, if we pass this order-and the SNP shall certainly vote for it in that spirit-there will be an opportunity for this Parliament to consider what is appropriate, to support the work of the Opposition and to make sure that there is a balance of forces in the Parliament, instead of a dictatorship from the Executive. That is one of the reasons why I-and the SNP-will support the order.  Furthermore, I hope that we will soon have the opportunity to vote on a motion to take the matter to the Neill committee and to seek the opinion and influence of people who have gone on public record as being somewhat scandalised by the order laid at Westminster.

I oppose the business motion in Tom McCabe's name. It is with great reluctance that I take this step. According to the consultative steering group report, the business committee-the Parliamentary Bureau-was meant to operate in a "consensual way"; and I know that the business managers, the Presiding Officer, the Deputy Presiding Officers and others have taken that point very seriously. The Parliamentary Bureau is part of a package that should reflect a desire for new politics in Scotland.  I have given notice to the other business managers and to the Deputy Presiding Officers, through the Parliamentary Bureau, that I intend to oppose the business motion. I did that yesterday by minuting my dissent at a Parliamentary Bureau  decision that was made by majority vote-the first vote that we have taken in four meetings.  The "Report of the Consultative Steering Group on the Scottish Parliament", which was drawn up a by a committee chaired by Henry McLeish, was greatly helped by his positive attitude-at that time-to the new politics. It expressed a belief that the "arrangements for the programming of business in the Scottish Parliament should be inclusive and transparent and should provide reasonable time for business initiated by non-Executive parties, by individual Members and by Committees."  Mindful of that, the Parliamentary Bureau intended to provide a small allocation of time this week for motions from members who are not ministers. I do not want to go into detail of the full discussions of the Parliamentary Bureau, but I must be able to say that, at last week's meeting, agreement was reached without dissent that time would be allocated this Thursday for a debate that would reflect motions lodged by members.  After discussion it was agreed that the debate should reflect on the order on the Scottish adjacent waters boundaries, because two motions, from two different groups of people, had been lodged on the matter. I stress that the Parliamentary Bureau wished to consider motions from members in order to reflect the desire of many members to debate current concerns. As there were two such motions, the Parliamentary Bureau asked the principal movers, Euan Robson and Richard Lochhead, to meet to arrange a single motion.  There would have been no difficulty in doing that; the motions were broadly similar and expressed opposition to the boundary order. However, negotiations on the motion were suspended yesterday morning after Euan Robson told Richard Lochhead that the Cabinet was discussing the matter. That was confirmed to me in a telephone conversation with the Liberal Democrat business manager.  Later yesterday morning, after the Cabinet meeting, I was approached and asked whether I would agree with an Executive motion in the name of Ross Finnie. I refused and asked for a special meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. At that meeting, James Douglas-Hamilton proposed a compromise, which was to debate the matter on a motion from the SNP, with the Executive motion as an amendment. The original Cabinet decision was, however, rammed through on the votes of the Liberal Democrat and Labour business managers.  That is not the substantive issue. The substantive issue is what standing and status this Parliament and the Parliamentary Bureau have in  ordering business. In Henry McLeish's introduction to the CSG report, he wrote that "the establishment of the Scottish Parliament offers the opportunity to put in place a new sort of democracy in Scotland . . . people . . . have high hopes for their Parliament . . . in particular our recommendations envisage an open, accessible Parliament; a Parliament where power is shared with the people".  In the last paragraph he adds:  "The work of this Group has set the tone for the future of Scottish politics."  It has not yet done that, but we can decide today to set the tone for the future of Scottish politics.  During the election, all parties and most candidates expressed their support for the new politics-a different way of doing things and a move away from the Westminster Government's dictatorial attitudes to the UK Parliament towards a consensual approach in which there would be debate and discussion on what took place. At the heart of that approach was the existence of the Parliamentary Bureau, which could discuss on behalf of the Parliament what motions would be taken and how they would be ordered.  I oppose this business motion because, within three weeks, we have departed from that practice. The pattern of departure has included the question of Short money, the problem of allowances and staff support and now the ordering of business. This Executive is saying that it will operate on the basis of Westminster business as usual, in which the views of the Government alone count.  I am informed that, regrettably, members of the Executive parties-even the Liberals, who have a proud record of defending democracy and parliamentary institutions-are being whipped to support the motion. They will allow a dark cloud to obscure the new light of Scottish democracy if this business motion goes through. If the motion is rejected, however, I understand that the bureau will meet immediately and a new business motion will be proposed.  The people of Scotland, who on 6 May demanded a new politics, deserve to be heard in this chamber. Most of all, they must be heard by the Executive. The people asked for a different way of doing things, the CSG produced a report which gave that life and the standing orders indicate that we should do things differently.  The obstacle to that lies with the Executive, which is determined to veto decisions of the Parliamentary Bureau as if it were a Cabinet sub-committee rather than a full committee of this Parliament. There is no doubt that the bureau is intended to be a full committee of this Parliament. To allow this motion to go through would be wrong in principle, wrong in practice, wrong for Scottish democracy and wrong for the future of this  chamber. I ask members to oppose the motion.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. It is my recollection that there was a discussion that the bureau had accepted that under rule 5.6(c) of the standing orders, members' business might be taken after decision time. I think that I am right in saying that that was discussed; therefore, there is a procedure by which motions can be lodged and discussed, because rule 5.6(c) allows a half-hour discussion every day. In my view, that is an inadequate step forward, but it is a step forward.

On a point of order. Amendments S1M-4.1 and S1M-5.1 conflate the names of two individuals-in the case amendment 4.1, those of James Wallace  and Ross Finnie, and in the case of amendment 5.1, those of Nicol Stephen and Iain Smith. It would be far more appropriate to take separate votes on the appointment of those individuals, particularly in the case of amendment 5.1, as the business bulletin shows that a number of motions were lodged relating to Nicol Stephen, but only one relating to Iain Smith. Conflating them in this way creates difficulties for members who wish to vote for one or other candidate. I ask you to separate out those votes.

I thought that I should rise to defend the Anglican tradition that my colleagues have criticised. As an Episcopalian, "meaningless ritual" is not a term I recognise. It might be helpful for Mr Salmond to receive a little more instruction in the Episcopal faith. We should recognise the history and symbolism of the building that we are in and the area in which it is situated. I suspect that I am the only member of this Parliament who was a student in the faculty of theology here, and the only one who worked for the Church of Scotland in this very hall at assembly time.  The whole area is redolent of Church history in Scotland. This hall stands as a tribute to the disruption and to the faith of a whole community who went out with nothing at all in order to stand against arbitrary authority. Old St Paul's church, down the High Street, was closed in 1715 because of its resistance. Edinburgh has a strong Catholic tradition and a modern, dynamic living tradition of  other faiths, including Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs. Mr Harper is right to refer to those other groups as well.  I was a little alarmed by Mr McCabe's suggestion that we should already be taking this motion away and beginning to interfere with it in a bureaucratic fashion. Surely we should begin to build upon it, if the people who proposed it are prepared for the Parliamentary Bureau to take the best from it and, as Mr Harper has said, to interpret it in terms of other forms of event such as prayer or celebration. If we can build on the motion in terms of multifaith celebration-and I think that that is important-then the motion gives us an opportunity to start something happening rather than to stop and go backwards. I support the motion as one that will take this Parliament forward. It will recognise not only where we are, but who we are and how, as Annabel Goldie has said, we can be inspired, strengthened and perhaps directed as we do our work.

On a point of order. There is a provision in the standing orders that, if the electronic system is not satisfactory for the vote, voting can be conducted by normal ballot. I request that you consider that option.