I hear what Jenny Marra says, but the same is true for England and Wales, where the population is nearly 10 times that. I hope that she is not suggesting that there is something strange about the prosecution system in Scotland. The issue is very difficult to bring forward; I hope that the member accepts that the same is the case in England and Wales. It is a very sensitive issue.

I thank Jenny Marra for lodging the motion, and I thank all the members who have participated in tonight’s debate, which recognises that tomorrow marks international day of zero tolerance for female genital mutilation. Such debates, along with internationally recognised days to mark zero tolerance of FGM, are extremely valuable in raising awareness of what is, as many members have said, a global issue, but we must recognise that the people who are victims of the practice, or who are at risk of becoming victims of it, are affected every day, either by living in fear of FGM being perpetrated on them, or by living with the horrifying implications of what has already been done to them. As other members have said, FGM is a child protection issue; it is a form of child abuse, because children are not in a position to make a choice. FGM is a brutal practice that is forced on them. It blights the lives of those who are affected by it and, as the motion suggests, it is an abuse of the human rights of women and girls. From what has been said in the debate, it is clear that we all agree that FGM is a practice that has no place in a modern multicultural Scotland. As I said in the debate on violence against women on 17 December last year, Scotland’s strategy to tackle violence against women will address FGM. The strategy, which will be the first of its kind in Scotland and will reflect the spectrum of violence that is defined as violence against women, will be published in the summer, following consultation early this year. Our child protection guidelines, which are used by all children-related services, is a second key document for tackling FGM, and includes a section on it. We know from data from the 2001 census that there were nearly 3,000 women between the ages of zero and 49 living in Scotland who had been born in FGM-practising countries. Of course, that does not mean that all those women have been abused in that way—it means only that they may be at risk. That is why it is vital that we ensure that we understand what the available statistics tell us. In her evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, Nina Murray from the Scottish Refugee Council said: “Prevalence may be very high in a country, but certain groups in that country might not be practising. FGM practice tends to be located in particular ethnic groups or communities.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 30 January 2014; c 1779.] We accept that statistics alone tell us only so much and that we need to ensure that our understanding goes beyond just numbers. That is why I was pleased to announce in December’s debate on violence against women that the Scottish Government is providing funding to the Scottish Refugee Council and the Women’s Support Project to carry out a project that will produce a baseline of information to inform the work to tackle FGM. The project, which is scheduled to be completed by autumn this year, will culminate in publication of a report that will outline and refine the available data, identify gaps in information, and make recommendations on ways forward with community and statutory partners. We will look closely at all the findings and recommendations from that report, which I will be happy to share with Parliament, as we establish what action we require to take at that stage, but I think that we should at the moment allow the project to get on with its work and come up with recommendations. In Scotland, female genital mutilation is punishable by up to 14 years’ imprisonment. We acknowledge that there have been no prosecutions for female genital mutilation. However, as I said earlier, that is also the case in England and Wales, which tells us that FGM is a very complex issue. I was struck by what Marco Biagi said—it is not just about prosecution. Although we would all like to see people being held to account for their actions, given the family dynamics that are involved, the issue is much more complex than being just about prosecution. It is therefore wrong to suggest that Scotland is in any way a soft touch for FGM—there is no evidence for that. Nonetheless, we want action to ensure that girls are protected.

We have set up a project that will make recommendations. It includes the appropriate expertise and will consult about what should be done. We should allow it to come back and tell us what it thinks should happen. Clearly, if that is one of its recommendations we will consider it. There is no point in setting up a project to make recommendations, but not to listen to them. As I said, the work by the Scottish Refugee Council and the Women’s Support Project will be very valuable in providing us with much more accurate evidence-based estimates of prevalence and risk in Scotland. We know that FGM is a difficult and sensitive issue. There are a number of possible reasons why victims may feel unable or unwilling to report FGM to the police or other authorities. We therefore need to ensure that what we are doing meets the needs of those who might be affected, or who may be at risk. We do not underestimate how difficult it is for someone from a practising community to come forward. If it was easy, people would have come forward and there would have been prosecutions. The fact that there have been no prosecutions tells us how difficult it is. That makes our work to raise awareness among communities, to bring about attitudinal change, and to encourage reporting of FGM by women, girls and men all the more important. Training is hugely important in raising awareness and addressing complex issues. As part of our work, we are in discussion with the Women’s Support Project to develop a range of information and training materials on FGM. Again, I would be happy to share those with Parliament. We recognise that while legislation, prevalence data, information and awareness raising rightly inform parts of our strategy to tackle FGM, we must continue to look at the expertise of people such as midwives and other health professionals including doctors, nurses and health visitors, who can often play a crucial role in identifying girls who are at risk, in recording incidents and in offering support and onward referral to women. That is why we have initiated discussions with the director of the Royal College of Midwives in Scotland to discuss the recommendations in the report “Tackling FGM in the UK—Intercollegiate recommendations for identifying, recording and reporting”. Reports such as that provide a valuable source of expertise in helping us to ensure effective multi-agency collaboration. It is not only health professionals who have a role to play; it has been mentioned that the involvement of teachers, social workers and police officers is also vital. As has been said, on 30 January the Equal Opportunities Committee met stakeholders who are experts in tackling the issues that surround FGM, in order to inform the remit of a potential inquiry into FGM. I very much welcome that and would like to see whether we can align the Scottish Government work with the committee inquiry, under the convenership of Margaret McCulloch. I hope that together we can produce good recommendations for action to effect change. All that I have outlined is intended to strengthen our response to FGM and to complement measures that are already in place. Those measures include engaging with people from affected communities; working closely with police, health professionals, social work and education to share good practice and promote awareness of the prevention of FGM; and funding voluntary organisations that provide support to victims of FGM. We will also consider imaginative solutions like Margaret McCulloch’s suggestion about passports. I will look into that in more detail. I want to acknowledge the work that is being done each and every day by those who strive to eradicate FGM—be it by raising awareness, by supporting victims or by working to inform our response to a horrific practice. It is important to state that only by listening to the experts, the communities and the people who have been affected can we really get in under the radar to tackle a very difficult issue that concerns something that is conducted in private and about which, as has been said, it is difficult to get people to talk. However, there is more that we can do, so we will consider some of the suggestions that have been made tonight. I will be happy to report back to Parliament once we have done the work on that. Meeting closed at 17:55.

I am delighted to address the chamber on our state of preparedness ahead of hosting the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games and, as important, on the legacy that we are delivering throughout Scotland. This afternoon I will reflect on the significant milestones that were achieved throughout 2013; I will also detail our plans to ensure that everything is in place on this, the final stretch, in advance of the games beginning. I am delighted at our achievements so far. With 174 days to go until the opening ceremony, final preparations are on-going to ensure that we are ready. The Commonwealth Games Federation’s co-ordination commission has recognised that progress. In October, I was very encouraged by the feedback received from the commission, which praised the organising committee for demonstrating “a clear understanding of all aspects of Games delivery”, and commended the excellent collaboration between games partners. With today’s news that Mike Hooper will be standing down as chief executive of the Commonwealth Games Federation after the games, I express my personal gratitude for and appreciation of his support and guidance. Having worked closely with the federation for many years, his expertise and knowledge have proved invaluable. He and his team have made a major contribution to ensuring that Scotland is ready to welcome the world for the Commonwealth games. I wish him every success for the future. I very much welcome the continuing support for the games from all political parties in the chamber. The strength of the cross-party support has been extremely important, from the bidding process for the games under the previous Administration to their being secured under this Administration. The discussions on the games that we have had in Parliament have demonstrated that it is possible for us to work collaboratively, whatever our political position on other matters. I am also delighted to see the support for the games from the people of Scotland and people throughout the Commonwealth. That is clear from the unprecedented demand for tickets. There have been 2.3 million applications for around 1 million tickets, with 94 per cent of tickets now sold. Perhaps that is because fairness and accessibility are at the heart of the ticketing strategy. Two thirds of tickets are priced at £25 or less. Half-price concession tickets for under 16s and over 60s are available for all sessions—a Commonwealth games first. There is no better evidence that people throughout the Commonwealth share our excitement than the warm welcome the Queen’s baton relay receives on its journey around all 70 nations and territories of the Commonwealth. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development recently saw for himself the enthusiasm that the baton generated as it travelled through Malawi and Zambia before arriving yesterday in Namibia. I expect an equally enthusiastic welcome when the baton returns to Scotland on 14 June. For 40 days, it will visit each and every local authority and will be proudly carried by 4,000 baton bearers, who will be drawn from our athletes of the past, present and future; our schools; and heroes in our communities who embody the values of the games. It is not only baton bearers who will get a hands-on games experience. Last week, we announced our search for 3,000 people to join the cast for the ceremonies during the games. There was a wonderful response to the games volunteering campaign, with more than 50,000 applications. The organising committee has now finished the huge task of selecting the lucky 15,000 Clydesiders. I know that those who are unsuccessful may be disappointed. However, we are determined to capture their enthusiasm and direct them to other exciting volunteering opportunities that are available beyond the games. In addition, there will be countless opportunities for Scotland’s people and communities and visitors to participate in the Glasgow 2014 cultural programme. Just this morning, 42 new cultural projects were announced, from traditional ceilidhs to a project led by Nicola Benedetti—there is absolutely something for everyone. Fantastic progress was made last year on completing permanent venues, all of which are now open. Anyone in Scotland can ride a competition bike around the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome or try the spectacular mountain bike trails at Cathkin Braes. The newly built athletes village will provide a first-class home away from home for 6,500 visiting athletes and officials. Post-games, the village will leave a lasting legacy for the east end of Glasgow, providing 400 affordable homes—300 of which will be for private sale—as well as a care home for the elderly. Work is also moving apace on transport, operational and security plans. The safety and security of all spectators and participants at the games is an absolute priority for the Government. London 2012 demonstrated how security was enhanced and public confidence was increased when private security guards worked closely with our highly regarded police and military personnel. I have therefore agreed with Police Scotland and with the organising committee to deploy a mixed workforce involving military, police and private industry resources to ensure a safe, secure and peaceful games. To assist with that, the chief constable of Police Scotland requested military assistance from the United Kingdom Government, and I am pleased to announce that yesterday I received confirmation from the Home Secretary that that request has been supported. That is a welcome development that illustrates the co-operation between both Governments to ensure the security of the games.

The look and feel of the games is really important. It will absolutely be the case that the presence of different security resources will create a secure games, but the games will feel friendly. That is why we were very keen for the Police Scotland and military element to be the public-facing, friendly face of security that people will see when they are getting their bags checked, for example. That worked very well at the Olympics, and it is a lesson learned from the Olympics that we are applying to the Commonwealth games. Today, I wrote to the Home Secretary thanking her for her support and requesting that consideration be given to the Royal Regiment of Scotland helping to fulfil the military role at the games. Of course, as exciting as those 11 days of world-class sport will be, there is no doubt that the games are about so much more. I know the great importance that members around the chamber place on the legacy that we are working to deliver and what it means for their constituencies. Over the course of the past year, I have certainly felt the level of excitement about the games rising. The facts and stats are very welcome but what will really make the games successful will be our ability to make the legacy meaningful to people across Scotland. That is why I was delighted to announce yesterday the Scottish Government’s gift in connection with the games. The 5,000 legacy tickets will provide an opportunity to attend the games to those who are making a contribution to Scotland’s legacy—those who may not otherwise have the opportunity to attend the games. Since my last update to Parliament, my Cabinet colleagues and I have had the pleasure of undertaking numerous visits to see at first hand the positive impact that the legacy is already having across Scotland’s cities, towns and villages. I will highlight some examples. The First Minister visited Wilton Lodge park in Hawick in the Borders in August, when he had the pleasure of announcing that it had been successful in obtaining £77,000 to create three state-of-the-art tennis courts in the town through the legacy 2014 active places fund. Since the launch of the fund, a total of 64 projects from 20 local authorities have received £3.2 million to build facilities that encourage communities to get active. I recently had the pleasure of visiting Comely Park primary school in Falkirk to unveil Scotland’s international hockey player, Holly Cram, as the first ambassador for game on Scotland, the official education programme for the games. The appetite to get involved in that programme has been truly remarkable, with more than 35,000 visitors to the game on Scotland website and an estimated 250,000 young people having benefited from its educational resources to date. Just last month, I visited the Dundee Repertory Theatre in my home city to officially launch the aspire Dundee project, which uses dance, music and drama to improve the lives of almost 2,000 children from across the city. Similarly, the First Minister was recently in Aberdeen to launch the legacy 2014 street soccer Scotland programme. Four thousand people from the north-east will be supported to overcome homelessness, mental health issues and unemployment. Funding will allow the programme to enhance its reach in Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, providing a total of 37,500 opportunities. On the west coast, in Argyll and Bute, two social enterprises—Mid Argyll Community Pool, known as MACPool, in Lochgilphead, and Stramash, which is based in Oban—will receive mentoring and coaching through the Pilot Light Scotland project to build more effective organisations. In North Lanarkshire, the NVT Group secured a major games technology contract, which has enabled it to offer modern apprenticeships within its 100-strong workforce. For companies throughout Scotland, the direct business benefits have been significant. To date, more than £300 million of contracts have been awarded for the Commonwealth games, and 83 per cent of that value has gone to firms in Scotland. That is more than £250 million of contracts, going to more than 400 companies across 23 local authority areas. To build on those economic benefits, we have developed an ambitious business legacy programme, which will promote the very best of Scotland on the international stage and improve business capacity at home. I cannot continue without highlighting the legacy that is being delivered for the community at the heart of the games, Glasgow’s east end. It really is an exciting time for the area. Clyde Gateway continues to attract inward investment, bringing sustainable jobs for local people. In addition, major transport improvements are opening up that area and the rest of the west of Scotland to significant economic opportunities. That is not to mention the two world-class sporting facilities, in the shape of the Emirates arena and the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome, which are spearheading an increase in local sport participation. In the past month, I have attended a reception at the Emirates arena to mark the construction of the £3 million Dalmarnock legacy hub, which is an exemplar of community-led regeneration, bringing under one roof many of the services that are so important to communities. Although I cannot cover everything, I hope that that gives members a flavour of the breadth of activity across the country. Earlier in 2013, we developed an interactive map as part of the legacy 2014 website, and I invite members to use the map to see at first hand the positive impact that legacy is having for the people of Scotland in their constituencies. In previous updates to Parliament, I have stated that the key to securing the geographic coverage of legacy is strong partnerships with our local authorities. Through discussions with local government partners such as the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives, VOCAL—the voice of chief officers of cultural and leisure services in Scotland—and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the local authority legacy leads network was created to drive legacy activity across Scotland. The network has grown throughout 2013, and I recognise the important part that each local authority has played in enhancing the reach of legacy throughout Scotland. I will touch briefly on the priorities for legacy moving forward. Young people remain at the forefront of our ambition, and the games present a fantastic opportunity to inspire and encourage our young people to fulfil their true potential. I have no doubt that that ambition is shared by members on all sides of the chamber, and it is something that Scotland’s sporting heroes acknowledge in sharing their own legacy aspirations. Allan Wells said: “I hope seeing new world-class facilities being built on their doorsteps will inspire more young people to get active and those already involved in sport to get to the next level. Having the Commonwealth Games come to Edinburgh all those years ago certainly did this for me and I look forward to what the Games will mean for future generations to come.” Our efforts to ensure that Scotland becomes a more active nation continue. The evidence on the multiple health and wellbeing benefits that can be gained from increasing physical activity is overwhelming, and we will shortly be launching a national engagement campaign to encourage workplaces to champion the efforts of staff to become more active in 2014, inspiring people to live healthier lives. Scotland’s physical activity charter will shortly be published. It is based on the latest international expertise on what works in tackling inactivity, and contains our long-term vision for a more active population. Support for volunteering remains a key priority for this Government, as we know that volunteers make such a big contribution to our society. We are working closely with partners and the third sector to harness the passion for volunteering that has been ignited by the games, connecting people to further opportunities to volunteer in their local communities. I finish by noting how proud I am of our state of readiness for delivering a safe, secure and successful Commonwealth games. I am proud of our world-class offering and the plans that are in place to showcase it on the international stage in a year in which Scotland will receive global attention like never before. I am proud of what we have achieved to maximise the reach of our legacy from the games, ensuring that it will be felt in communities from Shetland to Hawick and everywhere in between. I move, That the Parliament notes the positive steps taken by Games partners in Scotland’s final preparations to host a successful Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games; recognises the long-lasting active, social and economic legacy being delivered for the whole of Scotland by Legacy 2014 programmes; acknowledges once again the endorsement of the Commonwealth Games Federation for what Scotland has achieved; celebrates the success of both the Games ticketing programme and the launch of the Queen’s Baton Relay, engendering anticipation and excitement in Scotland and the Commonwealth, and welcomes the cross-party support for the delivery of a successful Games this summer.

I can reassure the member on that point. I attended a meeting of the legacy leads that was organised by COSLA and there were over 100 people in the room. Although they might not have been appointed as legacy officers, they were taking their legacy lead responsibilities very seriously. Each local authority is coming up with some impressive legacy work, which I am happy to share with the Parliament if that would be helpful.

I would certainly pay tribute to the role that has been played by Glasgow City Council—it has been an important partnership—but surely Hanzala Malik will recognise that the Scottish Government’s contribution to the public cost of the games is 80 per cent, amounting to £381.6 million. Surely we can all agree that, yes, they are Glasgow’s games, but they are also Scotland’s games. We need to agree on that and then just get on to celebrate and enjoy the games.

They share the credit.

This has been a good debate, and I should say at the outset that I am happy to support both amendments. I will just go straight into responding to as many points that have been raised as possible. I will start with Patricia Ferguson, and I confirm the position on payday lenders. Patricia Ferguson cited the parliamentary answer, but I want to be clear and put it on the record that we would not support any proposal for a payday lender to be a games sponsor. The games organisers have also made it clear that they do not seek sponsorship from any payday lender. That sends out a pretty clear message. Patricia Ferguson also asked about transport arrangements. We have a sharp focus on transport. Park-and-ride sites are being looked at in some detail and are still under consideration. Negotiations involving Strathclyde partnership for transport and all the other stakeholders and transport providers are being held, and it is important that we have a cohesive plan. I can therefore give Patricia Ferguson some reassurance about that. Business continuity has also been factored in. As well as providing the games with a robust transport arrangement, we want to ensure that people can get to their work and go about their business. I will make sure that information is circulated on the legacy leads initiative. I have seen some very good documents and brochures from local authorities the length and breadth of the country. They set out their fantastic legacy plans for their areas, particularly building on the Queen’s baton relay.

I agree. We can do more to make sure that everyone is aware of the information, and Parliament could be a good conduit for it. We will make sure that that happens. Patricia Ferguson and others mentioned the issue of statistics and participation rates. It is always a challenge to secure participation, but lots of things are being done to shift the participation rates for children and adults. We have the physical activity implementation plan, and we are funding a number of programmes. For example, the walking strategy is about to be launched in the near future. All that work is trying to shift the population in a general sense.

That is a good point, and I know that the Health and Sport Committee has paid a lot of attention to that issue. That is why we got the statisticians involved in creating a baseline from which we can measure. There is a lot to measure, such as the impact of the 150 community sports hubs and how many more people they are encouraging to be active, the opening up of the school estate, and active schools. It is a question of pulling all that together into a baseline from which we can measure more coherently, rather than just conducting one survey, because self-reporting has its limitations. I very much agree with Mr McNeil. Liz Smith made a thoughtful contribution. She talked about the sense of purpose that goes deeper than any one policy area and about trying to make a cultural change to see ourselves as an active population. The Scandinavians have been very successful at that, and better data collection also plays a part. Liz Smith also mentioned sportscotland’s audit of facilities. That is important because the focus is now on maximising the use of those facilities and making sure that we get the best out of school facilities in particular through better programming. Liz Smith and others mentioned the digital media strategy issue that was brought up at the cross-party group on sport. I am very keen for us to push that, although I do not think that we should let the broadcasters off the hook. There are major challenges with their coverage of sport, whether it be women’s sport or minority sport, and we should continue to work on that. That is also true of not-such-minority sports. Rugby is another sport that does not get its fair share of coverage. Without a doubt, with a digital media strategy we could go beyond the traditional broadcasters and appeal to a younger audience. At the end of the day, the younger audience gets most of its sports news from digital media. Organisations such as Scottish Swimming have been very effective at using digital media. We can support other sports to use it more effectively. Given that Liz Smith is a big cricket fan, I should congratulate Scotland on qualifying for the International Cricket Council world cup in Australia in 2015, which will be a fantastic opportunity for the Scottish team. James Dornan talked about what is going on in his constituency—a lot will be going on during the games. He also mentioned the Scottish women in sport group, to which I pay tribute because it is doing a lot of good work. I also established a working group, which advises the Scottish Government about women in sport and which is chaired by Sue Campbell, previously of UK Sport. I would like to see some recommendations from those groups on how we achieve a real shift in how women in sport are portrayed. I look forward to hearing more from them. Malcolm Chisholm talked about Meadowbank. I think it is fair to say that City of Edinburgh Council is trying to get to grips with the future of Meadowbank. It has come up with a number of specific proposals, which I have had sight of. John Mason talked about issues in his constituency. I should have congratulated him on becoming a volunteer. It is very positive that More than Gold is providing affordable accommodation for athletes’ families, particularly those from poorer countries. I turn briefly to Hanzala Malik. My mother used to say that some people could start a fight in an empty room—perhaps that is the kindest thing I could say about Hanzala Malik’s contribution. At the end of the day, surely we can agree on one thing, which is that the games have been a fantastic example of people working across the political divide. We should take shared credit for that: Glasgow City Council, the Scottish Government, Commonwealth Games Scotland, sportscotland, the organising committee and the Commonwealth Games Federation should all take credit. It is the people of Glasgow and Scotland who have made and will make the games. Surely that is something we can agree on.

The member should not say it if he does not believe it. It is not true: there are no Johnny-come-latelys. Everybody was involved in the bid at the start; the funding was from all the partners, without which it would not have happened. I do not think that Glasgow City Council would thank Mr Malik for portraying things in that way. Perhaps he should have a word with the council. I want to highlight some of the spend that is happening on the cultural side in Glasgow. There is over £13 million for the cultural programme, a lot of which is happening within Glasgow. Some recent announcements include the extension of the Royal concert hall for the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, the extension of the Theatre Royal for Scottish Opera and funding for the National Theatre of Scotland. The Glasgow Film Theatre has just received funding, and the Citizens Theatre has just received £1.5 million this week. Is that not enough to show Mr Malik the Scottish Government’s commitment to the city of Glasgow? That is on top of the £352 million funding towards the Commonwealth games. The games will benefit not just Glasgow but the whole of Scotland, as so many members have said so eloquently this afternoon. Alison Johnstone talked about the potential of pride house. I confirm that we will be supporting that and that we will be working with lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender organisations on the detail of it. When Stuart McMillan talked about what was happening in his area, he highlighted the role of Clyde the mascot—and we could not have a debate on the Commonwealth games without paying tribute to Clyde. John Pentland is right to say that the triathlon will be a fantastic early event. We are making progress on that, and I can confirm that we have made some funding decisions in collaboration with North Lanarkshire Council. I want to finish with the very enjoyable speech from Marco Biagi, who without a doubt got his towel down by the pool first when he talked about the fantastic development of the Royal Commonwealth pool and what it will provide for the diving competition. Peter Heatly is a diving legend whom I have met on a number of occasions and who is still inspiring people to this day. An important part of the games legacy is that, in the same way as there are household names such as Peter Heatly, the games will create a new generation of household names—athletes who will break on to the international stage and inspire a whole new generation to get involved in sport.

Like other members, I thank Neil Findlay for securing the time to discuss this very important issue and for his very insightful speech, which highlighted the challenges that his brother faced—a totally unacceptable experience. Other members have highlighted other cases. First of all, we recognise that the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities sets an internationally recognised benchmark for disabled people’s human rights, including on accessibility and personal mobility issues, and that our work will be measured against that very important standard. Our “Framework of Action for Independent Living in Scotland 2013 to 2015”, which was published in October 2013, lists as a key output that “We will actively promote the needs of disabled people and work towards equal access for disabled people to services, housing and transport”, and we are committed to working with disabled people in the design of those services. The case that has been highlighted today shows that, despite the existence of European Union regulations that require airlines to provide assistance in moving passengers to toilets and providing information on access limitations prior to travel, the legislation needs to be better understood by airlines and travel agents and better publicised to passengers. Although I understand that there is no legal requirement for an airline to carry on-board wheelchairs, it is essential that the needs of disabled passengers, including assistance in moving them to the toilet if required, are fully catered for during a flight. The provision of information by airlines and travel agents is clearly of significant importance. A 2013 audit of selected travel agents’ websites assessed that only 10 per cent of them provided sufficient information to disabled passengers. That is a clear marker that a lot of hard work remains to be done to ensure that disabled customers are provided with the necessary information before flying. I understand that the Civil Aviation Authority is considering these issues, which is an appropriate course of action. Although this area of policy is reserved, the Scottish Government will continue to monitor the impacts on disabled passengers travelling to and from Scotland’s airports and work with the relevant parties to ensure we promote best practice. I will certainly pick up with the Commonwealth games organising committee and specifically the transport group overseeing such matters Neil Findlay’s point about passengers travelling to the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup.

I am certainly happy to do that and think that the debate provides a useful platform in that respect. We can certainly communicate the Parliament’s views in that correspondence. We need to reach a position where disabled passengers receive a consistently better service and to highlight and act on the many examples of good practice, some of which have already been mentioned in the debate. Many airlines, including the low-cost ones, already carry portable aisle wheelchairs on board and other initiatives include free seat allocation for passengers with disabilities or reduced mobility; unlimited mobility and medical equipment and supplies carried free of charge in addition to regular baggage; and crews trained in moving and handling techniques and disability awareness and communication skills. There is good practice out there, but it needs to happen on all airlines. As an example of good practice, one transatlantic airline that has recently located to Scotland—Virgin—worked with the family of a severely disabled passenger, healthcare professionals and airport staff to ensure that her journey was safe and comfortable and that the necessary equipment was in place. That might be the gold standard, but there are basic things that all airlines could be doing and which really would not cost them anything at all. Scottish airports are also doing good work. For example, in 2013, Aberdeen airport launched a partnership with Grampian Employment Opportunities that is designed to allow it to work with disabled users to ensure that the airport experience is as comfortable and stress free as possible. Glasgow international airport employs dedicated help to assist with the estimated 90,000 passengers a year who require assistance with restricted mobility, and its service level agreement with the company involved includes challenging targets for ensuring that passengers do not have to wait for assistance. As for Jet2, which was highlighted by Neil Findlay, I understand that it is now in active discussion with the CAA about the provision of aisle chairs to passengers with reduced mobility. Although that is to be welcomed, we need action from the other airlines. For our part, we will continue to put disabled people’s rights at the top of our agenda. After all, it is our duty to implement the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to monitor progress. We will also continue to work with the CAA, airlines and airports to ensure that disabled passengers and passengers with restricted mobility have a comfortable and safe experience when travelling to and from Scotland. As I said to Neil Findlay in response to his intervention, I am more than happy to use this debate to ensure that those organisations, agencies and businesses are well aware of the Parliament’s views on this matter. If we can make some progress on that, this debate will have been very worth while indeed. Meeting closed at 13:05.

Forced marriage is, thankfully, not an issue that affects the majority of people in Scotland. However, it is a blight on those communities where it still happens and it can have a devastating effect on the lives of victims. I am sure that, whatever our views on this matter, we can all agree that everyone in Scotland who is eligible to marry or enter into a civil partnership has a right to do so freely and without coercion. Forcing someone to marry against their will is an abuse of their human rights. It disenfranchises victims by removing from them the opportunities that should rightly be available to all. The Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011 introduced forced marriage protection orders, and criminalised the breach of those orders. The act is working well, and seven FMPOs have been granted. As members know, we are now seeking to go further in the protections that are available for victims by creating a new criminal offence of forced marriage through this legislative consent motion on the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, which is currently going through Westminster. The Justice Committee has taken evidence on the legislative consent memorandum, and I am grateful to the committee and, in particular, its convener for their close and thoughtful consideration of this sensitive issue. This LCM has been controversial. I fully acknowledge that. There are valid concerns on the part of some stakeholders, which they ably explained in their written and oral evidence to the committee. Committee members themselves have reservations, which I am sure they will raise in their speeches during this debate. I believe that those concerns focus on several issues: the lack of consultation by the Government; whether existing criminal law provides sufficient protection; the chosen route of an LCM on a Westminster bill, rather than stand-alone Scottish legislation; and whether criminalisation might make victims less willing to seek help. It has also been questioned why we have taken this step at this time, given that our own act on the issue is comparatively new. We have done so because the UK Government became a signatory to the Istanbul convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. Article 37 of that convention requires forced marriage to be a criminal offence. It is our view that existing criminal offences in Scotland are not adequate to meet the requirements of article 37, and I note that that view was backed by the Justice Committee.

We are clear that, in order to ratify the convention, forced marriage requires to become a criminal offence. The Istanbul convention was, in effect, a game changer. We know that violence against women stakeholders are keen for the Istanbul convention to be ratified, and we want Scotland to be compliant. Criminalising forced marriage is necessary to achieving that. The LCM offered the opportunity to enable Scotland to continue to be at the forefront of social justice issues. In an ideal world, we would have wished to have had a longer timescale and period of engagement. Indeed, the committee questioned whether it would be practicable for the Government to take forward its own legislation in this area. I wish to assure Parliament that that was central to our initial considerations on whether to pursue an LCM. However, in considering how best to take the issue forward in Scotland, we came to the view that, as our goal was to ensure early ratification of the convention, our preferred legislative framework would be no different from that proposed under the UK bill. A further disadvantage that would arise if we did not follow this route is the gap that would open up between protections in Scotland and those in the rest of the UK. That period could extend to 18 months or more, and we believe that it is simply unacceptable for victims in Scotland to be denied protection for such a period. We would, quite rightly, attract serious criticism for allowing that to happen. I turn now to the view that criminalisation will prohibit victims from coming forward. The same argument was made when we criminalised breach of an FMPO in the 2011 act. However, at this point in time, we have no evidence that that would happen. It could equally be argued that the knowledge that perpetrators would face a significant sanction could be empowering to victims, it could encourage them to seek help by sending out a very clear public message, and it could act as a deterrent to those who might consider assisting a forced marriage to take place. That is certainly the view of some stakeholders. In its written submission to the Justice Committee on 29 November 2013, NHS Lanarkshire ending violence and abuse services stated: “The symbolism of having such behaviour criminalised could act as an inspiration to women and children living with or in fear of forced marriage ... as well as a deterrent to potential perpetrators.” Forced marriage is already a criminal offence in a number of European countries and there does not seem to be evidence that reporting has decreased. I bring to Parliament's attention the fact that the UK Government is considering amending the bill to ensure that those who might try to take advantage of a person’s lack of capacity to consent to marriage will also be guilty of a criminal offence under the law of England and Wales. Members might be aware that the issue was raised via an Opposition amendment that was tabled by Baroness Thornton in the House of Lords during the bill’s report stage on 14 January. Lord Ahmad then undertook to consider the matter further in advance of the bill’s third reading, which is scheduled for 27 January. If the UK Government decides to amend the bill to that end, we would be minded for similar amendments to be made in relation to Scotland, as we share the UK Government’s concerns in that regard. That links to the approach that we took in the 2011 legislation. Such a move would fall within the scope of the consent motion before us for approval today. Concerns have also been raised about how the criminal charge and the civil protection orders will work together. For example, would a criminal case proceed if the victim changed their mind or did not want that to happen? A number of factors would be taken into account, but proceedings could be taken without the victim’s consent if it was deemed appropriate. That is similar to how we have changed our practice in cases of domestic abuse. It used to be commonplace for the police to ask a victim whether she wanted the perpetrator to be charged. That placed her in a difficult position, having to seemingly take the responsibility for whether her partner was charged and taken to court. Many victims found that to be too heavy a burden and withdrew their statements. Practice has evolved now, however, and cases can be brought even if the victim withdraws her statement. The public interest test is applied, and the increased importance that is now given to domestic abuse throughout the criminal justice system means that the burden of responsibility is removed from the victim. We have spoken to the Lord Advocate about the issue and he is considering prosecutorial guidance on forced marriage. That will deal with the position if someone who is affected by forced marriage does not want criminal proceedings to be brought. The Lord Advocate will consult key stakeholders on the development of the prosecutorial guidance, and I hope that that will be sufficient to reassure members. As we will not know the impact of the legislation until it has been implemented, I give a strong assurance to Parliament that we will keep it under review in the medium and longer term. We will, of course, work closely with stakeholders throughout, as we have always done. Those working directly with the communities concerned are in the best position to give us the evidence we need, and we will provide resources for training and awareness raising, just as we did for the 2011 act. I make it clear that I see criminalising forced marriage as sending the strongest possible message that we will not tolerate such behaviour in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 9 May 2013, relating to the criminalisation of forcing a person to marry, cross-border application of the new Sexual Harm Prevention and Sexual Risk Orders and in respect of a new firearms offence, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the functions of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I thank everyone for their contributions to the debate. Although we might not all agree on the details, I have a strong feeling of the commitment that members have to ensuring that the right protection is available for victims of forced marriage, which we all agree is a serious abuse of human rights and should not happen in a modern, socially just Scotland. I listened carefully to the thoughtful points that members raised and I will address as many of them as I can in the time that is available. Before I do that, I want to elaborate on a point that I made in my opening speech. I said that I wanted to assure members that we will keep the legislation under review and regularly engage with stakeholders, and that in addition we will commission research to establish what is happening in communities, what the barriers are that prevent reporting whether in relation to civil remedies or criminalisation, how effective existing legislation has been, and what would help victims to take action. I reassure John Pentland that the research will, of course, be independent. We want good-quality research to help us to take the issue forward. The research will be useful because it will help us to identify what further action we may need to take in relation to policy or practice in the future. We know that legislation is only part of the answer and will not eradicate forced marriage by itself. Guidance, training, education and awareness raising are vital, too. We will continue to work with stakeholders such as Scottish Women’s Aid, Shakti, Amina and Saheliya on such matters. We will ensure that resources are adequate to do that. I will respond to some points that were made. I welcome Elaine Murray’s support, albeit with reservations, for the LCM. A number of points have been made about ratification, which I will discuss when I come on to Malcolm Chisholm’s point. Margaret Mitchell mentioned some views in the third sector, but third sector organisations have expressed other views. For example, the head of policy at Barnardo’s Scotland, Mark Ballard, said: “We believe that creating an offence under Scots law of forcing someone into marriage would be the right step to take in order to tackle this very serious issue.” Alison Davis, the manager of Saheliya, said that it is important to “adhere to the letter as well as the spirit of the Istanbul Convention”. I accept that views are mixed, but they are mixed—they are not just on one side of the debate. What is important is to agree that the organisations that have those different views will be very much involved in taking forward the measures.

I find that comment slightly ironic, given the UK Government’s clear position. As for Malcolm Chisholm’s point about ratification, the UK cannot ratify the convention until the provisions of domestic law are compatible with the convention. That is a chicken and egg situation. We must be compatible in order to ratify the convention, which the Prime Minister has said that he wants to do as quickly as possible. Given that he is from Margaret Mitchell’s party, I would hope that she agrees that this place should also seek to act as quickly as possible.

We are looking at forced marriage today. We are clear that, to ratify the convention, we require to criminalise forced marriage. The other articles are another issue. The LCM provides an opportunity to do something about forced marriage. I believe strongly that that is the right thing to do, not least because of the public message that it sends—that we will not tolerate forced marriage in Scotland. Making that a criminal offence sends a clear message. I turn to other points that were made. It is important to recognise the role of the organisations concerned. I again make the commitment to work with Scottish Women’s Aid and others to raise awareness among communities. As other members have said, we are talking not just about legislation but about how to take the message to the public. I give reassurance on that point. The relationship between civil and criminal procedures has been discussed a lot. Both procedures will be open to people, but we should bear in mind the important point that the criminal law looks at the criminal offence that has occurred, whereas the civil remedy looks at issues that might arise. A forced marriage protection order provides protection from something that might happen. People must understand that distinction. As I said in my opening speech, the Lord Advocate has agreed to look at the issues and at the public interest test. We must keep victims at the centre of considerations and keep victims and potential victims at the heart of the legislation, its implementation and the awareness raising in our communities.

I thank James Dornan for securing this afternoon’s debate, and Sandra White for taking the debate forward. It is an important topic, because it allows us to reflect on some of the wider issues surrounding domestic abuse. We know of the damaging effects on women who experience domestic abuse. Today, we recognise that children and young people in families where there is domestic abuse are victims too. That is the case whether those children hear the loudest of fights or the quietest of threats, whether they see physical violence inflicted upon their mothers or the aftermath of violence in the form of bruises and broken bones. Indeed, they may not witness physical violence at all, but psychological abuse of women can be just as damaging for children and can leave scars just as deep. Even when concerted efforts are made to shield children from witnessing or being aware of abuse, it must be incredibly difficult to protect them from the emotional consequences of abuse taking place within their home and being perpetrated and experienced by the most significant adults in their lives. That is why I am particularly pleased to have an opportunity to commend the work of the CEDAR network, and I add my own thanks to those already expressed in the chamber this afternoon to all of those involved in the network. I would also like to recognise the role of Scottish Women’s Aid, who brought the CEDAR model from Canada to Scotland and who managed the three pilot projects in Edinburgh, Falkirk and Fife. Of particular merit is the way in which CEDAR ensures that its programmes of recovery for mothers and children are complementary and work in parallel. That very much reflects CEDAR’s belief that mothers themselves are the best people to support children to come to terms with their experiences and to help them move forward into what we hope will be a life free from domestic abuse. Another commendable aspect of the CEDAR model is the way in which it embraces partnership working, which is true of the violence against women sector in Scotland across the board. I am also pleased that we have had an opportunity this afternoon to explore young people’s attitudes towards violence, particularly the way in which violence is seen by young people through the lens of gender. We know that violence against women is rooted in gender inequality and in the imbalance of power between men and women in our society. Dr Nancy Lombard, who has written extensively on men’s violence against women and on young people’s attitudes to violence, was mentioned earlier, particularly by Sandra White. Dr Lombard’s study examining the views of Scottish 11 and 12-year-olds documents some truly worrying views that demonstrate how perceptions about gender and violence remain deeply entrenched in our society—perceptions that being a man legitimises the use of violence, that women and girls are the possessions of men, and that it is a man’s right and entitlement to control and regulate his partner’s behaviour. Of course, that is not how the children themselves expressed the issues, but comments such as, “Because they’re a couple, she should do what he says,” or, “Well, she’s been cheating on him so she deserves it,” highlight that those perceptions are very much alive in our society and begin at a very young age. We must help young people growing up in Scotland today to challenge those perceptions and play their part in changing attitudes. However, let us not be under any illusions—that is not easy for a young person, or for an adult either. Any action that a person takes that defies and distances them from their peers and perhaps even their friends takes tremendous courage. That is why I am pleased that the Scottish Government is supporting the violence reduction unit to deliver the mentors in violence prevention—MVP—programme in a number of Scottish high schools. MVP Scotland focuses on empowering young people to identify, safely challenge and speak out against unacceptable behaviour. I and other members have spoken about MVP previously, so I will not go into the detail, but suffice it to say that I think that it is a fantastic programme, and I am delighted that the Scottish Government is funding and supporting the roll-out of MVP Scotland to all state schools in Edinburgh and Inverclyde. Sandra White asked what progress is being made on the strategy to tackle violence against women. I reassure her that it is of course progressing well and that the consultation is progressing. It is important to reassure members that many of the wider issues that have been raised in the debate, such as those of gender inequality and the imbalance of power that underlies domestic abuse, are part of the work that will be taken forward through the strategy. It is important that we do that. The Scottish Government is doing a lot of work to tackle domestic abuse. Police Scotland has made tackling domestic abuse one of its top three priorities, which sends out a strong signal. In recent years, the criminal law has been strengthened in a number of ways. The Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill will improve the support that is available to victims and witnesses throughout the justice system and will put victims’ interests at the heart of on-going improvements, which in itself is important. Of course, there is the proposal in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill to remove the requirement for corroboration, which has had the support of Scottish Women’s Aid and a number of other organisations that support women. A lot of work is being done although, obviously, a lot more is still to be done. The strategy to tackle violence against women gives us the opportunity to step up all of that work so that we can try to eradicate the scourge of domestic abuse from our society. I absolutely believe that, across Scotland, we all have a part to play in making our country one that is viewed around the world as an exemplar because of not only our determination to tackle violence against women but what a nation can achieve by putting the pursuit of equality at its heart. I join my fellow members in congratulating the CEDAR project on its wonderful work, which I believe plays a valuable part in helping us towards that goal. Meeting closed at 17:33.

The BIG 2014 communities programme has awarded almost £650,000 to about 430 community programmes; 55 businesses have won games-related contracts; and four projects have been awarded £223,000 through the active places fund, complementing the 26 community sport hubs that are already in place. That is a small sample of the work that is going on. I encourage Mr Paterson and other members to visit the legacy 2014 website, where they can get more details on what is happening in their areas.

Our assessing legacy 2014 website tracks the games legacy outcome indicators and reports every six months on progress against the 48 legacy programmes. The progress as at the end of September will be published on the assessing legacy 2014 website later today.

On behalf of the Scottish Government, I am delighted to open this debate and to have an opportunity to reaffirm the Government’s unreserved commitment to tackling violence against women. I cannot say strongly enough that violence against women has absolutely no place in our society. I welcome the interest and support for the agenda among the members who are in the chamber and beyond. We might not always agree on every detail, but our desire and passion to see an end to violence against women in Scotland has united the Parliament since its earliest days. I sincerely hope that that continues to be the case. Sadly, there is still much work to be done to eradicate violence against women in our society and beyond. Violence continues to be perpetrated against women and girls across the globe on a daily and unrelenting basis. In Scotland, women and girls continue to be the victims of domestic abuse, rape, sexual assault and other forms of violence such as commercial sexual exploitation and female genital mutilation. Also, the ways in which violence is being perpetrated are evolving. Social media such as Snapchat, Twitter, Skype and Facebook provide lots of different ways for us to communicate with one another but, regrettably, some people use those tools in a different way: to humiliate and exploit others. One example of that is revenge porn, which we debated earlier this year. I know that there is a lot of interest in the Parliament on the issue of female genital mutilation, some of which was expressed during the human rights debate a week ago. As a form of violence against women and girls, female genital mutilation will be included in Scotland’s strategy to tackle violence against women. The strategy will be the first of its kind in Scotland, reflect the spectrum of violence that is defined as violence against women and be published in the summer of next year following consultation in the new year. I will return to the subject in my closing remarks. There is much work to do to achieve the vision of Scotland that we all want, but there is also much to be proud of. I pay tribute to the hard-working organisations on the front line that work day in, day out to help women and children who are affected by the scourge of domestic violence. Many other aspects of the situation are also worth referring to. In its first year, Police Scotland has shown a great deal of commitment to, and leadership on, the violence against women agenda. It has made tackling domestic abuse and tackling rape two of its top three priorities. A new national rape task force, which works closely with specialist rape investigation units in each of the 14 divisions within Police Scotland, has been established. Rape is now being taken as seriously as murder. Every rape investigation will be led by a detective inspector or someone above that rank, who will lead a team of people who have the same skill sets as those used in homicide investigations. Rapes committed after 1 April 2013, when the new single service was established, and which remain unsolved will be subject to cold-case reviews in the same way that murders already are. The Scottish Government already proposes to remove the requirement for corroboration in criminal cases via the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. That move, which is supported by Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Victim Support Scotland, recognises the fact that corroboration can make the prosecution of sexual offences, which often take place in secrecy and without witnesses, particularly difficult. Removing the requirement for corroboration will enable compelling cases to proceed based on the best evidence, putting the focus squarely on the quality of evidence rather than its quantity. The prevalence of domestic abuse in our society remains acute. More than 60,000 incidents of domestic abuse were recorded in 2012-13, an increase of 0.5 per cent on the previous year. It is likely that that increase reflects to some extent greater reporting of domestic abuse to the police and the confidence that those who experience abuse have in the response of the police and other partners. That is to be welcomed, but the Scottish Government is clear that 60,080 incidents of domestic abuse is 60,080 too many. That is why the Government has increased funding to tackle violence against women, including domestic abuse, by 62 per cent since 2007, allocating £34.5 million for the 2012 to 2015 period. We recognise that, despite that, there are always pressures on budgets, particularly due to higher costs across many organisations. Nevertheless, compared to the funding support elsewhere, funding has increased and enabled much work to take place in our communities. We have also strengthened the criminal law in recent years, introducing a new offence criminalising the breach of an interdict with the power of arrest where domestic abuse is involved. The Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced on 6 February this year, will improve the support that is available to victims and witnesses through the justice system, putting victims’ interests at the heart of continuing improvements. To ensure that the Scottish Government fulfils its international obligations on violence against women, we propose to criminalise forced marriage. Everyone in Scotland who is eligible to marry or enter into a civil partnership has a right to do so freely. We have a proud record of tackling all forms of violence against women, including forced marriage. The legislation that was introduced in the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011 was a clear statement of our intention to work towards its eradication. Our decision to criminalise forced marriage will ensure that Scotland is compliant with article 37 of the Istanbul convention and demonstrate that the country will not fail to meet its obligations to protect those who are at risk. I am pleased to tell members that we have taken the decision to reshape our traditional model for consultation to encourage as many people and organisations as possible to engage and get involved in the consultation for the new violence against women strategy. We will invite and support stakeholders that deliver front-line services to host on our behalf discussion groups about the strategy with service users. Those groups will enable us to ensure that the strategy is built on service users’ views and meets their needs. We will set up a series of workshops with key stakeholders, including Police Scotland, Education Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and voluntary sector partners, which will take place in February next year. The main focus of those sessions will be on discussing how best to strengthen those organisations’ commitments to tackling violence against women, which will be set out in the strategy. From the new year onwards, we will widely circulate externally an outline structure of the strategy, which will be accompanied by consultation questions. That will ensure that all who are not directly involved in the discussion groups and meetings and who feel that they have something to contribute to the consultation have a mechanism to do so. In Scotland, we have much to be proud of. We have been creative and we have truly embraced a multi-agency response to tackling violence against women. As the minister who is responsible for equality, I am immensely proud of what we have achieved in Scotland across Administrations that go back to the Parliament’s establishment. We have the opportunity to build on those successes and we must never be complacent. That is why I have written to Professor Rashida Manjoo, the United Nations special rapporteur on violence against women, to invite her to visit Scotland during her official mission to the United Kingdom in April next year. She will visit the UK to examine UK laws, policies and practices that relate to violence against women, and I want her to hear about and see some of the fantastic things that are happening here in Scotland. As I said at the outset, the Parliament has always engaged a great deal on the issue. We have been united in our condemnation of such violence, which we all agree does not accord with the vision of Scotland that we want. I very much look forward to further discussion with members in today’s debate and beyond, as the development of the strategy progresses. I welcome members’ input on the strategy. I move, That the Parliament reaffirms its commitment to ending violence against women; welcomes the development of Scotland’s Strategy to Tackle Violence against Women, the first of its kind in Scotland; notes that the strategy will encompass the spectrum of violence defined as gender-based violence, and commends the valuable contribution that voluntary and third sector organisations have made to the shaping of Scotland’s approach to violence against women

Does Jackie Baillie welcome, as I do, the focus that Police Scotland now has on ensuring that repeat offenders are kept under observation?

On the issue of prosecution, does Margaret Mitchell recognise that, where an incident of domestic abuse resulted in a crime or offence being recorded, a report was submitted to the procurator fiscal in 78 per cent of incidents in 2012-13? That is a substantial increase from the figure of 51 per cent in 2003-04.

I thank all the members who have participated in the debate for their many positive and constructive contributions. In that spirit, I should say that we will support the Labour amendment. In my opening remarks, I said that I would return to the issue of female genital mutilation. I do so now, before I turn to some points that have been made in the debate. We absolutely need data that will help us to estimate more accurately the prevalence of female genital mutilation in Scotland. Data from the 2011 census that will allow a more up-to-date prevalence estimate to be calculated is due to be released in early 2014. We will, of course, make that information available to members as soon as we can. Let no one be under any illusion: female genital mutilation will not be tolerated in a modern and multicultural Scotland. In Scotland, female genital mutilation is punishable by up to 14 years’ imprisonment. We acknowledge that there have been no prosecutions for female genital mutilation in Scotland, but that is also the case in England and Wales, where there are many more women and girls from countries where female genital mutilation is prevalent. It is wrong to suggest that somehow Scotland is a soft touch on the issue. We know that female genital mutilation is a difficult and sensitive issue and that there are a number of possible reasons why victims might feel unable or unwilling to report it to the police or other authorities. That makes work to raise awareness and to encourage reporting all the more important, which is why I am pleased to announce that the Scottish Government is providing additional funding of £15,000 to the Scottish Refugee Council and the Women’s Support Project to carry out a project that will produce a baseline of information to help inform work to tackle female genital mutilation. The project will involve identifying and analysing existing data; reviewing work that has been undertaken to tackle, prevent and raise awareness of female genital mutilation; and identifying and drawing lessons from successful projects and best practice in other parts of the UK and Europe, to help inform us on what works in terms of service provision, prevention and prosecutions. We are also in discussion with the Women’s Support Project to develop a range of new information materials on female genital mutilation. I am happy to share more information with members about that at a later date. We recognise that health professionals such as midwives, doctors and nurses play a crucial role in identifying girls who are at risk, recording incidents and offering support and onward referral to women. That is why we have initiated discussions with Gillian Smith, the director of the Royal College of Midwives in Scotland, to discuss the recommendations that were made in the report “Tackling FGM in the UK—Intercollegiate recommendations for identifying, recording and reporting”, which was published by the Royal College of Midwives on 1 November 2013. I will update members on those discussions once they are a little further developed. I turn to some of the points that were made in the debate. Jackie Baillie made a number of important points. Like many members, she said that the issue of violence against women is rooted in gender inequality and the abuse of power and that we need to tackle that to really tackle the issue. She asked whether we would meet Maureen Gordon and her union representatives. I will ensure that the meeting request is progressed. Like many other members, Jackie Baillie mentioned that the domestic abuse courts are extremely busy. The Scottish Government is of course aware of the problems that are associated with the volume of cases that come before the domestic abuse courts in Glasgow and Edinburgh. The criminal justice board in Glasgow is currently considering ways in which to address the issue, and additional trial diets have been set aside for domestic abuse cases to help handle the increased volume of cases that are coming before the court. Yesterday, Scottish Government officials met Sheriff Katherine Mackie and Police Scotland to discuss the difficulties that are currently being experienced by the Edinburgh domestic abuse court and potential actions that can be taken to deal with the issue. A further meeting will take place in the new year. I was struck by Margaret Mitchell’s rather negative tone. Two things are important to bear in mind. First, the funding that the Scottish Government provides, to which many speakers referred—the £34.5 million over the 2012 to 2015 period—contrasts starkly with the £40 million that the UK Government provides for the whole of the rest of the UK. Also, Margaret Mitchell should bear in mind the impact that the welfare reforms by her Government at a UK level have had on victims of domestic abuse. I do not want to strike a negative tone but, in response to her speech, I say to Margaret Mitchell that she should remember those two points. Graeme Pearson said that people get angry and that Rhoda Grant had shown anger about her case. I do not mind people coming to the chamber and being angry about cases. However, I mind accusations being bandied about, such as—to quote Rhoda Grant—that the Scottish Government is complicit in the trade of prostitution and trafficking. I am sorry, but I find that deeply offensive personally and on behalf of the Scottish Government. We have stood together on the issue since 1999. That is the strength of tackling violence against women. No one in the chamber has a monopoly of wisdom on the issue, and it does not benefit any of us—certainly not women who suffer violence—to break the cross-party consensus that exists on the issue.

My point is that we stand together to tackle the issue and that Rhoda Grant did herself a great disservice in the tone that she struck. Alison McInnes made a very good speech. She talked about the priorities within the new strategy and including young people in that work. I am happy to take that forward. Christina McKelvie reminded us of the powerful argument for doing away with the corroboration rules with the 2,800 cases of domestic abuse that could not proceed to court. We should bear that in mind. Malcolm Chisholm, as always, reminded us of the challenges that some of our front-line organisations have. We absolutely acknowledge that point. Maureen Watt reminded us about cases not proceeding to court. I say to Alison Johnstone that COSLA is, of course, part of the violence against women strategy discussions. It is a key member of the group and, as we always do, we will discuss budgetary issues. We will get back to Annabel Goldie about the smartphone app. I am not sure about it, but we will look into it and get back to her. By and large, the debate has been positive. Women who suffer violence in Scotland deserve to have the Parliament standing together on the issue to send out a message to Scotland that violence against women will not be tolerated and that we will strain every muscle to do everything that we can to address it and, finally, we hope, eradicate that scourge from Scotland.

A written constitution would set out principles and rules that would apply to the institutions of the state, and would underpin the relationship between citizens and the state to protect rights and secure fairness and equality. In addition, the Scottish Government intends that an equality provision would be included in the interim constitution that would be put in place at the time of independence. After independence, a constitutional convention would consider how to protect and promote equality further.

As a nation that will play a socially responsible role in the world, an independent Scotland would continue to provide a place of safety for people who seek asylum. The asylum process in an independent Scotland will be robust and humane, with clear adherence to human rights and equality principles and to the rule of law. As Christina McKelvie mentioned in her question, we would close Dungavel and end the inhumane practice of dawn raids. However, independence would also enable us to address asylum seekers’ access to employment, education and accommodation. As she did, I welcome migrants’ rights week next week. I am sure that it will be an opportunity to highlight many of the issues.

Gender equality is a significant part of the white paper—on page 106, as Kezia Dugdale has been told on a number of occasions. We will consult on a target for female representation on company and public boards and we will, if necessary, legislate as appropriate. I do not understand what Kezia Dugdale’s alternative to that is, because I cannot see it anywhere. The white paper has put gender equality very much on the agenda and will allow us to move forward to becoming the progressive Scotland that we all want.

12. Christian Allard (North East Scotland) (SNP): To ask the Scottish Government how many community sports hubs are being developed in North East Scotland. (S4O-02698) Plans have been developed for 19 community sports hubs across the four local authority areas in the north-east, 14 of which are already up and running, delivering opportunities for their local communities to take part in sport and be physically active.

There are many benefits from community sports hubs. I will highlight one in particular—the development of the Garioch hub, which has seen a number of sports clubs brought together under the one roof, with a clear focus on driving participation in sport and physical activity. The hub, in addition to the new 3G pitch in Inverurie, will undoubtedly further enable sports development. Active schools clubs and the community will be able to come together and build upon the good work that is already being done. If members do not have hubs being developed in their areas, they should certainly be making inquiries and requesting a hub. They are absolutely the way to make it easier for people to be more active and, of course, they are also affordable for people.

I am delighted to address Parliament on “Giving children and young people a sporting chance: a draft Strategy for Scotland”, which we published yesterday. Earlier, we had a motion of condolence for Nelson Mandela. As on so many matters, his words on sport are uplifting: “Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire, it has the power to unite people in a way that little else does. It speaks to youth in a language they understand. Sport can create hope, where once there was only despair. It is more powerful than Governments in breaking down racial barriers. It laughs in the face of all types of discrimination.” We all recognise the importance of being physically active, and we know that sport is just one part of an active life, but given the legacy that will come from Scotland’s hosting the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup next year, there is no better time to celebrate our successes in youth sport and to consider what more needs to be done. It was clear from June’s debate on youth sport that members have their own ideas about that, but I am sure that members agree that the strategy should not be full of things that adults think are important. The strategy should be not only for but by children and young people, which is why we started by asking the young people’s sport panel for their views. What its members told us has shaped the document that members have before them, including the title, which was the panel’s suggestion. Members of the panel are in the gallery today; I thank them very much for their input. The panel told us that they want only the best for children and young people in Scotland. They want opportunities that ignite and excite young people to get involved and stay involved. Young people’s needs can be summarised as follows: “Give us great opportunities, supported by great people, delivered in great places and given a higher profile.”

I am happy to take that point on board and to give it further consideration. The draft strategy sets out in some detail what we are doing, collectively, and what more might be done, in the four areas that I set out. I cannot do justice to all the detail in this speech, but I will spend a little time on each area. The young people’s sport panel told us that they want opportunities to be involved in sport in a range of ways—at school, out of school, in clubs and groups, and informally with their friends and families. We think that the position is already strong. There are opportunities to try sports through physical education, active schools and programmes that local authorities and leisure trusts provide, as well as through sports’ governing bodies and clubs, the voluntary sector landscape of youth and community organisations and in higher and further education. There are opportunities, through schools, to take part in events and competitions such as the Sainsbury’s school games and the Commonwealth youth games. There are opportunities to develop leadership skills through programmes such as youth legacy ambassadors, young ambassadors and lead 2014. However we can build on that. On PE, we are making good progress, with 89 per cent of schools delivering on the PE target. That is up from just under 10 per cent in 2004-05, so there has been almost a complete reversal of the position then, when 90 per cent of schools did not achieve the target. There is more to be done, which is why I announced yesterday that continued investment of £5.8 million over 2014-15 and 2015-16 will be provided through the partnership between Education Scotland and sportscotland to help local authorities to maintain the quantity and, which is also important, to improve the quality of PE provision in schools.

I am sure that that is true, to some extent. What is also true is that the priority that is given to PE, particularly in the primary sector, is now far more prominent. That has taken a lot of hard work by front-line professionals. Head teachers have shown leadership and classroom teachers have been skilled up so that they can make an important contribution to PE. On that point, we will reject the Conservative amendment because it fails to recognise the essential role of the primary school classroom teacher in delivering PE. Without classroom teachers developing such skills, we would not have made such progress on the quantity and quality of PE.

I will do so in a second. If we were to remove that resource, the quantity and quality of PE that children in primary schools get would be drastically reduced. I am sure that that is not what Liz Smith wants.

PE specialists have an important role to play, particularly in supporting classroom teachers and in creating links between secondary schools and their feeder primaries, but we cannot underestimate the role of the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher has always been important in delivery of PE. What is new is that we are upskilling that workforce and ensuring that its members have the necessary confidence when they deliver PE. Without that resource, we would not get anywhere near the target of delivering two hours of PE a week. We must recognise that that is an important resource. I am conscious of time, and I want to move on to other ways in which we will build on the work that has been done. Although school sport competition is only a small part of the strategy, it is an important part of it. We feel that more can be done on the quality of school sport competition. Sportscotland will learn from and roll out the current pilot activity on intra-school and inter-school sport competition to drive up the number of opportunities that exist for young people to take part in good-quality competition. On opportunities for children and young people to lead, sportscotland will work to ensure that young people are an integral part of the management team of every community sport hub. It is, of course, crucial that all children and young people have the opportunity to take part in sport. The PE disability inclusion training programme, which is provided through Scottish Disability Sport, is giving up to 1,000 teachers the knowledge, skills and experience to include disabled young people fully in quality PE and sports provision by 2014. I know that that is an issue that Patricia Ferguson has mentioned in her correspondence to me about the strategy. In addition, a range of valuable existing programmes reach out to those who have particular needs, such as the active girls and street soccer schemes, jump2it and the Co-operative young volunteer programme. Community sport hubs provide an opportunity to reach out to young people in their communities, and sportscotland will work alongside the Robertson Trust to develop and support stronger youth work approaches in community sport hubs. That will involve reaching out to young people who do not take part in sport at the moment, and for whom the school environment is perhaps challenging. Notwithstanding all that, I want to consider whether we are doing all that we can to ensure that opportunities are inclusive and engaging, and especially that we get views directly from children and young people. We and sportscotland are working closely with representative bodies for children and young people, including Young Scot, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, and Children’s Parliament to ensure that we get the views of those who already participate in sport and—importantly—of those who do not. Day in and day out, and week after week, vast numbers of teachers, volunteers, parents and coaches give of their time, energy and commitment to encourage children and young people to enjoy sport. In recent years, an enhanced effort has been made to support those who work with children and young people to develop more child-centred behaviours. That has included provision of enhanced training about safeguarding, disability inclusion and protecting children and young people, and the introduction of positive coaching Scotland, which is a programme that aims to drive culture change in the behaviours of key influencers in young people’s lives, including parents, teachers and coaches. Although we are fortunate to have a huge and talented resource of coaches and volunteers, we can build more on those foundations. To do that, sportscotland will continue its commitment to the positive coaching Scotland programme, it will develop and deliver a new club leaders training programme, and it will deliver a new multiskill coach training programme and qualification. In recent years, Scotland has seen a transformation in the capital infrastructure for sport. The scale of new national, regional and local facilities for sport, combined with the school estate modernisation programme, means that we have never been as well served by great sports facilities across Scotland as we are now. However, it is important that, as well as having those fantastic facilities, the school estate is open at local level. By March 2018, the £1.25 billion schools for the future programme will see the construction of 67 new schools for more than 46,000 pupils. In our debate on the subject in June, Tavish Scott highlighted his concerns in relation to sportscotland’s involvement in the design of new schools. To ensure the best possible outcomes, the Scottish Government will facilitate sportscotland’s earlier and continuing involvement in the design of new schools. That will be delivered within the Scottish Government’s school building programme. At the same time, sportscotland will use its research on the school estate as a basis for discussing with local authorities and their partners improvements to the programming of community sport hub activity in schools. The young people’s sport panel is keen that a higher profile be given to young people’s involvement in sport. I have asked the panel to develop proposals on how that can happen. I am confident that it will, if its contributions to date are anything to go by, embrace the opportunity and provide us with some comprehensive and creative ideas. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the important role that sport plays in the lives of children and young people by providing them with skills and confidence now and for later life; recognises the potential of youth sport in improving physical and mental wellbeing, competences for work and establishing sporting success in Scotland; recognises that young people have been directly involved in the development of the draft youth strategy, and agrees that this is an important step in delivering a lasting legacy in 2014 and beyond.

I welcome Patricia Ferguson’s comments on the role of classroom teachers. Does she not recognise the huge progress that has been made towards all schools achieving the target? The latest figures show 89 per cent, with progress happening apace for the remaining schools. Surely she recognises that that represents progress and work by many people.

In the 2011 manifesto, we recognised that the classroom teacher is a key resource in delivering PE. I absolutely acknowledge that now. I hope that Liz Smith will do so as well, as Patricia Ferguson did earlier.

I am not sure that I agree with the vision that Ken Macintosh painted of facilities. When I look around me, I see fantastic new facilities not just in the west but in lots of communities. We have sports facilities like we have never had before. Surely there is a positive story to tell about that. More can always be done, but surely he recognises that we now have some fantastic facilities in our communities.

The strategy is about giving young people the core skills so that they can go on to enjoy sport, a by-product of which will be a healthier life. The quality of PE is very important and the new money will focus on driving that up.

This has been a very good debate and I thank everybody for their comments. I know that it has been quite short, but I am happy to come back to the Parliament on the issue. I will ask that the young people’s sports panel consider all the suggestions that have been made in the debate as they take the draft forward to the publication of a final strategy and action plan in the spring of next year. Some good suggestions have been made. I am certainly happy to look at Patricia Ferguson’s scholarship suggestion and if we can go further on access for children with a disability we will, of course, do so. Liz Smith made some useful suggestions, as did Tavish Scott, around travel costs. We have already committed to looking at that issue. Stewart Maxwell reminded us of some of the more positive statistics. Two thirds or 70 per cent of children aged two to 15 meet the recommended levels of physical activity. However, we do not want to be complacent, which is why we have no difficulty in accepting the Labour amendment. We recognise that there is always more to be done. Ken Macintosh talked about the requirement for more indoor facilities, particularly during the winter. I absolutely recognise that, which is why we have put such a focus on opening up the school estate. In many communities, schools provide the best sporting facilities. They need to be open beyond the school day. The recent research that sportscotland undertook shows that a lot of the school estate is open beyond the school day, but we need to ensure that it is all open beyond the school day. The hubs are a good way of doing that.

Obviously, the hubs are the clubs in many respects, but I agree that it is fine if clubs do not want to go into a hub. Many of them do, of course, because they can then share facilities, resources and people. That is a good model, particularly for the smaller clubs. I think that Mark McDonald mentioned them. Ken Macintosh asked why it has taken so long to deliver the two hours of PE. Exactly. I wanted to take the matter by the scruff of the neck and make that happen because it was taking too long—to have only 10 per cent of schools in 2004-05 meeting the two hours of PE target was an absolute disgrace. By my estimation, getting to nearly 90 per cent of schools delivering those two hours in two periods is not a bad track record, but we are not complacent about that; indeed, I want to see all schools delivering that as the minimum. We are investing £11.6 million— £5.8 million over the past two years and £5.8 million over the next two years—to make that happen. Every local authority must come up with a plan for how every school in its area will deliver on that target and that money helps to oil the wheels.

The member will find that, when it came to secondary schools, the count was not based on two hours; rather, it was based on the period system in the sector. However, let us just get the target met and more kids having more PE. I recognise that the quality of the activity is absolutely critical and the new funding will focus on driving that up. I am absolutely delighted that Dumfries is, as Aileen McLeod mentioned, hosting the ice hockey tournament. That is a big deal for the town. I hope that that goes well. Margo MacDonald, as always, made very good points. She talked about sport that we are successful at. The fastest growing sport is girls’ football. A benefit from that is how fantastically well our national women’s football team is doing. That success is no coincidence—it is because all those girls are enjoying football and excelling at that sport. She also made an important point about quality and the status of physical education. We are driving forward initiatives such as better movers and thinkers because they demonstrate that the academic performance of children improves with the enhancement of physical activity and education in schools, so there is also an academic benefit to it.

I want to ensure that the PE resource in its broadest sense is available. That may be done by PE specialists, well-trained confident classroom teachers or coaches working in partnership with teachers. However, the issue is really about children enjoying PE and wanting more of it. That is not always about the qualifications of the person but about their skills in enthusing the young person about PE and sport. A number of other important points were made that I will touch on. Graeme Pearson mentioned affordability and access. Community sports hubs are important for that reason, which is why we have made it a condition on such hubs that affordability is key. We want the school estate and the community sports facilities to be not only open, but affordable to all. I reassure Mary Scanlon on her point about adults. The debate was on youth strategy, so she will excuse me for focusing on young people.

Adults are important, too, and our targets there remain. The latest statistics show that 62 per cent of adults met the recommended physical activity levels. There is always more to do. We are investing in the Paths for All Partnership and are about to deliver a new walking strategy because we know that walking is a critical physical activity for the older population. We have not given up on the grown-ups at all, but the early development of good habits in the school environment is important because we know that active children and young people become active adults. I thank members for the debate. We will look for other opportunities to come back to the Parliament for a debate on the final strategy.

I do not doubt for a minute Kezia Dugdale’s commitment on the matter, and I have debated it with her on a number of occasions. Given her beliefs on equality and her criticisms of the white paper, why does Labour oppose having powers on equality here in Scotland? Why will Labour not support the devolution of equality legislation to this Parliament?

I wrote to the member’s party leader, Johann Lamont, to ask for discussions about gender equality, but I am afraid that I still await a reply. It cuts both ways. I am about to write to Jackie Baillie in the same vein, and I hope that the Labour leadership will sit down to talk about areas of consensus.

In fact, the Equality Act 2010 does not give the UK Government powers over mandatory quotas. They are explicitly ruled out for the UK Government, for us and for everyone else.

In the main, speeches have been helpful and insightful. I will deal with a number of points that have been made. First, I will highlight for Jenny Marra and others some of the very positive things that the Government has done for women. They include support for the living wage, the welfare fund to mitigate the Tories’ welfare reforms, and the raising of childcare hours from the 412 that we inherited to 600, which will start next year. Those are practical policies that have helped women in Scotland. I turn to some other issues that have been raised, and will go back to a theme that Kezia Dugdale started with. I did not get a response on it that I fully understand, so I will ask again. Labour members say that they want the Scottish Government to take action now to improve the position of women in boards and companies. We are clear that we do not have those equality powers—it is very clear from legislation that we do not—and we say that we want support from across the chamber to gain them to do the things that Labour members say they want to do. However, Labour members then say, “No. We don’t want those powers to come here to the Scottish Parliament; we want them to remain at Westminster.” I just do not get it. Kezia Dugdale rose— Can Kezia Dugdale explain?

Page 106 of the white paper says: “The Scottish Government will consult on a target for female representation on company—and public boards—and, if necessary, we will legislate as appropriate.” [Interruption.]

Where is the alternative from the Labour Party? There is none. We had nothing on gender quotas in the 13 years in which it was in power in the UK—nothing was done. As far as I am aware, there is no alternative document that Labour members have that says that they are committed to gender equality. We have in the white paper a clear commitment to take forward gender equality, but the members on the Labour benches do not want us to have the necessary powers. I just do not understand why that is. I will write to Jackie Baillie, as I wrote to Johann Lamont, asking for cross-party support, because when I go to the UK Government—as I have already, with regard to a section 30 order—to ask for those equality powers to come here because of what we want to do, my position is strengthened if I have the support of the Opposition. I do not know why Labour members would not want to support us in that. It puzzles me, and their reluctance to have the powers come to the Scottish Parliament undermines Labour’s claim that it supports gender equality. Mary Scanlon talked a lot about modern apprenticeships, and said that the spend on modern apprenticeships is different for men and women.

No, I will not, thank you. Angela Constance answered Mary Scanlon’s question and said that the difference is due to the employed status of modern apprentices, which means that, in many ways, they reflect the occupational segregation in the labour market. As many members have said, the Wood commission made some good recommendations to tackle that, including the work that is being done on STEM subjects. We have to intervene early and encourage young women to make employment choices that they are not making at the moment.

That is why we need more women in higher-level apprenticeships and why we need to get girls to make their employment choices earlier. That is what the Wood commission is all about.

As I said earlier, we do not have power over quotas; that power is explicitly ruled out in legislation. However, following consideration of the Wood commission’s recommendations, we will consider how we can encourage more women and girls into those careers. Siobhan McMahon mentioned the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report. As Angela Constance has already said, the Scottish Government’s response agreed with all the recommendations of the report and agreed to implement them. However, I remind Siobhan McMahon about Labour’s childcare record. We inherited 412 hours a year in 2007. We brought that up to 475 hours and we will deliver 600 hours from 2014. Of course, with the powers over the economic levers, we would go much further, as is outlined in the white paper.

I am sure that Angela Constance will write to Siobhan McMahon with those details, but she has obviously committed to that awareness-raising campaign. Jayne Baxter made some interesting points, and ended on one that is pertinent, which concerned OPITO and Fife College leading on the energy skills challenge fund and, specifically, targeting women for courses that are due to start in January 2014. A lot of good initiatives are taking place; that is one that she should, rightly, be proud of in her area. John Mason reminded us that the rhetoric of Opposition sometimes does not match the reality of what was done when that Opposition was in Government. He made those points very well in relation to previous Westminster Governments. I will end on childcare. This Government is very ambitious for childcare, but it is clear that in order to make the changes that we need in order that we can move towards the level of childcare provision that was set out in last week’s white paper, we will require the revenues from the tax that women who are returning to work would pay as well as the reduced level of welfare payments that they might currently receive, all of which will go to Westminster under the current arrangements. Under independence, that money would stay in the Scottish economy and would be used to help to pay for the phased expansion of childcare that has been outlined. That is real ambition—it is not tinkering at the edges or shifting money around. I presume that Labour members will tell us where they want to shift money from. Would it come from local government, for which they always want more money? Would it come from the health service, or from colleges, for which they are always calling for more money? Is that £600 million to come out of any of those budgets? It is disingenuous indeed for them to call for that £600 million to be spent when they are calling for money to be spent on all those other budget areas at the same time. The only way we can have that step change in childcare is to have powers over the economy and the powers of independence. I look forward to that happening next year.

I think that that is a pretty strong commitment. Can the member say what the Labour commitment is, or is it all talk and no action from the Opposition benches?

The Glasgow 2014 organising committee is working to ensure that accessible seating and associated facilities are available for people with mobility issues at Commonwealth games events. To that end, it is currently conducting accessibility audits at all competition venues to understand existing provision and identify areas for improvement. Accessibility improvements have already been made at Hampden. A new upgraded lift has been installed, along with four new wheelchair-accessible WCs and additional facilities for users with reduced mobility. For the games, a temporary athletics track will be installed and the wheelchair viewing spaces will be temporarily relocated.

The organising committee has been working with all competition venues to try to ensure that solutions can be made on a permanent legacy basis wherever possible, although it is recognised that temporary solutions will sometimes be necessary. However, I recognise that the Scottish Disabled Supporters Association is doing excellent work to ensure that issues for its members are being raised and considered. While the specific issues raised by the member are the responsibility of Hampden Park Ltd, I would be happy to meet the member and the SDSA to discuss that further.

I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing to the chamber the important issue of the sexual objectification of women. As members have said, it has been a week of important members’ business debates that have brought us together. I thank all members for their positive, insightful and constructive speeches. Although the issue is serious, the contributions have also often been humorous. Sometimes, using humour is a good way to make a point. I was struck by Annabel Goldie’s description of how ridiculous it would be for women in other jobs to be portrayed in such a way; that made the point well. I particularly liked Christian Allard’s suggestion of replacing page 3 with a page that promotes positive stories about women. I also liked Alison Johnstone’s reminder about the lack of women on the sports pages. Our national women’s football team is having a hugely successful world cup campaign, and I want more to be written about that in the back pages of our newspapers. The Scottish Government believes that achieving gender equality is one of the key building blocks that are required if we want to create a more successful Scotland. The routine reduction of women to their appearance—or a particular appearance—or to a combination of body parts is a barrier to achieving that aim. As members have said, it can be easy for people to laugh off page 3 as a harmless bit of fun, to tell people not to buy the paper or to argue that, at the click of a mouse or the touch of a screen, people can access a huge amount of more explicit and violent images on the internet. However, such views ignore the fact that page 3 forms part of everyday sexist behaviour, which affects the lives of women in Scotland daily. Like all the members who are here, I applaud the work of the no more page 3 campaign. In just over a year, it has managed to encourage thousands of women and men to take a stand against negative, demeaning and limiting portrayals of women. Our commitment to tackling gender discrimination and all forms of violence against women has been demonstrated in a number of ways, although there is always more work to do. One of the key strands of the approach that we have taken is to address negative portrayals of women in the media. We know that one of the principles enshrined in the new framework of press regulation is that it remains for newspapers themselves to determine their content. That framework has received cross-party support. The decision of the Privy Council to approve the royal charter on press regulation is an extremely welcome one and, following the Scottish Parliament’s unanimous decision to support the charter earlier this year, we have secured amendments that ensure that it properly reflects Scottish circumstances. I am sure that everyone here would agree that getting the framework right for establishing an effective system of independent self-regulation of the press, including cultures and practices, is an important step forward. In my view, getting a framework that can properly respond to concerns about the portrayals of women in the press is the most important priority. Of course, Fiona Hyslop continues to take forward that work. Those measures are essential because we do not want our young people—as many have said during the debate—exposed to a culture that repeatedly tells young women that they are sexual objects and that tells young men that it is completely acceptable to perceive young women in that way. As a mother of a young daughter, I want her to grow up in a society that does not portray women in that way. Many others have spoken similarly about the impact of having daughters; it is a powerful tool in changing many men’s attitudes as well. I was very impressed by the porcupine campaign. It is an innovative project that is supported by the women’s support project and the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust. It is run by a group of young people who aim to give real, honest advice to their peers about the porn industry. Last week, I had the pleasure of meeting two young people from the campaign who have been involved in some peer research into young people’s experiences of and exposure to pornography. It is a significant piece of work because young people are increasingly being bombarded by pornography—largely online. That includes extreme pornography, which can have a negative impact on young people, their perception of sex and what a healthy relationship is. Sarah Boyack touched on that point as well. The findings of that research are currently being written up. I very much look forward to seeing those findings and, more importantly, to discussing with the campaign what more we can do. As a Government, we take the protection of children and young people extremely seriously. It is an offence to publish indecent material and to possess material that depicts acts of extreme violence of a sexual nature. Although regulation of the internet is a reserved matter, we have established a group on child internet safety—with representation from a wide range of sectors—to discuss issues that relate to online safety, and we continue to work to increase understanding among parents and children about the risks of internet use. I want to put this evening’s debate into a wider context that includes our debate on domestic violence last night. As I am sure that members will be aware, the Scottish Government is currently developing a strategy in partnership with others for Scotland to tackle violence against women. It will be the first such document in Scotland, and it will shape the way in which we tackle violence against women in the years ahead. We will continue to recognise the need and demand for intervention services that provide support for women and children who are experiencing men’s violence, and to work with men who use violence. However, our strategy will emphasise the need for an increased focus on prevention and early intervention, and it will reinforce the links between all forms of violence against women—from domestic abuse, rape and sexual assault to honour-based violence—and commercial sexual exploitation. We know that women experience a spectrum of violence and that many women experience many forms over their lifetimes. In Scotland, we are exceptionally lucky to have a wide range of active and engaged individuals and organisations that are working to further the protection of children and young people and to ensure that tackling violence against women remains at the top of the public agenda. Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland will, in collaboration with the National Union of Journalists, be hosting the inaugural write to end violence against women awards in the Parliament next week, which is another step forward. The awards aim to raise the standard of media reporting of violence against women and gender inequality in a bid to lower public tolerance of both, and they are well timed to follow this debate. That is a positive development, because we need to make connections with those in the media who also believe in positive portrayals of women and to make common cause with them. I know that there are many who want to change the media reporting that perpetrates damaging stereotypes of women and myths about violence against women, and we need to highlight high-quality reporting too. We also need more women in the media. The fact that there are so few women in the front line in the media is very visible, particularly in this place, and that needs to change.

That point is well made. The situation that Elaine Smith describes is part of the bizarre nature of a morality that is uncomfortable with women’s bodies feeding babies but has no difficulty with page 3. We are continuing to fight to overcome those issues. Dealing with such issues requires a cultural shift. We must work towards that together, as the Scottish Government cannot change things on its own, despite—as I have outlined—all the work that we are doing. We need members on all sides of the Parliament to come together and join with the women and men out there in progressive Scotland who want to make those changes. It is good that, not only in this debate but in last night’s debate, women and men across the political spectrum have said essentially the same thing. It shows that we are in a good place in Scotland in that respect and that we can display leadership among all parties in making the cultural changes that will mean that we will look back on page 3 in years to come as pretty old-fashioned and of its time as we move forward to a different, progressive Scotland. Meeting closed at 18:12.

First, I congratulate Sandra White on securing this hugely important debate and welcome Angela and Marie from Glasgow Women’s Aid to the public gallery. It is absolutely right that Parliament should join in celebrating the 40th anniversary of Glasgow Women’s Aid and the huge contribution that it has made over the past four decades in supporting women, children and young people who are experiencing domestic abuse. I am in no doubt that its tenacity and support have given strength to many women who have been victims of domestic abuse. On Friday, I had the pleasure of speaking at Glasgow Women’s Aid’s 40th anniversary event, which Sandra White also attended. I do not say that to make Drew Smith and Stewart Maxwell feel any worse. It was a fantastic event, and whether or not they were there, the support in this place, and among many men, for the work of Women’s Aid is well appreciated and understood. I had the pleasure of speaking to Maura Butterly who, in 1973, was one of the pioneers in the establishment of Glasgow Women’s Aid. She is such a modest woman that she did not want to be in the limelight at all. Maybe that is the mark of the woman. She did all that work, having come back from America with the concept of refuge. As Sandra White laid out, she got on to Glasgow Corporation, which was initially loth to accede to her demands. However, she is a tenacious lady and eventually she got the support to develop the first refuge, which was a fairly small and basic flat. From small acorns, many important things have emerged. In my address last Friday, I read out a quote from a friend of a woman who had been helped by Glasgow Women’s Aid. It said: “I want to thank Women’s Aid for helping my friend today, you have helped to save her life, thank you so much, your organisation is amazing”. That really sums up how important Glasgow Women’s Aid is—it literally saves lives. From those small acorns, it has grown to provide a huge number of family spaces in the seven refuge bases throughout Glasgow. It employs 35 workers, who work with children and do outreach work, and family resource workers. It provides a huge amount of support. As Sandra White laid out, the number of women who seek Women’s Aid’s support is huge. Its services are unfortunately very much in demand. I suppose that the flip-side of that is that, as members have said, part of the reason for the rise in demand for services is that women are feeling more confident about coming forward. That is welcome, but it is a sad reflection on our society that we still have huge challenges in dealing with this issue. I am very grateful to Glasgow Women’s Aid for being there for those women and children at one of the most difficult times of their lives. As a nation we have made a journey since the early 1970s. It is undeniable that in the field of women’s rights a great deal of progress has been made. In 1975, the Sex Discrimination Act made it illegal to discriminate against women at work, although there are still many issues for women at work. Statutory maternity provision was introduced and it was made illegal to sack a woman because she was pregnant. Reference has been made to the law of no defence in respect of rape in marriage. At all those points in history, important things have been won by women. We should remember that women were at the vanguard of all those battles—many of them were battles indeed. We have a lot of work still to do. Violence against women continues to be perpetrated. Girls and women around the globe face it on a daily and unrelenting basis. In Scotland, women, children and young people are still suffering domestic abuse. The way in which violence is being perpetrated has changed and is changing. Earlier this week I spoke at an event organised by the Women’s Support Project and Rape Crisis Scotland about the sexualisation of culture and its impact on the relationships that our children and young people form. We know about issues such as sexting, sexual exploitation and online bullying, all of which underpin the power base and values within our society. One of the things that we are taking forward with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others is the development of a strategy for Scotland to tackle violence against women. That will include domestic abuse but will capture many of those other important issues as well. The strategy will be the first such document in Scotland and will shape the way in which we tackle violence against women in the years ahead. We will consult on it in early 2014, which might be the opportunity that Drew Smith talked about to have a wider debate. We will also continue to recognise the need and demand for intervention services that provide support for women, children and young people who are experiencing domestic abuse and other forms of violence. We will continue to work with men who use violence through for example the Caledonian project to change behaviours and challenge violent men, which is important. Our strategy will reinforce the links between all forms of violence against women, from domestic abuse, rape and sexual assault to honour-based violence and commercial sexual exploitation. It will emphasise the need for an increased focus on prevention and early intervention. I reassure Sandra White and Jackie Baillie that Police Scotland has made domestic violence one of its top three priorities and there will be a real focus on repeat offenders, which is important. I say to Malcolm Chisholm that ASSIST has been a really important partnership because of the intelligence sharing about where these men are and what they are doing. That is hugely important. We are funding a roll-out of the ASSIST programme. It has been said, quite rightly, that we know that violence against women is rooted in gender inequality and the imbalance of power between men and women in our society. This afternoon I spoke at the women on board conference, which looked at the barriers to women’s representation on Scotland’s public boards. Why does that matter? It matters because it is about reducing and eventually eradicating the inequality in our society. It is that inequality and power imbalance that provide the breeding ground for attitudes towards women that can lead to violence against women. We must look at that in the round. Let me leave members in no doubt that the Government is absolutely committed not only to ensuring that domestic abuse and violence against women are consigned to the past, but to achieving equality between men and women in our society. Meeting closed at 17:50.

Funding for sporting infrastructure is routed through our national agency for sport, sportscotland, which has begun discussions with Dundee City Council on the new plans for a regional performance centre in Dundee. Those plans will determine the budget required for the project. It is expected that the centre will be completed by 2016.

Discussions about the budget will follow the new plans; after all, one cannot set a budget without knowing what the new plans will look like and what they will cost. However, I can tell the member that the new steering group, in which the city’s two football clubs, both universities, Dundee College, Angus College, NHS Tayside and, of course, Dundee City Council are involved, met on 17 September, and discussions have begun with sportscotland to amend the plans for the national performance centre to a regional performance centre model. Once all that is done, we will know what the required budget will be, and that will be taken forward through sportscotland and Dundee City Council.

I expect that, as well as supporting elite athletes in the Tayside area, the new regional performance centre’s inside and outside facilities will be very much community focused to allow many people of all ages, particularly young people, to enjoy sport. The centre will undoubtedly help young people in the area to be more active and will deliver a strong legacy from the Commonwealth games on top of some of the other fantastic facilities that have recently been taken forward in Dundee.

Good progress continues to be made towards the successful delivery of the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games. With less than a year to go, the games remain on track to be delivered on time and on budget. All permanent sports venues have been completed and are already available for use by the public, and interest in ticket sales has been tremendous with more than 2.3 million requests for around 1 million tickets and at least 70 per cent of the tickets for every session being available to the public. Of course, the Queen’s baton relay will begin its journey around the Commonwealth early next month.

Plans and discussions are on-going with regard to a gift of the games initiative involving the games’ partners, and there will be news about that quite soon.

I am certainly happy to meet the member to discuss such matters. We have an opportunity to promote a positive message about Scotland’s journey and the progress that we have made, although I acknowledge that there is still progress to be made on these matters. If that journey can be an inspiration to others, I think that sharing our experience with others who might be at different stages in their own journey would be a very positive move.

The Scottish Government fully recognises the importance of accessibility for people with disabilities. We are working with the organising committee and public transport operators to ensure that the games are fully inclusive and accessible. To that end, Glasgow 2014 is currently finalising an accessible transport strategy, which will be published in November. Details of the strategy and the key principles for delivering accessible transport across the games network will be in that document.

There is no doubt that the miracle of Medinah in 2012 will be talked about for many years to come. Whether people were cheering for Europe or for America, I think that everyone will agree that the golf was spectacular and that the excitement was almost unbearable at times. Medinah should—and always will be—remembered for the golf, but when the Ryder cup comes to Scotland in September next year, I want it to be remembered for much more than just the golf. I proposed the timing of the debate to coincide with our “year to go” celebrations, which took place earlier this week. As members may have seen from the media coverage, staging an event of this magnitude presents many opportunities for Scotland, for Scottish businesses, for our tourism industry, for schools and for charities, not to mention our own golfers of all abilities as well as golf fans—of whom, of course, we have many, here in the home of golf. I therefore thank the members who agreed to take part in the debate today—the one and only opportunity for members to discuss the opportunities that are afforded to Scotland by our hosting the Ryder cup next year. Scotland is, of course, a country with rich traditions and year-round attractions. However, 2014 will be a special year, when we will welcome the world and showcase Scotland’s assets on the global stage. It will not only be the year when the Ryder cup comes back to Scotland for the first time in more than 40 years; 2014 will also see our second year of homecoming, which will be a year-long programme of events and activities to showcase all that is great about Scotland. Another great sporting event will also, of course, take place—the Commonwealth games. With those important events on the horizon, it is vital not only that Scotland meet the world’s expectations, but that we as a Government and as a people use those opportunities to promote Scotland and to demonstrate once more that Scotland is a perfect stage for major events, whether they are sporting, cultural, local or international. The success of 2014 will rely on a great many people and on many years of planning. The Ryder cup alone has been being planned for since the success of Scotland’s bid in 2001 under the leadership of the Rt Hon Henry McLeish. Since I was appointed as Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport in 2011, I have worked closely with Ryder Cup Europe and the Gleneagles hotel as well as VisitScotland, which have led on the planning and preparations for what I am absolutely sure will be the best-ever Ryder cup. My priority, which I feel very strongly about, is to ensure that any major sporting event that is held in Scotland benefits the people of Scotland. The Ryder cup will do that in many ways; I will touch on some of them today. I am delighted to be able to announce that, in partnership with Ryder Cup Europe, the Scottish Government will be offering up to 50 young people from all over Scotland the opportunity and financial support to volunteer at the 2014 Ryder cup. As we saw from the Olympics last year, volunteers play a crucial role in the success of major events. The training and experience that will be gained by volunteers is one of the many legacy benefits for individuals and for Scotland as a whole. However, we know that not everyone is in a position to meet the additional costs that are associated with volunteering. Our volunteering support scheme, which will run alongside the wider “Scotland’s best” initiative, will mean that up to 50 young people who face financial barriers to volunteering will receive structured training and financial support and, on completion of the training, a qualification that will boost their future volunteering and employment opportunities. For the Ryder cup, there will be 1,800 volunteers in total from around the world—more than half those volunteers will come from Scotland. They will gain invaluable experience of working at a major event, but the experience that Ryder cup volunteers will gain is only part of the legacy that the 2014 Ryder cup will leave for Scotland. For children and young people at school, the event will present an opportunity to learn about and to be inspired by golf and the Ryder cup. Earlier this week I joined the European and American Ryder cup captains—which was a pleasure—to launch an education e-resource that is made up of learning and teaching materials that cover everything from the history of golf to how hospitality and media are delivered at major events. The learning materials, which are in line with curriculum for excellence and were developed by Perth and Kinross Council in partnership with Education Scotland and Stirling Council, are openly available to all and can be used to inspire children from three to 18 years of age. Through schools, in a once-in-a-lifetime competition, we will give every child and young person in Scotland an opportunity to be part of this exciting event, to learn from the experiences of those who are involved in organising every aspect of the event, and to have better links to getting started with the sport. The education resource has also been developed to have strong links with clubgolf, which is the Scottish Government’s junior golf initiative, so that those who are inspired by the 2014 Ryder cup will be able to forge links easily with local golf clubs and existing junior golf programmes. I want to put on the record my thanks to the Auchterarder community school and its children, who hosted the launch of the education resource this week. They did a fantastic job and the two captains were very inspired by the children and what they saw. Clubgolf is already a major legacy benefit of the Ryder cup and is an excellent example of how we can benefit from the opportunity that the Ryder cup presents. Since 2003, the Scottish Executive and Scottish Government have committed £500,000 annually to ensure that all children in Scotland are introduced to golf by the time they reach nine years of age. To date, almost 300,000 schoolchildren have been introduced to golf through clubgolf, and we expect that by 2018, 500,000 schoolchildren will have benefited from clubgolf. More than half of new junior golf club members last year joined through the clubgolf pathway, including a higher proportion of girls, which is fantastic. The vast number of legacy benefits means that there is not enough time to mention them all just now, but I will return to those when we talk about our work with charities later in the debate. I also take this opportunity to draw members’ attention to another golf event that will take place during Ryder cup week. The junior Ryder cup will take place on 22 and 23 September, also in Perthshire, at Blairgowrie golf club at Rosemount. The junior Ryder cup contest is designed to build international friendships between top junior golfers from Europe and the United States, and it features mixed teams of boys and girls who are under 18 years of age. The junior Ryder cup in 2010 was held at Gleneagles and we aim to build on the success of 2010 to get even more children attending. I am sure that this free event, which will be attended by many local schoolchildren, will inspire young golfers. In addition to the great legacy benefits, the 2014 Ryder cup will bring great economic benefit. With match-day tickets already heavily oversubscribed—up by 38 per cent on the 2010 event at Celtic Manor in Wales—the 2014 Ryder cup is expected to see 45,000 spectators each day, and around 250,000 over the course of the week. To date, one in three tickets has been purchased by someone in Scotland, but we will have visitors attending from 75 countries, which is more than ever before. In addition to the spectators, the extra staff who have been employed to build the event infrastructure will be on site from June until November, and many event volunteers are already seeking local accommodation for the week of the event. In total, the local area will play host to an additional 7,000 staff and volunteers during the peak period. That will translate into direct benefits not only to golf tourism but to the wider tourism industry. Although the benefits will be seen specifically across the accommodation sector, they will extend far beyond it to Scottish food and drink suppliers, travel and transport, other tourist attractions and the wide range of businesses that supply the tourism industry. Encouraging our international and domestic visitors to take the opportunity, in attending the Ryder cup, to extend their visit to Scotland and see the great assets that we have to offer will be key to maximising the benefits from the event. Whether that involves their seeing more of Scotland’s amazing natural environment, visiting our great cities or playing some of the hundreds of other great golf courses in Scotland, we want to ensure that we seize the opportunity to showcase Scotland at its best. To that end, VisitScotland is scaling up its existing golf tourism marketing campaigns to use the Ryder cup to promote Scotland as the home of golf, in key domestic and international markets. The Ryder cup will offer opportunities to drive increased inward investment. To achieve that, a business engagement programme is being prepared that will target senior business events and tourism contacts. In addition, we have worked with Ryder Cup Europe to ensure that procurement contracts are advertised to all Scottish companies through public contracts Scotland, the public sector procurement portal. That is the first time in Ryder cup history that such an approach has been taken, and it ensures that the event’s procurement opportunities are communicated to Scottish companies, which can then bid for contracts. Another lasting legacy benefit of the Ryder cup is improved public transport access and amenities for communities in Perth and Kinross. Gleneagles rail station will play a crucial role in the transport plan for next year’s event, so in order to ensure that visitors receive the best possible welcome, and to leave a lasting legacy for the people of Perthshire, the station will be upgraded with a number of improvement works ahead of September next year. From the images, it looks absolutely amazing. The plans include a new link road to the station to improve safety and access, increased car parking, installation of new lifts to improve platform access, and refurbishment and reopening of waiting rooms and toilet facilities. I am aware that some media attention has been given to the impact of the event on local residents and businesses and, in particular, to the local transport plans. I want to offer reassurance to members and constituents on two points. First, there is on-going engagement with local communities. Only last week, a series of community forums took place in several locations, which provided people with the opportunity to meet the event organisers and discuss any issues. Secondly, I offer reassurance that concerns are being listened to and addressed. Members will appreciate the planning that is required for an event of such scale, and that complex risks are involved in moving large numbers of people safely to and from event venues. Transport planning for the Ryder cup is no exception and has been on-going for some time. Ryder Cup Europe, Transport Scotland, ScotRail, Police Scotland, local councils and others are engaged in a multi-agency approach to ensure that the transport plan for the 2014 Ryder cup is not only designed for the Ryder cup spectator, but will ensure the least possible disruption to local residents who might not wish to be part of the event but who want to go about their daily business. As a result of concerns that have been raised, local residents and businesses have received information about special transport arrangements that will, without compromising the safety and security of the event, ensure that they will not be inconvenienced. The face-to-face engagement process is on-going, with another set of forums planned for next year, and there will be other communications, such as targeted newsletters, to fill the gaps in between. In addition, anyone can visit the Perth and Kinross Council website for information, or speak to the dedicated Police Scotland Ryder cup community liaison officer. I pay tribute to Perth and Kinross Council, which has been extremely helpful and has taken the opportunity to make the most of the Ryder cup coming to its area. I look forward to hearing members’ views during the debate, which is perhaps an opportunity for members to highlight some of the legacy benefits and what is going on in their areas. I am happy to accept the Labour amendment, because we really do not want to divide on such an issue if we can avoid it. I move, That the Parliament notes Scotland’s preparedness for the 2014 Ryder Cup, which will take place in one year’s time; commits to supporting a lasting legacy in terms of education, volunteering, infrastructure, tourism and sport; notes the initiative from the Scottish Government and previous Scottish administrations for the successful bid and the investment in Clubgolf and golf tournaments, and believes that such cross-party and cross-administration support firmly sets Scotland as the home of golf.

I should make sure that Patricia Ferguson understands that the charge is not something that has been introduced for the Ryder cup in Gleneagles next year; it has always been the case that there has been a charge to recover the cost of volunteers’ kit at Ryder cup events. Of course, the volunteers are guaranteed time on the course. Furthermore, the package will cost a lot less than was charged in Medinah, where the registration fee was around £160, compared to £75 this year.

Neil Findlay’s comments are very unfortunate. This is the one and only opportunity that the Parliament has had to discuss the Ryder cup. We have discussed the Commonwealth games on a number of occasions, and I hope that Mr Findlay will not say the same when we debate the games again later in the year. He needs to raise his game somewhat.

I thank all members who took part in this largely constructive debate. As members said, David McLetchie would almost certainly have taken part in this debate. He certainly would have wanted to be at the Ryder cup next year. This place is all the poorer for his passing. I do not want to dwell on Neil Findlay’s comments, which were not representative of a debate that has been positive. However, I will give this warning to Neil Findlay: if we are going to debate only things that come in by the tonne in our mailbags, I am afraid that sport would not get much of an airing. I think it is fair to say that the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and sport in general are not necessarily what fill members’ mailbags, but that does not mean that they are not important for this place. Large amounts of public money are being invested in events such as the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup, so it is right and proper that people, through this Parliament, are told about what that investment is delivering. I do not believe that Neil Findlay’s comments are representative of what Patricia Ferguson believes, as I know that she has a commitment to sport that has been demonstrated over many years. I did not want to let his comments go. I will try to address the points that have been made as best I can. In her opening speech, Patricia Ferguson raised the issue of the charge for volunteers. I can confirm that charges were levied at Celtic Manor in Wales and when the competition was held in America. Celtic Manor was the start of that charging. It is important that we support our young volunteers who would not otherwise have the opportunity to volunteer at Gleneagles. I should also say that we are working on a ticketing initiative that will help young people in particular—volunteers and others—to attend the Ryder cup. We will get more details on that later this year. It will be a gift-of-the-games opportunity to make sure that people who would not otherwise get or who could not otherwise afford a ticket for the Ryder cup will get what will be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to be part of it. Before I move on, I say to Patricia Ferguson that I will investigate the fair trade issue in more depth. Liz Smith made a very good speech about golf in the wider context of the golf tourism strategy. The Ryder cup will certainly help the upturn in European visitors, because many will come over for that event. She also raised the issue of the pathway from clubgolf into clubs. There is about a 15 per cent conversion rate from clubgolf to clubs, which compared with other sports is a very high conversion rate from an introduction to a sport. That is good. However, some clubs are better than others at having a junior membership programme that is affordable—either low-cost or no-cost. The message that we need to get across to clubs is that, if they get that right, they could have lifelong members who join very young and stay at the club loyally for many years. There is always more work that we can do.

We are trying to help clubs, particularly smaller clubs. The roving pro initiative helps clubs that do not have a pro there permanently. We hope that having access to a pro in itself will help bring in membership. We are working very closely with clubs on how they can capitalise on the Ryder cup more generally. As we have heard, a lot of people do not have tickets. If clubs play it right and open their doors and have Ryder cup events, they could well benefit from a general increase in membership. We are supporting them to look at how they can do that. Liz Smith asked about golf scholarships. We are always looking at other things that we can do and I will certainly take away what she said and consider it. Graeme Pearson talked about the need for universal access to golf as a sport. Clubgolf has helped to open up golf to kids who might otherwise never have had the opportunity to play it. As part of that, a social inclusion pilot has been undertaken to provide clubgolf with information on how it can increase participation in areas of deprivation where there may not be a family history of playing golf. The results of that will be taken forward. Scotland is in a fantastic position compared with many other countries throughout the world. Because of our municipal courses, golf is far more affordable here than it is in many other countries. We should celebrate that fact, although we must be vigilant, and if there is more that we can do, we should certainly do it. Annabelle Ewing spoke well about the importance of the Ryder cup to the local economy. She also mentioned the local charities that are involved in and will benefit from the event. It is right that there is a good mix of charities. There are four official Ryder cup charities, including Quarriers, which provides care and support for thousands of vulnerable children. That is a really good charity partnership. There are also the Friends of St Margaret’s in Auchterarder, Perth & Kinross Disability Sport, and, of course, the McGinley Foundation, which is Paul McGinley’s charity. All of that means that some really good work will happen as a legacy of the Ryder cup. No one would guess that Graeme Dey had been a sports journalist in his past. He made a very good, enjoyable speech, in which he took us back through all of the magical moments of the past few years. Aileen McLeod talked about some of the fantastic new talent that is emerging. I saw that for myself at Gleneagles this week, when the Ryder cup captains teamed up with clubgolf players whose talent had emerged through the clubgolf structure. They were fascinated by the skill that those young players—particularly the girls, I have to say—were showing on the course. I predict—I think that it has already been said today—that, at some point in future, we will see an open champion emerge who started their career in golf through clubgolf. That will be a tremendous thing to see. We have a magnificent opportunity next year to capitalise on the Ryder cup, and a lot of work and effort is going in to ensuring that we do so. I always believe that the best legacies start early. It was due to the foresight of predecessors that the opportunity was spotted to start that legacy early through the clubgolf initiative. The fact that by 2018 half a million children will have been introduced to the sport is something of which all of us can truly be proud. I thank everyone who took part in the debate. It has been a positive debate and a good afternoon.

Like others, I convey my thanks and congratulations to James Dornan for securing this important debate and bringing the matter to the Parliament. The speeches have been interesting and thoughtful and have shed light on some of the barriers that affect the ability of disabled people to participate in society and, specifically, politics. As a number of members said, the independent living in Scotland project held a significant pop-up think tank called politically (in)correct in Glasgow in February as part of its “Solutions Series”. That is where the representation of disabled people in politics was raised, and it has clearly had an impact as, among other things, it has led to the debate. I thank the independent living in Scotland project for the work that it does to support disabled people in Scotland and for being at the cutting edge of ensuring that disabled people’s voices are heard in shaping policies and services that affect them. In particular, it has taken an innovative approach to its “Solutions Series” in the on-trend format of pop-up think tanks. It clearly works very well. The “Solutions Series” has brought together not only people with disabilities but policy makers, public servants, academics and other experts. A number of other pop-up think tanks have been held on issues such as the personalisation agenda, independent living and the topic of rights to reality, which concerns implementing article 19 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Scotland. We work closely with the ILIS project and other disabled people’s organisations on building capacity and engagement, with independent living as a strategic overarching commitment. It is important to be clear what we mean by independent living. It is that disabled people of all ages should have the same freedom, choice, dignity and control as anyone else at home, at work and in the community. That means the right to practical assistance and support to participate in society and live an ordinary life. James Dornan was right when he said that all those issues are unfortunately made all the more difficult by the welfare reforms that are being pursued elsewhere. A number of MSP colleagues attended the event in February and, therefore, will be well aware of the discussion about the underrepresentation of disabled people in politics in Scotland. The latest available figures show that adults with a long-term condition or disability make up 28 per cent of the population, and we need only look around the chamber to see that disabled people are clearly poorly represented in mainstream politics. We need more role models in politics, political parties and the Scottish Parliament. We have some good ones already, and the debate has demonstrated many of them. However, listening to Dennis Robertson and Siobhan McMahon speak about their difficult and, often, long journeys to get to the Parliament should leave us under no illusion about the fact that there are significant barriers facing disabled people who get into elected politics.

Part of the answer is the fact that Dennis Robertson and others stand here today and act as role models, which shows people that, although it is not always easy—in fact, it is not easy—it is possible. We should build on the role models that we have. Of course, those role models exist not only in the Parliament. Graeme Dey talked about Councillor Sheila Hands, who is a fantastic role model. Having recently appeared with Sheila Hands at a women and independence event, I can assure members that she is a tough lady and an able performer. Whether she has disabilities or not, she is a first-class politician. We should not underestimate the importance of such role models. As Michael McMahon said, a few years ago, they were not here. We have made significant changes, but we must keep that momentum going and build on their presence. We have heard about some of the barriers that people face and some of the ways in which they can be overcome. The issue of attitudes is far more challenging. We must all challenge people’s attitudes when, for example, we hear certain terminology used in meetings, and we must provide encouragement and support to ensure that people with disabilities do not rule themselves out. The Equalities Act 2010 permits political parties to take certain steps in the selection of election candidates to reduce inequality in their representation, so there are opportunities for positive action in that regard, and there are opportunities for parties to find ways of working together to address the underrepresentation of people with disabilities. We have discussed a number of recommendations that have been made, such as mentoring and buddy schemes that give people an insight into political life. James Dornan specifically asked about the access to politics fund, which was set up by the UK Government and runs until next March. I am happy to confirm to him that we will take that away and look at the feasibility of establishing something along those lines in Scotland. I thank the people who are in the public gallery. It is not often that a members’ business debate leads to some concrete action and change. They have demonstrated that, through the use of external pressure to get our attention firmly, some important and practical actions will flow from tonight’s debate. I thank all those who have taken part in it. Meeting closed at 17:48.

The member will, of course, be aware that the Deputy Prime Minister is visiting Glasgow to look at the facilities for the Commonwealth games next week. I hope that the member is not making any assertions in relation to Nick Clegg’s intentions in that regard.

Would the member like clarification?

I convey my thanks and congratulations to Christina McKelvie for securing the debate and for bringing this very important and timely matter to the Parliament. The speeches have been very thought-provoking and useful. It may be a shame that no men have contributed to the debate, but it is important that we build on the existing consensus among members in the chamber and that we widen the issue out to others in Parliament. There have been some very helpful suggestions about how we might go forward with that from tonight. I congratulate the violence against women organisations such as Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland, the Zero Tolerance Trust and the Women’s Support Project for doing so much to bring revenge porn and other forms of violence against women to our attention. Using new media such as Twitter and Facebook, Scottish Women’s Aid in particular has reached thousands of people with information about revenge porn. Its mini-site has been very successful in stimulating debate and raising awareness. I understand that Ellie Hutchinson from Scottish Women’s Aid is to deliver a seminar on revenge porn for officials in the Scottish Government next month, which I am sure will be very informative and useful as we take the matter forward. Violence against women involves a wide range of crimes and behaviours, as has been said by many people. Some are centuries old; others are newer and constantly developing and changing. It reflects the worst of humanity that some of us manage to find ways to pervert innovations such as new media and forms of instant communication, which should be positive, and turn them into something entirely negative. I am sure that pretty much all of us have taken a photo on our mobiles and shared it with family and friends. Something as simple as that can give a lot of pleasure, keep us in touch with people whom we do not see regularly and extend our connections outwith our own circles. Revenge porn is particularly worrying because it combines forms of humiliation of specific targeted women with the generally increasing acceptability of objectified images of women. It also adds to the current very worrying trend that has seen women receiving rape and death threats on Twitter simply for expressing entirely legitimate views, or even because of their appearance. I am sure that we have all been appalled by those subversions of social media and the misogyny that they reveal. Revenge porn affects us all. Even if we have not been directly affected, it affects us all as women, and societal attitudes to women are impacted upon by such things. Of course, we are all affected by a prevailing culture in which images of women’s bodies are used in a variety of negative ways. Men, too, are adversely affected. Thankfully, only a small minority of men are abusive or violent towards women, but those who are not abusive or violent often feel unfairly accused, or that they are being lumped in with a group of men whose attitudes they abhor. Violence against women impacts on relationships between men and women, as does anything that prevents true equality between men and women. Although all men are not the problem by any means, all men have a role in helping to end revenge porn and other forms of violence against women. Men often ask what they can do, apart from not using abuse or coercive control in their own relationships. The answer is quite straightforward. They can challenge their friends when they show around objectified images of women. They can act and not just be bystanders. In addition to the women’s organisations that I mentioned earlier, there is also work in Scotland that is aimed at supporting men to challenge their peers. The White Ribbon Scotland campaign signs up men to pledge not to use, collude with, or remain silent about, violence against women. There is also the mentors in violence prevention project, which the violence reduction unit has been piloting successfully in a number of schools. MVP trains young people in high schools to act as champions of non-violence and to challenge safely their peers about their attitudes and behaviour. As many members will be aware, we are currently developing a violence against women strategy for Scotland. That strategy will bring together commitments from all partners across a range of directorates in the Scottish Government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Police Scotland, NHS Scotland and, of course, our important third sector partners. It will be the first such document in Scotland and will shape how we tackle violence against women in the years ahead. It will reflect the new realities in which women are controlled, harassed and humiliated through the new media—the accessibility and reach of which have transmitted men’s abuse on to a world stage. The strategy is a good place for us to consider how we approach the issues that have been raised this evening. Of course, the strategy will reinforce the links between all forms of violence against women—domestic abuse, rape, sexual assault, honour-based violence or commercial sexual exploitation. That important issue has been touched on. We know that women experience a spectrum of violence and that many women experience many forms of violence over their lifetimes. We believe that, because pornography objectifies women and commodifies them as being available for sale, it is a form of violence against women that has consequences that reach much further than those for the women who are involved in its production. Revenge porn is an obvious example of the spectrum of violence against women, and it is an important issue of concern. It is a mark of the effectiveness of the women’s organisations in Scotland that the issue has been so quickly identified from the real experiences of women and brought to our attention. There is a lot of debate at the moment about the kind of country that we want Scotland to be. I am sure that all members share the view that we want a Scotland where violence against women does not happen, is simply unthinkable and has been consigned to the past. We want a Scotland where no woman ever finds that intimate pictures of her have been distributed to the world in revenge and to humiliate her. I want a Scotland where no woman will be threatened with rape or death because she has expressed views or simply because she is in the public eye. We have some work to do to achieve that vision of Scotland, which I am sure we all share. The positive thing about this evening’s debate is the consensus—it exists not just in Parliament, but in the many organisations and communities out there—that we can work together to make that happen. The new strategy is a good starting point. Positive suggestions have been made during the debate, which I will ensure are taken forward. I am sure that the committees that have been mentioned will want to consider including this important issue in their work programmes. I hope that, from the small beginnings of tonight’s debate, bigger things can come. Meeting closed at 18:12.

Nigel Don does not know the half of it.

I have been left almost speechless by that offer of support, which does not come very often. Indeed, I will come back to it in a minute. This has been a welcome debate with good speeches from across the chamber, some of which I will touch on in these closing remarks. We have heard about the many challenges and barriers that the Gypsy Traveller community faces every day and, as has been pointed out, I, as minister with responsibility for equality, have the overarching ministerial responsibility for this area of work. I always relish a challenge, but this issue gives me the opportunity to be the glue—if you like—in the Government to ensure that responsibilities that lie elsewhere are being met and actioned. Of course, the Scottish Government recognises that the Gypsy Traveller community is among the most disenfranchised and discriminated against. We have seen as much in attitudinal surveys that, although showing huge progress in many other areas, have also highlighted attitudes towards the Gypsy Traveller community that have had their time. I welcome the opportunity to take this work forward through not just a cross-Government approach but—I hope—a cross-party approach. A concrete result of today’s debate would be for me to take up members’ offer of cross-party support and leadership; after all, we need the leadership not just of the Government but of parliamentarians. As we move forward with the national awareness campaign, we will have an opportunity to put in place local ambassadors for change to challenge certain attitudes and I will be coming back to members across the parties who have expressed a willingness to help to discuss how we might put that into practical effect. I want to turn to some of the specific points that were raised in the debate. I might not get to everybody’s points, but I will try my best. First, of course, I welcome Margaret McCulloch, the new convener of the committee. It cannot be easy to speak on behalf of the committee after only one day in the post, but she did a very good job. Clearly, this is an issue that the committee should come back to—it is not one that should be dealt with just in a one-off report. We can look at ways of working together to ensure that progress is monitored. When Margaret Burgess responded to the issue of the awareness-raising campaign, she mentioned discussions with Amnesty International with regard to how to take the issue forward. There is a need for a clear action plan, with some timeframes for when matters will be taken forward. I am happy to come back to the committee with an action plan that contains some of that. I think that we can certainly come up with a timeframe for the awareness-raising campaign without too much difficulty. I pay tribute to Mary Fee for the work that she has done as convener. Had Margaret Burgess been closing the debate, she would have done so. However, as she is not, I will do so on behalf of us both. I congratulate Mary Fee on her new position. One of the themes that have been evident in the debate is the balance of rights and responsibilities. It is a difficult issue but an important one. I join with others in noting that politicians always have to watch their language. However, we also need to dig a bit deeper into what the issue is actually about. In the situation in Dundee that was mentioned, the issue was actually poor business practice, but it became an issue of ethnicity. The issue should not have been the ethnic background of the person who was carrying out the work when it was really to do with poor business practice, which included not providing an invoice or a quote and the ramifications of what happens when disputes about what was agreed take place on people’s doorsteps. We need to look at what the issues are. However, the overall issue is to do with rights and responsibilities, and how to balance them. Alex Johnstone attempted to lay out some of those challenges. Issues such as new sites and unauthorised camps will be difficult for local authorities to resolve, and they have been identified as early priorities with regard to how we can build relationships locally. I am not sure that the answer is that the Scottish Government should come in with a pair of tackety boots and say where a site is going to go, as that will please no one and solve nothing—to be fair, I do not think that Alex Johnstone was suggesting that. We need to try to replicate some of the good practices that exist. We have heard this afternoon about areas in which sites are working well. If they can work well in some areas, they can work well in all areas. We need to learn from that good practice and try to replicate it. Mark McDonald made a good contribution. He got beyond the rhetoric that has been a problem for all parties. Again, we have to provide the leadership that enables people to move beyond what might be seen as easy political hits in the local context. Siobhan McMahon asked specifically about the timeframe for the awareness-raising campaign, and I can reassure her in that regard. That campaign will be a good start. However, I was struck by Nigel Don’s suggestion that an awareness-raising campaign should not be about trying to explain what Gypsy Travellers are about. It is not about that—it is about respecting difference without having to understand everything about the Gypsy Traveller community. When we think about how to pursue the awareness-raising campaign, such ideas will need to be taken on board. Murdo Fraser came back to some big issues around unauthorised sites. The rubbish that is left and the cost of the clean-up generate negative local media headlines. However, some of the biggest critics of that bad practice are members of the Gypsy Traveller community, who know that it generates bad headlines. They are angry when it happens because it does nothing to promote good relations. Dennis Robertson called for a bugle. I am not sure that I can be a bugle, but I give a commitment that I will work closely with the committee and spokespeople from other parties in a genuine attempt to move the issue forward.

We are committed to providing all children with the opportunity to learn to swim. The top-up swimming programme, which started in 2010, supports the improved delivery of swimming lessons to schoolchildren throughout Scotland. To date, £1.2 million has been invested in the programme, and I hope shortly to announce what additional support will be made available. I understand that North Lanarkshire Council, which previously participated, is not participating in this year’s top-up swimming programme.

Whereas, obviously, local authorities are responsible for the management of their school estate, they also have a statutory responsibility to ensure that there is adequate provision of sports facilities for local residents. Swimming is not only one of the best forms of physical activity but a way of giving young people confidence in the water as well as being a fun way of keeping active. The top-up swimming programme was particularly aimed at those children who had not learned to swim, a disproportionate number of whom come from more deprived backgrounds. Therefore, the top-up swimming programme is good at helping those children from more deprived backgrounds to be confident in the water and to be able to swim. I would hope that every local authority would want to be part of that excellent programme.

I am delighted to address Parliament on youth sport. I am sure that members agree that it is an important subject, but I will spend some time outlining why I believe it is important. The benefits of sport for those who take part in it are clear and we know that meeting the physical activity guidelines can deliver dramatic improvements in managing and preventing disease. In Scotland, inactivity contributes to nearly 2,500 deaths each year and leads to significant financial costs for the national health service. However, the benefits of being active are not limited to the physical. Participation can help young people to develop self-discipline and self-confidence, and can help in their ability to develop relationships with peers and adults and in their success at school. Getting things right in relation to youth sport can create the basis for lifelong habits of being active. We know that 73 per cent of children already meet the physical activity guidelines, but getting more young people active is, I am sure, something that every member in the chamber supports. On top of the developmental and health benefits, youth sport can contribute to Scotland’s sporting success. We are all aware of the fantastic success that Scottish athletes had in last summer’s Olympics and Paralympic games in winning 13 medals, which was more than in any previous games, but that must not be the high-water mark. If we take the right actions now, elite success in the future can be greater still, and I am confident that we will see that next year in Glasgow. All that explains why I am determined that we raise our ambitions for youth sport. I am also determined that our actions on youth sport are informed by the widest possible set of experience and knowledge. The young people’s sport panel has already made a valuable contribution and will continue to be involved with other stakeholders. This debate is an opportunity for members to bring forward their ideas and suggestions, and I look forward to hearing them. I intend to publish a draft youth sport strategy in September and to give Parliament a further opportunity to debate, discuss and make suggestions on the subject at that time. It is important that we begin to look beyond the current targets and the horizon that we are currently aiming for to consider what we might want to do around youth sport in the future. I look forward to continuing that dialogue with members from throughout the chamber, but I will outline what I see as being some of the key elements in ensuring success in youth sport. It starts pre-school, because we need to provide a strong foundation. We know that play is central to how children learn, for both cognitive and softer skills, and that outdoor play in particular can be a major contributor to improving outcomes around physical activity and healthy weight. Scotland’s first national play strategy, which will be published later this month, will set out our vision for play and the action that we are going to take to achieve it. Of course, actions are already in place. The go2play fund provides £3 million to promote the benefits of free-play opportunities and good-quality play spaces for children. Among other things, it has supported the deployment of play rangers, which has allowed children to play in spaces that are familiar to them, such as their street or local park, while giving parents peace of mind and encouraging positive interaction between children and their local community. School age provides the opportunity to build on the early foundations. Once children learn to throw, catch, run and jump, a world of different sport and physical activity opportunities is available. School often provides young people with their first taste of structured sport and access to local sports clubs. It also provides an opportunity to try a range of different activities and sports. That includes swimming, and I hope to announce shortly what additional support will be made available through the successful swimming top-up programme. I am convinced that quality physical education provision is the bedrock for ensuring that every child has access to structured PE. That is why we committed about £6 million last year to put in place support mechanisms for schools throughout Scotland to meet the commitment to deliver at least two hours of PE in primary schools and at least two periods of PE in secondary schools for pupils in S1 to S4 by 2014. That is a commitment that, interestingly, the UK Government dropped in October 2010, which makes the Tory amendment a little rich and which is why, as Alex Johnstone will not be surprised to hear, we will not be supporting it. The Government’s commitment is delivering results—we saw that in the healthy living survey results for last year, which showed that 84 per cent of primary schools and 92 per cent of secondary schools were meeting the commitment, up from 3 per cent and 46 per cent respectively, in 2004-05. There are also now more PE teachers than at any time since 2006, so we are hoping to see continued success when the next results are published on 25 June. We hope to complete the journey by 2014. Of course, as well as staff, the provision of high-quality facilities plays an important role in provision of PE in schools. The Scottish Government is supporting substantial investment in sporting facilities in new schools across Scotland through the £1.25 billion Scotland’s schools for the future programme. On that basis, I am happy to accept the Liberal Democrat amendment. To date, local authorities, supported by Government funding, have invested around £24 million in sporting facilities in the 18 schools that have been completed or are under construction. As the Liberal Democrat amendment says, it is important that those schools are easily and widely accessible to the public. Our flagship active schools programme builds on that core provision by providing opportunities for children and young people to participate in sport before, during and after school. Unlike other areas of the UK, we chose not to reduce our investment in school sport and, since 2007, sportscotland has invested more than £80 million in that programme. Last year alone, the programme provided around 5 million opportunities for young people to take part in more than 70 different sports and activities. We know that there is a particular issue around participation in sport by girls. The active girls programme provides £500,000 a year to increase participation among girls and young women in PE, physical activity and sport, and is delivering for key outcomes. The programme is doing very positive work, a lot of it around dance, which has attracted a lot of girls back into being active in the school environment.

If Jenny Marra had been listening, she would have heard me say that the number of PE teachers has increased over the past few years. If she were to pay attention, she might hear such things. It is important to celebrate the successful models that are already in place in primary and secondary schools. With that in mind, I previously announced the introduction of the school sport awards, which will recognise schools’ achievements in increased PE delivery, in accessibility of schools’ facilities to their local communities and their greater offering of extracurricular sports activities. The awards will be introduced first in North Lanarkshire, West Lothian and Argyll and Bute from the start of August 2013—the next school term—with a view to their being rolled out nationally in August 2014. I hope that Parliament will welcome that, because I think that it is important to recognise in a visible way the good work that schools are doing when they do all the things that we ask them to do. I look forward to seeing schools gaining the awards. We are continuing to improve Scotland’s sporting facilities and have invested more than £70 million to deliver some world-class venues. Members will be aware that the First Minister announced today a new cashback for pitches fund of £3.15 million to help to install a Scotland-wide network of full-size 3G pitches for youth football and rugby. That is an example of where the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is helping to support young people in areas that experience problems with antisocial behaviour and crime. With more than 2,500 schools in Scotland, there is an opportunity to ensure that communities can benefit from year-round access to the facilities. Clearly, many schools excel at that. Members will be aware of our commitment to ensuring that at least half the proposed 150 community sports hubs will be located in schools. The latest of the 114 hubs that are currently being developed is in Callander. The McLaren community sports hub will bring together McLaren high school, McLaren community leisure centre, Active Stirling and Stirling Council, along with more than 15 local sports clubs and will help to improve the sporting offer in Callander. I think that we can go further. I want to explore with partners the possibility of reaching a position in which all secondary schools have the opportunity either to be a community sports hub or to have access to one. We will be discussing that as we take forward the youth sport strategy. It always amazes me to hear that in Scotland more than 195,000 people volunteer within the 13,000 sports clubs, thereby helping to support the 900,000 registered members. Those are amazing statistics, but we want to build on that. The Commonwealth games provides a once-in-a-generation opportunity to make lasting improvements in Scottish sport and to bring wide-ranging benefits to individuals, businesses and communities throughout the nation. We are all aware of the fantastic part that was played by the Olympic games makers in the London Olympics; we must harness the enthusiasm of volunteers here to deliver an inspirational Commonwealth games to secure a long-lasting legacy. I discussed volunteering at length at last week’s Health and Sport Committee. I do not have time to go into all the details here, but a lot of very exciting activity is going on within our communities. However, we have a real opportunity to use the excitement of the Olympics and the Commonwealth games to do even more, which is why sportscotland is providing a package of further support, which includes regional development managers to work directly with clubs and governing bodies to help local clubs to grow and thrive. That work will continue beyond 2014 and will therefore be yet another example of how we are delivering a lasting legacy. We already have a number of legacy programmes under way, which are using the games to inspire a generation of young people. Let me mention just a few. The youth legacy ambassador programme is engaging young people throughout Scotland in creating a positive and meaningful legacy for local communities. There are currently, across 25 local authorities, 83 youth legacy ambassadors who are fuelling community pride and passion in the games. Game on Scotland, the national education programme for the Commonwealth games, is helping our children and young people to develop as responsible global citizens and will transport them to the heart of the games, providing a wide variety of rich learning experiences and opportunities. We have the lead 2014 partnership, which harnesses the enthusiasm of our young people to help to create the next generation of young sport leaders, and through which 80 student deliverers were trained in each of the years 2011 and 2012, training around 800 pupils in schools in each of those years. We are also working with NUS Scotland and the further and higher education sector to focus on making a positive impact on the future of young people through the wealth of volunteering and training opportunities that will be available in the run-up to the games. Would it not be fantastic to continue that track record of hosting events by hosting the youth Olympics in 2018? We want to propel the youth Olympic games and the Olympic values across the globe, while providing the safe and warm welcome for which Scotland is renowned. Thanks to our proven ability to deliver and plan for world-class sporting events, the Glasgow games can focus on global youth outreach and we can project the youth Olympic games across the world, while inspiring the young people of Scotland to become champions in their lives. It is a tough competition, but the Scottish people have backed the bid in their thousands. That support is vital to persuading International Olympic Committee members of the merits of our bid, as is the welcome cross-party support in this place. We are grateful for that continued support as we get ever closer to decision day on 4 July in Lausanne. I fervently hope for a successful outcome; I am sure that members all hope that, along with me. I have outlined my intention to publish the draft youth sport strategy in September and for that to be informed by the widest possible knowledge and experience. I hope to hear some new ideas today from members, but I would be very happy to involve members over the summer in that process and to bring the draft youth sport strategy back for members’ comments. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the important role that sport plays in the lives of children and young people by helping to create a lifelong habit of being active; recognises the potential that youth sport can have in improving physical and mental wellbeing and establishing sporting success in Scotland; agrees that every effort should be made to harness the motivational potential of the Commonwealth Games in promoting youth sport; notes the Scottish Government’s commitment to publish a draft youth sport strategy in September 2013, and recognises Glasgow’s bid for the Youth Olympics in 2018 as evidence of the commitment to delivering a sporting legacy.

Will the member give way on that point?

Just to clarify, 50 per cent of the community sports hubs, which is 150, will be within secondary schools. However, we are looking at what happens next, and discussions are taking place in relation to the youth sport strategy on every secondary school being a hub or having access to one.

Does the member not welcome the fact that more sports will be involved in the national performance centre rather than the centre just being about football? The sporting world in Scotland certainly welcomes that fact; surely the member welcomes it, too.

It might have helped had Jenny Marra named the right constituency. In her request, she named Dundee City East; she should have named Dundee City West, which is where the NPC would be based were the bid to be successful. Perhaps the member needs to be a bit more careful when drafting her questions.

Is the member aware that one of the difficulties with the current funding arrangement through UK Sport is that although Scottish swimmers gave a strong performance in the Olympics, as we hope they will next year, that was not necessarily recognised when it came to deciding which sports were successful or otherwise at the Olympics?

Oh dear.

I welcome the positive contributions—perhaps with one exception, which I will come back to—that have been made from around the chamber. I should have said at the start of the debate that we accept Patricia Ferguson’s amendment, which very much adds to the motion. She talked about how to harness motivation and about ensuring that we continue that through and beyond the games next year. I hope that I managed to answer in my opening remarks a little of what she asked, but it is very important that we remain focused on that. Patricia Ferguson also raised the issue of school pupils with disabilities. We have supported Scottish Disability Sport in rolling out measures to improve delivery of sport for children with disabilities. I very much agree with members that that must be included in the youth sport strategy, so we will ensure that it is. All that I will say in response to Alex Johnstone, apart from that he may have got out of the wrong side of the bed this morning, is that I could have understood his criticisms of our delivery on PE were it not for the fact that the Conservative UK Government dropped the target entirely in 2010. We have not done that; we have said that we will meet the target by next year. As many members have said, it is not the be-all and end-all. We agree that it is not, but it is an important part of the jigsaw; the school environment has an important role to play in ensuring that children are active every day of the week. Tavish Scott mentioned the Public Audit Committee’s consideration of the progress report and its comments on legacy. The Commonwealth Games Federation co-ordination commission highlighted the legacy plans and described them as being world leading and as “a blueprint for future ... Games.” We are not complacent, but I hope that the way in which legacy has been built into everything that we have done from the moment the bid was won is something that future hosts will be able to emulate. Aileen McLeod talked about the active schools games that are going on in her area, which are a good example of an improvement in the quality of competitive school sport. We want that to feature in the youth sport strategy, because there is room there for improvement. I will also be happy to take up her invitation, diary permitting. Margaret McDougall talked about the need for the legacy to extend beyond Glasgow. I agree with her; I want to see a legacy for the whole of Scotland. However, to imply that the west of Scotland has not received substantial investment in sports facilities might be stretching things a bit too far; I do not think that that can be said to be the case. Nevertheless, there is always more to be done, and I want to ensure that we have, in North Ayrshire and any other part of Scotland, a genuine legacy from the games. I also agree with Margaret McDougall’s point about social enterprise. There are huge opportunities for social enterprise in sport. There are some really good examples of that, although we can always do more. Bob Doris championed the case for Glasgow hosting the world masters games in 2021, and the number of members declaring that they would take part was impressive. He also referred to the 24 projects that are being funded through the active places fund, which is a concrete example of how the legacy is being delivered to a number of communities through that community-based fund to improve community sports facilities the length and breadth of Scotland. Jenny Marra rightly praised the efforts of Dundee City Council. I take issue with her speech only in that she implied that there has to date been little or no investment in sports facilities in Dundee, which is just not the case. I highlight the new multimillion pound Olympia leisure centre, which is about to open and has competition-quality swimming facilities; the new world-class gymnastics centre; the new hockey pitches and 3G pitches at the Dundee international sports complex; and the new outdoor velodrome in Caird park, to name but a few of the new facilities. That investment is important because, along with other cities in Scotland, Dundee is looking to host the pre-games training camps. I would not want Dundee’s portfolio of excellent facilities to be in any way undermined—it is important that it is able to promote them. Joan McAlpine highlighted Scotland’s success in curling. We must have regard to our traditional sports, and a bit of rivalry seems to be developing about which area has the strongest links to curling. Irrespective of that, I wish Eve Muirhead and the team good luck in Sochi. I also assure members that there will be opportunities to develop and support our curling tradition. Alison Johnstone talked about the power of sport and the need to ensure that young people are involved in development of the youth sports strategy. I assure her that the young people’s panel will do that—it will go out and talk to young people about what they want to see in the strategy, which is important. Graeme Pearson talked about senior school leaders and leavers. It is important that senior pupils in schools are involved in leadership roles—it gives them fantastic skills development for the future. Of course, many of them have already been recruited into sport-coaching roles. He may be interested in the recent announcement on the expansion of modern apprenticeships in the sport and leisure sector, which creates opportunities for young school leavers who have an interest in sport. What can I say about Christine Grahame’s speech? She and I had a similar hockey experience. She mentioned that she was a dancer. We have yet to see her in action, but there is always time for that.

Christine Grahame highlighted that dance appeals to girls. It does not matter to me what the activity is, whether it is dance or hockey. I have always said that as long as it gets young people hot, sweaty and active that does it for me. [Laughter.] Members should wipe that thought from their minds. Christine Grahame also mentioned the sports summit. [Interruption.]

Information on healthy eating is important. The issue is not simply about sport; it is about everything that goes with sport, including a healthy lifestyle. In response to Tavish Scott’s closing remarks, we should remember that Scotland contributes to the Olympics funding structure and to UK Sport. As is always the case, our athletes will train wherever they need to train—they go to the best facilities all over the world—and the funding follows the athlete. That is the case now, and I assure Tavish Scott that it will be the case after independence. Nanette Milne mentioned passing on coaches’ experience to less-experienced coaches, which is also an important point, and Mark Griffin reminded us about the international children’s games and its legacy. I attended that event; it is another great example of Scotland’s capacity to attract fantastic events to our country. I, too, hope that we will see that long and growing list of major sporting events that we have managed to attract to Scotland being added to, and that we have the full support of all parties in the chamber in our hope that our youth Olympic games bid has all success next month in Lausanne. I thank members for their contributions.

Further to the release of the equality evidence strategy 2013, the Scottish Government published seven comprehensive equality evidence reviews that collated information from a wide range of published research to fill evidence gaps across all the protected equality characteristics. The Scottish Government is working with National Records of Scotland colleagues ahead of the release of equality tables from the 2011 census, which are due for publication from this summer. The census data will help to address evidence gaps across a number of equality characteristics and will provide that information at lower-level geographies.

The Scottish Government and disabled people’s organisations have jointly established a working group that is aimed at improving the disability pages of the equality evidence finder. The disabled people’s organisations within the group have been positive about the evidence finder, welcoming it as a new resource, but they and the Scottish Government recognise that more could be done to improve it. The Scottish Government will continue to engage with the group to ensure that the evidence gaps are considered, prioritised and, importantly, filled where that is appropriate.

The Scottish Government places a strong emphasis on equality because it believes in a fair and just Scotland, because equality is at the heart of realising improved outcomes for the people of Scotland and because it matters for our economic and social wellbeing. The “Scottish Government Equality Outcomes and Mainstreaming Report”, which was published on 30 April, summarises much of the action that we have taken to date.

I am sure that Siobhan McMahon appreciates that the equality agenda spans many ministers’ portfolios and that many ministers have an input into it. One reason why I was keen to take on aspects of the equality agenda was to give momentum to many aspects of the Government’s policy. I will ensure that the equality agenda is pursued across all those aspects but, of course, I will work closely with other ministers. I will work closely with Roseanna Cunningham, the minister who has responsibility for religion and belief. I hope that I can give Siobhan McMahon some reassurance on that.

The Scottish Government is taking a number of actions to tackle the barriers that face women who want to work. I hope that Aileen McLeod is aware of last year’s successful women’s employment summit and aware that Angela Constance has formed a strategic group on women and work to help her to monitor the wide range of activity across Government. A cross-Government occupational segregation group has also been convened to consider the wide range of challenges that we face in achieving better gender balance across the labour market. In addition, the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will increase the hours and flexibility of high-quality early learning and childcare. The First Minister has asked the Council of Economic Advisers to consider the best models of delivering and funding a high-quality, universal early learning and childcare system. I hope that the whole Parliament can agree on that.

I congratulate Alex Johnstone on securing this debate to welcome the national cricket teams of Japan to Scotland for the first time. I am impressed with his grasp of the Japanese language. I am not going to try to emulate it, but I am extremely impressed. Of course, we will check the record to see how accurate he was. There have been positive and constructive speeches this evening and I am delighted to be able to respond as the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport. I am pleased that we have a long and positive relationship with Japan that, as was touched on in the debate, helps us to realise the potential for greater educational, cultural, business and scientific exchanges between Scotland and Japan. The Scotland trip for the Japan Cricket Association will be a first. It coincides with the 150th anniversary of the first cricket match that was held in Japan. The visit will also see the first ever women’s Cricket Scotland president’s XI fixture take place against the Japanese women’s squad, which—with my equalities hat on—I am also delighted about. I am impressed that Liz Smith will umpire one of those games; I did not know that. The matches in Glasgow with the Western District Cricket Union men and the Scottish Wildcats women will be of special significance to the Japanese, as Glasgow is, of course, the birthplace of James Pender Mollison, who helped to found the Yokohama Cricket Club, the first cricket club in Japan. By making the trip to Scotland for these friendly matches, both sides are helping to increase the awareness of Cricket for Smiles, which was set up by Alex Miyaji and which has been referred to often in the debate. I am pleased to hear about his Dundee connections. The programme is focused on acquiring cricket equipment to be distributed to more than 1,500 schools that, as Liz Smith, Alex Johnstone and others said, lost their own equipment and were affected in many other ways by the tsunami in 2011. It is, without doubt, a worthwhile cause that helps to raise awareness of what the victims of the earthquake and the tsunami are facing. In some ways, it also shows the power of sport in helping to rebuild lives and communities. Without a doubt, Japan has shown a great deal of resilience in recovering from those horrific events. I have been impressed by the Japanese people, their strong sense of unity and the support for one another that they have shown during very difficult times. Japanese and Scottish folks have some notable sporting links, which have been highlighted by awards recently given by the Japanese Government to two Scottish athletes. In 2011, Mr George Kerr, president of the British Judo Association, was awarded the order of the rising sun with gold rays and rosette in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the promotion of judo, exchange and understanding between Japan and the United Kingdom. In 2010, Mr Ronnie Watt was awarded the order of the rising sun with gold and silver rays for his outstanding contribution to karate and his commitment to strengthening the relationship between Scotland and Japan. It would be remiss of me not to mention one other Dundee connection. The fantastic architecture of the V and A at Dundee is being designed by the Japanese architect Kengo Kuma, who is renowned for his innovative museum architecture in Japan, including in Nagasaki and at the Suntory whisky museum in Tokyo. I look forward to seeing that fantastic building take shape. Japanese companies have been investing in Scotland for many years. Alex Johnstone mentioned the fact that 65 Japanese companies in Scotland employ approximately 5,000 people. Scotland’s first Japanese investor was Terasaki Electric, which established operations way back in 1971 and continues to expand to this day. Mitsubishi Electric Air Conditioning Systems Europe in Livingston employs 500 people and has made an on-going contribution to the Scottish economy. This year, it will celebrate its 20th anniversary. Japanese investment has been very important to Scotland for many years, and the growing sectors of renewable energy and research into life sciences are areas in which Japan and Scotland can collaborate and build a strong working relationship. John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, is building on that relationship. He visited Japan in April last year to meet Japanese investors and discuss their current and future investment in Scotland. He will make a return visit to Japan next month. Members mentioned the links with Scottish food and drink. Japan is a very important and growing export market that has increased by 25 per cent, from £73 million in 2010 to £91 million in 2011. Scottish whisky forms an important of those exports, and Scottish smoked salmon and farmed salmon, which is recognised as being the best farmed salmon in the world, is used as sashimi-grade quality in Michelin-starred restaurants and other sushi outlets in Japan. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, went with a delegation of some 20 Scottish food and drink companies for an in-market workshop in Japan, so it is clearly a big growth area for us. In October last year, we celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Scotland Japanese school in Livingston. The school has been a valuable part of the support that is provided to the Japanese investor community in Scotland; indeed, Scottish Development International has supported the school for many years. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development attended an event at the school to mark that important anniversary. He met members of the Japanese community as well as representatives of Japanese companies. Scotland offers first-class universities and research facilities. Our universities, including Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, Heriot-Watt and Stirling, have long-established links with Japan. Those links cover many different disciplines from the sciences, business, history, social sciences and languages. We welcome the fact that Scottish universities are continuing to build on their existing exchange and research programmes with Japanese universities. The City of Edinburgh Council has long-established links with the city of Kyoto. The governor of Kyoto made a civic visit to Edinburgh in October last year to mark the 15th anniversary of those links. During his visit, the governor met the Minister for External Affairs and International Development to discuss growing interest in Japan about Scottish devolution. There are a lot of links between Scotland and Japan, sport being an important one. I am keen for us to look at opportunities to share our expertise. We have a fantastic institute of sport and I certainly hope that through these important events and the cricket links that will be established over next few weeks, some longer-term aspirations and ambitions to share sporting connections can be developed. I reiterate my warm welcome for the first visit of the national cricket teams of Japan to Scotland. I commend Alex Miyaji for setting up the Cricket for Smiles charity, which—as members have said—is helping to raise funds for much-needed equipment for schools. I look forward to working on strengthening and building on the strong sporting, economic, cultural and educational relationships that Scotland has enjoyed with Japan for many years. I am sure that those relationships will only grow in stature over the next few years. Meeting closed at 17:32.

First of all, I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on securing this very important debate to mark such a significant global campaign. It is very appropriate that this is her first members’ business debate, given her long-term interest in gender equality. I also thank all members who have participated in the debate for interesting, positive and constructive contributions. I am very pleased to be able to respond to the debate in a personal capacity, given my full commitment to this topic. It is also my pleasure to respond in my capacity as minister with responsibility for equality alongside my responsibilities for sport, the Commonwealth games and obesity. That happened as a result of the growing importance of mainstreaming equality and allows me to work alongside and provide extra support to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and to progress our work on equality. I should say that the cabinet secretary retains responsibility for same-sex marriage legislation and will maintain close contact on all equality issues. I look forward to working with members in the chamber and indeed the whole Parliament on progressing our equality work. As many have pointed out, violence against women destroys lives, limits freedom and potential and has no place in 21st century Scotland. However, less than three weeks ago, a 14-year-old girl was raped by two men on a Glasgow bus and at the weekend a 24-year-old woman was dragged by three men into a lane near Queen’s park in Glasgow and raped. It is clear that we still have a lot of work to do. There was widespread coverage of the crimes and a general sense of outrage in Scottish society. As a society, we must stop accepting violence against women and girls as a given and challenge the attitudes to women that lie behind such horrific crimes. As rape and other sexual offences are among the most distressing and disturbing crimes in our society, we want to ensure that those who commit them are caught and that, in addition to justice, victims receive the support that they need. Indeed, it is the intention of Scotland’s new single police force to treat rape as seriously as it treats homicide and to use the same levels of expertise for investigations as are used in homicide investigations. Moreover, specially trained sexual offence liaison officers will support victims throughout those investigations. On the wider world stage, G8 leaders are for the first time conferring on the topic of sexual violence during war, including the more efficient prosecution of perpetrators. Resolving sexual violence in conflict is an inseparable part of resolving conflict in general. As Ban Ki-Moon said, “We must unite. Violence against women cannot be tolerated, in any form, in any context, in any circumstance, by any political leader or by any government.” He also said: “There is one universal truth, applicable to all countries, cultures and communities: violence against women is never acceptable, never excusable, never tolerable.” We very much welcome campaigns such as one billion rising that raise awareness of violence against women and inspire people from all over the world to take action. The truth is shocking. According to the United Nations, one in every three women on the planet will be physically or sexually abused in her lifetime. On 14 February, the largest global action in history to end violence against women and girls took place, with more than 1 billion people—women and men—in 207 countries mobilised and inspired to come together, express their outrage and strike, dance and rise against violence. I was delighted to hear of the number of events that happened all over Scotland. There were dance protests and street parades throughout Scotland, from the Borders to the Highlands and Islands, and communities large and small took part. An event took place outside the Parliament, as Kezia Dugdale pointed out. Tomorrow is national stalking awareness day. To mark it, a brand new partnership-based campaign was launched in Glasgow yesterday to raise awareness of what stalking is and what to do about it. Stalking has a negative impact on every part of victims’ lives. It ranges from harassment, telephone calls and computer communications to letter writing, and can, of course, sometimes escalate into physical and sexual violence, and even murder. As a Government, we want to work collaboratively to ensure that Scotland has robust laws to tackle stalking. We improved protection for victims, of course, through the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, which criminalises stalking, but we recognise that there is still much to be done. I am pleased that, in spite of severe economic constraints, we have been able to maintain our funding for tackling violence against women at £34.5 million. That is important because it benefits projects such as the mentors in violence prevention programme, which is led by the violence reduction unit, the ASSIST—advocacy, support, safety, information services together—service, which is a specialist service that provides advocacy and support to victims of domestic abuse, and the Scottish Borders pathway project, which is a new multi-agency project that is designed to support victims of domestic abuse and any children involved. I recognise the particular circumstances in Edinburgh, of course, which Malcolm Chisholm pointed out. He acknowledged that they have arisen as a result of the end of lottery funding. We support the Edinburgh centre to the tune of around £100,000, I think, but I recognise his and Alison Johnstone’s local concerns. I believe that the Government and the Parliament provide leadership on tackling and preventing violence against women. However, this is about not just us but everyone playing a part, no matter how small. Violence against women cannot be tackled by any one sector alone, which is why it is vital that we work with our partners. We certainly welcome Police Scotland’s commitment to addressing domestic abuse and rape. We also welcome the energy and dedication of our public, statutory and voluntary sector partners in working to reduce and ultimately eradicate those terrible crimes. Jenny Marra raised the horrific crime of female genital mutilation. I will write to her in detail on the specifics around police reports and convictions. I pay tribute to the work of partners in the voluntary sector—Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and the Women’s Support Project—that have campaigned and lobbied nationally over many years. We are currently developing Scotland’s first strategy on tackling violence against women, and prevention and early intervention will be a central feature of our approach. It is essential that men and boys are part of the solution, because the problem is absolutely not just a women’s problem, although women are overwhelmingly the victims. Iain Gray put it very well when he talked strongly about the need for men to take responsibility and change their attitudes to women, as those underlying attitudes underpin some of the sexual violence that I talked about earlier. We continue to support the very successful white ribbon campaign, which has grown from its roots in Canada into an international education and awareness-raising initiative. It engages men in a positive way to take action and send a message to other men that violence is not acceptable. We are fully committed to tackling all aspects of violence against women and to supporting the continued work that many in the Parliament and throughout Scotland, particularly in the voluntary sector, are involved in. Any instance of rape or violence against women is one instance too many. Progress is being made, but there is still a lot to do, and it is vital that we continue to work to raise awareness and change attitudes, through the one billion rising campaign and other means, so that we prevent violence against women from happening in the first place and tackle the gender inequality issues that underpin much of that. In conclusion, I commend again the one billion rising campaign. I look forward to its continuing presence as a leading campaigning organisation in Scotland and to a time when its and our work to tackle violence against women is done, although I suspect that that is some way off. In the meantime, I look forward to working with members across the chamber to make the progress that is required. Meeting closed at 17:49.

On Commonwealth day, 11 March this year, the route that the Queen’s baton relay will take around the Commonwealth was announced. When the baton arrives in Scotland in mid-June next year, it will spend 40 days travelling around every part of Scotland, visiting every local authority area. The relay will finish at the Commonwealth games opening ceremony in Glasgow on 23 July. The Glasgow 2014 organising committee is working with the Scottish Government, local authorities and others to develop the route that the Queen’s baton relay will take as it travels around Scotland. That route will be announced in October this year. As the baton travels around the country, it will provide a fantastic opportunity for people in communities across the whole of Scotland to take part in celebrating the games.

We have been working hard to learn the lessons of the Olympic torch relay. For the Queen’s baton relay, the organising committee has committed as far as is operationally possible to enabling baton bearers to run in their local area. No fees are associated with being a baton bearer, and those who are fortunate enough to be selected will have a tremendous opportunity to contribute towards a great spectacle and the excitement of the games coming to Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Is the member able to tell us who armed Saddam Hussein to use those weapons against his own people? Would he like to tell us that?

I am delighted to address members in the chamber this afternoon, and to reflect on the success of the Olympics and the positive progress that we have made in our preparations for the 2014 Commonwealth games. Humza Yousaf will focus on the legacy achievements so far in his closing speech. This summer’s Olympic and Paralympic games were enormously successful for Scotland. Scottish athletes won more medals than in any previous Olympic games, and it gives me great pleasure, as the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport, to say that there are far too many medallists to mention individually. It proved to be a wonderful springboard for the 2014 Commonwealth games, with a fantastic performance from team Scotland and team GB. Who could fail to be won over by the wonderful Olympic volunteers—the games makers. Make the games they did, which is why I am particularly proud that we recently launched our volunteering programme to find 15,000 of Scotland’s finest and friendliest people. Applications will open in January, but I was delighted by the announcement earlier today that more than 40,000 people have already expressed interest in volunteering for the games. That just shows how many people want to play their part and I hope that people will continue to register and keep up the momentum of the volunteering campaign. We have learned much from our Olympic experience and I am determined that we will draw on that to enhance the quality of our games, which are now a mere 582 days away. Our ambition is to deliver a world-class games. In October, we had our latest report card, which made good reading. After its third visit, the co-ordination commission whole-heartedly endorsed the good work and progress that have been made so far. The chairman of the commission said that our games preparations were the best that he had seen in 20 years, which is high praise indeed from those who know. The co-ordination commission has a vast amount of experience of major sporting events, so it is good to see Glasgow meeting the commission’s and our high expectations. What were our report card grades? The commission commended the excellent progress of the games partners, and it is a true partnership that is delivering the games. Some of the many successes since the commission’s previous visit included the completion of superb venues such as the Emirates arena and the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome; the unveiling of Clyde, our 2014 mascot, whom many members have met; more sponsorship deals, most recently from AG Barr and Emirates Airline; and the appointment of our host broadcaster and Jack Morton Worldwide to produce our ceremonies. We are proud that those achievements have been recognised, but we cannot take our eye off the ball. With less than 600 days to go, we are increasing the momentum as we enter the next planning phase. The commission commended the sound relationships that have been developed between the Government, Glasgow City Council, Commonwealth Games Scotland and the organising committee. It emphasised the need for that good work to continue. It also applauded the strong cross-party support from the Parliament for the games and urged us to continue in that vein. I am therefore pleased to say that we are in an excellent position in our planning. Part and parcel of delivering a successful and enjoyable games will be the delivery of a safe and secure event. Planning for safety and security for major events is a complex process that involves many agencies that are expert in assessing and managing risks and co-ordinating and delivering safety and security operations on the ground. Planning for the games has been going on for a number of years but, in May, the co-ordination commission identified a need for greater clarity around the safety and security arrangements and how they will be funded. Audit Scotland had also highlighted the risks that are associated with planning a complex multisport event on such a scale and I will spend some time describing how we have addressed that. The organising committee and Strathclyde Police have been reviewing the security arrangements for the games since early in 2012. In response to Audit Scotland’s report, the games partners wrote to the Public Audit Committee to highlight the opportunities that the Olympic and Paralympic games would provide to learn lessons from London’s security strategy. The organising committee and the police attended London as observers to learn lessons and inform how we can improve the governance and organisation of the 2014 games. We were determined to learn lessons and review our security arrangements in view of that invaluable experience. I will detail the key lessons that we have learned from the Olympics that have directly influenced our thinking on security arrangements. There is the comparison with the Olympics security budget. London 2012 had a total security budget of £1.1 billion. In 2010, £600 million was budgeted for policing and £311 million for venue security. However, in November 2011, which was very late on, the venue security budget rose by £271 million. We do not want to be in the same position only eight months before our games. The Olympics demonstrated that volunteers are vital for stewarding inside venues and for directing spectators with a smile and a wave. However, when it comes to screening and searching those who are entering venues, trained security personnel supported by the police are vital. That was highlighted when G4S defaulted on its contract, and London looked to the military rather than its volunteering contingent to fill the gap. Original planning for Glasgow had assumed that 50 per cent of safety and security roles could be undertaken by volunteers. Given the Olympic experience, our use of volunteers for that purpose will be heavily reduced, with a resulting effect on the venue security budget. In contracting, London’s G4S experiences taught us the risk of having a single company provide private security. Consequently, the organising committee, in collaboration with the police, will split the private security tender for 2014 into multiple contracts to spread the risk. The procurement process is under way, but the expectation is that bidders will not be able to offer the same economies of scale as they would for one all-encompassing contract. That, of course, will have cost implications, which have been factored into the revised budget. As is the case with all major events, as the planning process has matured our knowledge of safety and security requirements has crystallised. For example, we now know that the athletes village will need to be secured from January 2014, not June 2014 as originally planned. Events scheduling has been developed, so we now better understand the shift pattern requirements for stewards and other security staff and the knock-on impact on staffing costs. The London 2012 experience was similar in that demand for security personnel could not be finalised until late in the operational planning process. Indeed, that was a key reason for the massive escalation of the venue security budget for the Olympics at a late stage. Olympic lessons on risk assessment have helped us to detail more clearly the physical security requirements of the venues. We now know that we need more closed-circuit television, perimeter fencing and security-checking equipment. Those requirements have substantial cost implications, but they are critical to ensuring that everyone is protected properly from the moment they approach the venue right through to when they leave at the end of the day’s events. As games planning has progressed, we have also developed a clearer picture of the non-competition venues that are needed. They all have security requirements that could not properly be scoped earlier. Hotels, training venues and the cultural events that are planned throughout Scotland will all need a level of protection—some of them around the clock—all of which has cost implications. Alongside the review of security requirements, we have been considering how to strengthen our governance to give us confidence that there is a firm grip on the delivery of a safe and secure games and on the associated budget. In light of that, we have taken two specific actions. The Glasgow 2014 strategic group has asked Stephen House, the chief constable of the police service of Scotland, to assume primary responsibility for the delivery of the overall security for the games. He has accepted that new role delegated to him by ministers and will direct not only the policing around the games but the wider security arrangements at games venues. He will attend meetings of the strategic group, which is chaired by the First Minister, to report on all aspects of security planning to the games partners. We are also strengthening the governance arrangements underneath the strategic group, and I have lodged a paper in the Scottish Parliament information centre that explains those new governance arrangements in more detail. In light of the lessons learned from London and the work that the police and the OC have subsequently carried out, the chief constable has advised that an enhanced budget is required to meet the costs of delivering a safe and secure games. I therefore announce that the Scottish Government is taking responsibility for the new games security budget of £90 million. As the minister responsible for the Commonwealth games, I have to listen when Scotland’s top police officer tells me that that is what is required to deliver a safe and secure games. Mr House has written to me in those terms, and I have placed a copy of his letter in SPICe. The Scottish Government will hold that new budget outwith the games budget to ensure better co-ordination and more rigorous oversight. The existing £27.2 million security budget and £25.1 million of contingency funding will be transferred across to the Scottish Government.

Not just now. However, it would not be prudent to draw entirely from contingency funding to meet the security budget shortfall in case unforeseen pressures emerge in the next 18 months. Therefore, I am committing £37.7 million of new funding from the Scottish Government in 2014-15 to fund in full the budget that has been agreed with the chief constable. We will continue to exert cost control and have agreed that any of the significant contingency remaining that is not used by the end of the games will be used to offset the additional outlay for security undertaken by the Scottish Government. The additional funds represent an increase of £37.7 million in the public sector contribution to the games. The public sector contribution sits alongside £100 million of commercial revenue that will be raised by the OC through sponsorship, broadcasting income, tickets and merchandise sales. I am certain that this is the right step to take at this stage if we are to continue to have confidence in our ability to deliver a safe and secure games for everyone to enjoy.

I will certainly write to the member on that matter, in which I know she has an interest, as both Kenny MacAskill and I have been involved in that. Scotland has an excellent track record of hosting and policing major events safely and securely. That is one of the reasons why we won our bid to host the 2014 games. I am confident that these new governance and assurance arrangements—and the new budget to support them—will ensure that we continue with that excellent track record.

In response to Margo MacDonald, I would say that the lessons learned from the real-time experience of how the Olympic games were run have been applied to our security budget. I have laid out some of those lessons in my speech, but I am happy to provide additional detailed information if members require it. The Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council, along with our partners, agree that we must not and will not take any chances with the safety of all those who wish to attend the games. If we are to deliver the best and most memorable Commonwealth games, the many thousands who attend must feel secure. For that reason, we have accepted the advice from Chief Constable Stephen House that a safe and secure games can be delivered for £90 million. In concluding, I welcome Patricia Ferguson’s amendment, and I am pleased to commend the amended motion to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the continued good progress being made in the preparations for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games; acknowledges the endorsement of the Commonwealth Games Federation for what has been achieved so far and the strength of legacy planning for the future; welcomes the announcement of the volunteer recruitment programme; expects the relevant lessons from the 2012 London Olympic and Paralympic Games to be incorporated into Commonwealth Games planning; endorses the ambition of the Games partners to deliver a safe, secure and spectacularly successful event; recognises that a solid foundation is now in place to maximise the legacy impacts for all of Scotland, and commends the benefits that have already been secured.

I reassure Margo MacDonald that discussions are taking place with the governing bodies of shooting on a legacy from the facility. I cannot tell her what the outcome will be, because the discussions are on-going. We are conscious of the need to ensure that the legacy is maximised as much as possible.

I thank Mark McDonald for bringing the launch of Grampian’s new initiative, the autism alert card, to our attention and I thank those members who have attended and contributed to the debate. As members might have noticed, I am not Michael Matheson. I am standing in for Michael as he is unable to attend the debate. I am very familiar with this subject from my time as Minister for Public Health and it is very dear to my heart. I fully welcome last month’s launch of the card in Grampian. The card is supported by Grampian police, the National Autistic Society Scotland, a range of partner organisations across the region and, of course, Mark McDonald and other local members. Those partner organisations include the charities Autism Initiatives Scotland, the Grampian Autistic Society, and G4S, Aberdeen City Council, Moray Council and Aberdeenshire Council. I believe that the card will help ensure that people with autism are more quickly identified as being on the autism spectrum and get the assistance and understanding that they require. Members across the chamber have laid out very clearly why that is important. It will help to address the unique challenges that people with autism can face, particularly if they are victims of crime or an accident. As has been said, in such situations they may experience immense pressure and become very anxious but feel unable to explain their situation or what they are experiencing. In addition to the difficulties that they experience in the moment, they may have trouble interpreting facial expressions, not understand what it is being said to them or misinterpret others’ intentions. All those things can have very serious consequences, particularly if a person is caught up in a serious crime or medical emergency. As has been said, there is still a challenge to help the wider public understand autism a bit more. Those without an understanding of autism may find such individuals’ behaviour or words at such times unusual, which can be difficult and stressful for both the person with autism and the person dealing with them. Public and emergency services professionals may find the person with autism’s behaviour particularly challenging in a high pressure situation. The card will include details of a personal contact, that is, a named representative of the individual on the spectrum who can assist and support police and ambulance, hospital and other key service professionals by taking them through how best to help the individual and providing them with a fuller understanding of the individual’s needs. The autism alert card is for use not only in emergencies or highly pressurised situations, but in daily life—as Maureen Watt said—when someone is out shopping, using public transport, using leisure facilities or out at social events. By showing the card, a person can make another person aware of their condition, improve their understanding and help facilitate communication. The NASS, which is one of Scotland’s leading autism charities, is encouraging all affected young people and adults in the Grampian region to apply. An estimated one in 100 Scottish people are on the autism spectrum. That equates to around 50,000 people, of which almost 6,000 are believed to live in Grampian. Autism alert card schemes have already been launched in the regions of Strathclyde, central Scotland, Lothian and Borders and the Highlands and Islands, including Orkney and the Shetland Isles. The schemes have been launched by and are available through a variety of leading autism organisations, including Scottish Autism, the NASS and the autism resource centre. Mark McDonald made a very good point about the possible opportunities to take the card schemes further with the coming into being of the single police force, which I will pass on to Michael Matheson as an idea to take forward. The Government is committed to improving the lives of people with autism and those of their families and carers. As many members will be aware, in November 2011 Michael Matheson launched “The Scottish Strategy for Autism” to ensure that people with autism and their families are supported by the widest possible range of services, including social care, education, housing and employment. That was widely welcomed. The Government is beginning to make a real difference by improving the support services that are available to people who need them. One year on we are making good progress, while acknowledging that there is always more to be done. Alongside the strategy, the minister announced an investment of £13.4 million over four years to implement the 10-year strategy, building on improvements to autism services and access to those services. Part of that funding was the autism development fund of £1.5 million per annum, which is available to local and national organisations to enable them to deliver local services on the ground. To date, some 53 organisations across Scotland are benefiting from that. Other initiatives that are being funded to drive forward the work of meeting the strategy’s recommendations to address gaps in services include the roll-out of six new one-stop shops throughout the country, funding for training courses and investment in a 10-month national mapping project that will provide a picture of services on the ground and gaps that need to be addressed. In February, the roll-out of one-stop shops was announced as a spending priority by the Minister for Public Health. The one-stop shops provide local services for people with autism in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Six additional one-stop shops are being planned or are in the early stages of being established in Grampian, the Highlands, Tayside, Fife, Lanarkshire and Ayrshire. Those will be voluntary sector models working in partnership with local authorities, the national health service and local groups representing parents and those on the autism spectrum. Each one will be tailored to meet local needs. The one-stop shops could perhaps provide a vehicle through which people could obtain information about, and seek help in applying for, an autism alert card. A variety of research projects are also being funded through the £13.4 million that is being invested to deliver the strategy, including one that is addressing the issue of waiting times for obtaining a diagnosis. People on the autism spectrum face a wide variety of issues in their daily lives, and no two people on the spectrum are the same—an important point that has been raised in the debate. For some, their differences may not be immediately obvious and can be easily misunderstood. The work that is being undertaken, of which I have mentioned just a few examples, will help us to realise our vision of individuals on the spectrum being respected, accepted and valued by their communities and having confidence in services that treat them fairly so that they are able to lead meaningful and satisfying lives. I thank everyone for their contributions to the debate. I will make sure that Michael Matheson is made aware of the points that have been made during the debate. Meeting closed at 17:37.

I, too, thank John Mason for this timely debate, which has had some good speeches and suggestions. I will try to respond to as many as possible but, in case I miss some, I assure members that they have all been noted. I am glad that many members noted in their speeches the third successful of visit of the co-ordination commission for the 2014 games. I was pleased that the chairman of the commission expressed his view that our preparations for the games are the best that he has seen in 20 years. That is reassuring, but we will not be complacent as there is more work to be done. That work will step up a pace as we get into the home straight. Importantly, the chairman also said that our legacy preparations are a model for other countries to follow. Members have said that the legacy is as important as having a fantastic games, which of course they will be. We must ensure that there is a legacy for the whole of Scotland from the games. I have sent a copy of the progress report to all members, and I hope that they will have a chance to look at it in detail. Members noted in their speeches recent events related to the games. For example, there was the completion of the Commonwealth arena and the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome. I encourage those who have not had a chance to go and look at those venues to do so, because they are absolutely fantastic. We have also had the unveiling of the games mascot, Clyde, which received unanimous praise. He is absolutely fantastic and one of the best mascots that I have seen for any games. A lot of sponsors have come on board, with the most recent partner, Emirates Airlines, joining the Commonwealth games family just yesterday. Sponsorship is an important part of the raising revenue for the games, with the target being to raise £99 million through it. Earlier this week, I attended the opening of the volunteer centre at Commonwealth house in Glasgow. The target is to have 15,000 volunteers for the games, and I encourage members to go and have a look at the volunteer centre. It was pleasing to hear so many people wanting to volunteer themselves. We remain firmly on course for the games, but we are not going to be complacent, because there is a lot to be done over the next 20 months. As Ruth Davidson said, the Olympic games experience gave us an opportunity to learn all the lessons that we can. That has been helpful, and it is important that we keep the momentum going for the next 20 months. I will respond now to as many members’ comments as I can. John Mason made an important point about the churches’ involvement in the more than gold campaign. It is fair to say that some countries that will send athletes are poor countries that struggle, so any support that can be given to such athletes and, indeed, their families when they are over here will be welcome. John Mason also made the point that housing is not enough for the regeneration of an area and that the games are important as a catalyst for regeneration, particularly for the east end of Glasgow. I have seen tangible evidence of that important aspect. Patricia Ferguson made a point about the importance of the Commonwealth Games Federation picking up on the issue of co-operation and partnership working. That is important to all of us. Patricia Ferguson also made a point about the north of Glasgow. A lot of work is going on in relation to the Pinkston paddlesports centre, and the youth Olympics bid is having a direct benefit elsewhere in the north of Glasgow. Even if we do not win the bid, that work will have been a catalyst for the early regeneration of that part of the north of Glasgow. I hope that the member will take comfort in that and in the £10 million active places fund, which all communities can make applications to. Sandra White talked about the upgrade of the subway. I want to see the mural that she mentioned—I have not seen it yet but I am going to now that she has told me about it. She asked about how organisations and groups can get involved. The contracts for the ceremonies have been awarded, but I will pass on her comments about how to involve the wider group of people and organisations who want to be involved in some way. The regeneration of George Square is slightly outside our remit, but I will certainly make the point to our games partners in Glasgow City Council about the need for that work to be completed in time for the games. Ruth Davidson said that the new facilities speak for themselves. I agree. The fact that many other events have booked those venues in the period before the Commonwealth games tells its own story. James Dornan did a fantastic job of promoting his constituency but also reminded us of the athletics history of Hampden, mentioning Eric Liddell’s achievement in 1925. Anne McTaggart highlighted the youth legacy ambassador programme, which offers young people an opportunity to be involved and to involve other young people. That is a great success story. Jamie Hepburn talked about the games being an event for the whole of Scotland and paid tribute to 12-year-old Beth Gilmour, who did a fantastic job of designing the mascot. He also talked about two important things that are going on in our schools. The active schools network is a real success story and, added to that, there is the programme to establish 150 community sports hubs, which is a key legacy ambition. Half of those hubs will be based in schools, which will ensure that schools are open after school hours. We want to get the school estate open for business. There will be an opportunity to go into these matters in a bit more detail before the end of the year, because I want to have a wider debate in the chamber on the games preparations. I hope that that will enable more members to be involved in discussing the preparations for the Commonwealth games and the legacy benefits for the whole of Scotland that will undoubtedly flow from our hosting of the games. 13:13 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Will the member give way?

I am very pleased to take part in the debate and welcome the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into community sport. I had the great privilege of attending the Olympic and Paralympic games. There were, of course, a considerable number of outstanding performances in both. As a nation, we saw some great performances from the Scottish Olympians within the team. Those athletes have inspired many to set themselves goals, work hard and be all that they can be. Of course, it is now about keeping the momentum going for two years towards 2014. I was particularly pleased to hear in John Swinney’s budget statement that we have an additional £1 million to support our athletes as they prepare for the games in two years’ time. One of the abiding memories of London 2012 is the contribution that was made by the volunteers—the games makers—and it was good to see many of them at the parade last Friday. The army of volunteers gave their time freely to support the delivery of what was undoubtedly the most successful Olympics and Paralympics ever. There are undoubtedly lessons to be learned as we take forward our preparations for 2014 and reflect on the role of volunteers more generally. I know that the role of volunteers is an important area for the inquiry, because we must not underestimate the impact of volunteering in sport. Volunteers make a vital contribution to sport daily, from washing strips to sitting on the boards of governing bodies—it is all important. The voluntary sporting community comprises about a fifth of the population, who are members of Scotland’s 13,000 sports clubs. That is an enormous effort and a cause for celebration—I reiterate that it is a key priority for the Scottish Government as we head towards Glasgow and beyond. Sportscotland is working in partnership with Volunteer Development Scotland and other key stakeholders to ensure that the volunteer workforce is recruited, trained, supported and rewarded for its valuable contribution to Scottish sport and wider civic society. We cannot take volunteers for granted and we must ensure that we support them as best we can. Elite athlete performance has been the focus of attention over the past few weeks as a result of the great performances that we have seen, but the most important outcome from 2012 and 2014 is the legacy and ensuring that Scotland becomes a more active nation. The need to tackle levels of inactivity in the population is well known. Although 72 per cent of young people meet the recommended levels of activity, only 39 per cent of adults do. Of course, older adults are even more of a challenge.

The community sport hubs are part of the solution to that, because one of sportscotland’s requirements for a hub and the partners within it concerns affordability and ensuring that affordability issues are not barriers. It is not just a case of affordability; we need to ensure that hubs and the clubs within them are welcoming to everyone. That welcome is as important as the money or the physical access. Physical inactivity kills more people worldwide than even obesity or alcohol excess. It is the cause of some 2,500 deaths a year in Scotland, costing the NHS more than £90 million a year. There is a big gain for us if we can get people to be more active. Progress is being made on the national physical activity implementation plan that I announced in May. That will explore opportunities to embed physical activities in all areas of Government policy. One such initiative is our investment in paths for all, which has succeeded in making 10,000 people a year more active through walking—a very simple activity. I was very pleased to hear John Swinney’s commitment in the budget of £6 million additional funding for cycling initiatives, given that cycling is another easy way to encourage people to be more active. Increasing opportunities for everyone to be more active lies at the heart of our legacy ambitions and sport has a role to play in that effort. Community sport hubs are very important and I was pleased that Duncan McNeil referred to the hubs in positive terms. In my view, they are the answer to unlocking some of our resources, whether that is in the schools estate or in clubs. We need to open those doors to wider membership. The community sport hubs are very well located in the heart of communities. Our priority is to have 150 hubs established by 2016, with at least 50 per cent based in schools. Sportscotland is making great progress in supporting local authorities. A total of 66 hubs are now up and running, offering a wide range of sporting activities.

We have begun to do that, and there will be further announcements on the community management fund in due course. I highlight the importance of schools. We are making very good progress in the area of physical education and active schools, but there is more to be done. I announce that we will be developing a new sports strategy that is designed to increase activity levels among young people. Included in that strategy will be an examination of the role of competitive sport. I want to involve a new youth sport panel—many of whom have joined us and are in the gallery today—to help us inform and shape our policy on sport and physical activity. I hope that that initiative will be welcomed. I would be happy to speak to the committee about it in more detail when I give evidence next month. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I look forward to hearing the comments of members across the chamber.

Is Jenny Marra trying to say that what she describes is a recent phenomenon? Does she accept that, if there is a problem with the facilities, it tends to go back a few years to a previous Administration’s tenure?

I will try to respond to as many points as possible. Duncan McNeil made some very important points about swimming. We have the top up swimming programme for children who cannot swim, particularly those from deprived areas, and it is working very well indeed. The active girls programme will try to bring together, across all schools, the best of what we know works for teenage girls more comprehensively than has been the case—there will be more information on that shortly. I agree with the point about GP referral. We have tried and tested that and we now need to make it happen as widely as possible. We are working on that. Patricia Ferguson made a number of important points, one of which—Mark Griffin also raised it—was about a future debate. They may be aware of a commitment to hold regular updates and debate on the Commonwealth games. I suggest that that would be the way for us to reflect and to look forward, and I promise that one will take place before the end of the year. Nanette Milne and Liz Smith mentioned PE teacher numbers, in which there has actually been a rise. In 2005, the figure was 1,821, and in 2011, it was 2,116. The overall number, which includes those who are centrally employed, is 2,182. However, we must recognise that primary school classroom teachers have a very important role in delivering PE. We are currently building on the good work of Education Scotland, making sure that those teachers have the skills to deliver quality PE to children. Kezia Dugdale talked about the community ownership and management fund. I assure her that detailed work is taking place on that fund and that details will be announced soon. She talked about social enterprise work, and there is a good opportunity there. I will look at the issue of the post that she mentioned. I have met the lady concerned and I know that some good work is going on. Jenny Marra mentioned a couple of issues relating to the national performance centre. I am sure that no one in the chamber would expect anything other than an open, fair and transparent process when £25 million of public money is allocated—I am sure that she would acknowledge that. I am surprised that she would cast doubt on the fund’s ability to deliver the national performance centre. She has been told—on a number of occasions—that the Young Scots action fund is a £50 million fund and that the majority of that money will come in 2015-16. The budget she referred to covers only up to 2014-15. I hope that no further doubts will be cast on the money for the national performance centre. Alison Johnstone raised a number of issues relating to cycling. I had a very good meeting with her and the cross-party group on cycling, and I hope that they will welcome the £6 million of extra money in the budget announced by John Swinney earlier. John Park made a very good speech, as always. I am pleased that he said that people in the modern apprenticeship programme quite rightly have employment status. I hope that he will share that view with his colleagues, given some of their responses to the apprenticeship programme. I will look at the new youth employment initiative, which Angela Constance and I launched, in relation to his points, as I thought that they had some validity. I will end with a little more information about the new youth sports strategy that I announced earlier. There is an opportunity for us not only to harness the really good work that is going on, whether on PE, active schools or community sport hubs—all of that good work—but to look at what more needs to be done. I hope that we can use the opportunity, over the next few months, to have a good look at what works, from the pre-school level right the way through to higher and further education, and how we ensure not only that we get children active at a young age but that we keep them active as they go through their formative years into their teenage years and beyond. Working with key partners, we hope to be in a position to publish our new strategy next spring, with the involvement of the youth sports panel. I think that we are going to have a really good piece of work, and I look forward to members’ contributions to that process.

Oh, thanks.

As the great turnout for the Olympic torch demonstrated, people across Scotland are looking forward to the fantastic festival of sport and culture that the Olympic and Paralympic games will offer. The Scottish Government congratulates all those Scottish athletes who have been selected to compete at the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic games and we wish them good luck when they compete in London.

That is a very good question. We must ensure that the spirit and enthusiasm that are already evident as we head towards the Olympics are captured and, more important, rolled on for the two years up to the Commonwealth games. Much of the work that is going on in communities on the back of the Olympics—and indeed the Commonwealth games in two years’ time—will give children and people of all ages the opportunity to take part in sport. For example, the 150 community sports hubs that will be established will provide a lasting legacy for young people, in particular, to get involved in sport. I should also remind members that the Olympics will kick off in Scotland on 25 July—even before the opening ceremony—with the first football match at Hampden. I encourage everyone to go along and see some great football.

The good thing about the Olympics is that politics is left at the door and that it is all about people coming together to compete. Those are the values of the games, and I certainly believe that they provide a fantastic opportunity for some of our young athletes who have never performed at that level. For example, Craig Benson, who is only 17 years old, has made it into the Great Britain swimming team. The fact that the games will provide new and hugely inspirational role models to inspire the next generation of young athletes coming through in Scotland can be only a good thing.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Scottish Government in this timely debate. I say that it is timely because, as every member will know, women are experiencing a disproportionate impact from the recession and, of course, as a result of the policies of the Westminster Government, particularly its welfare reform agenda. We are focusing on areas in which women are disadvantaged. I welcome the chance to explore the barriers that women face and which prevent their maximising their representation in public life and in senior positions in employment across all sectors. The tone of the debate is important. Jenny Marra and the Labour Party have had the opportunity to set the right tone for the debate and to reach out to the rest of the Parliament to help to build a consensus around this very important issue. Jenny Marra cited a number of organisations that have supported her motion, but I am not sure that they would support her tone. They want to see action and progress being made on the issue, and it is disappointing that, with Jenny Marra’s rather unfortunate party-political attack on the SNP and others, an opportunity has perhaps been missed to build that consensus. Jenny Marra talked about Labour’s record. Its record not only in eight years in the Scottish Parliament, but in 13 years in Westminster has been pointed out in interventions. There was nothing about quotas in Labour’s manifesto last year for the Scottish Parliament elections, and there was nothing about them in its manifesto for the local government elections this year. I would like to move the debate on to where we can agree, and I hope that we will get action around the issue after the debate. I think that there is a lot of agreement across the chamber and across the parties, but consensus has to be built, and it will not be built by taking the tone and approach that Jenny Marra has taken, which is unfortunate.

A person can be passionate about an issue without having to resort to the petty party-political attacks that we saw Jenny Marra making. If Jenny Marra and the Labour Party are serious about the issue, they should be reaching across the chamber to build consensus, not making party-political attacks that set the tone for the debate. I want to move the debate on to more positive aspects. Women make up 52 per cent of the population, but we are nowhere near being represented at that level in a range of key institutions. When we look at the boards of businesses that do not have a gender balance and, more important, at those that do, we find that the latter businesses do better. That is an important point. There is also a case in relation to Government, councils, health boards, police forces and so on. It can be suggested that talent will rise naturally and that the best person should always be selected for a position, regardless of gender. It can also be suggested that it is patronising to provide support to enable women to achieve positions. However, I think that it is patronising to assume that there are not equal numbers of equally suitable male and female candidates, and it is worse than patronising to assume that the best candidate just happened to be male on so many occasions.

In a minute. There has been good progress in relation to public appointments over the years, but it is not enough. Our public bodies need board members who reflect Scottish society, including not just women, but people from all walks of life, who can bring their unique skills and experience to help us to deliver for the people of Scotland. The diversity delivers strategy was launched in September 2008. In 2011-12 just over 30 per cent of applications came from women, against a target of 40 per cent, and women accounted for 34 per cent of appointments. We should recognise that progress is being made, but I am the first to acknowledge that more needs to be done.

I did not say that. Perhaps the member should have listened. It is refreshing that the Labour Party has stopped denigrating small independent countries and has started to acknowledge some of the things that such countries are doing. That is positive—long may it continue. Let us look at what we have done so far. We are building capacity, through the establishment of the public appointments and diversity centre of expertise, which advises on and administers the public appointments process across the Scottish Government. We are raising awareness, engaging with stakeholders and undertaking a range of outreach activity to promote awareness of public appointments opportunities. That work is bearing fruit, because we are attracting significant numbers of women applicants for public appointments. However, we must do more. I have sympathy for the call for quotas and have done so throughout my political career, but we must acknowledge that there is no consensus on the issue. There is no consensus in the Parliament and there is certainly no consensus outside it. Consensus has to be built, and I for one am prepared to work with anyone in the Parliament who wants to consider what more we can do. People must be aware of the potential restrictions in relation to the Equality Act 2010, which very much focuses on positive action but appears restrictive with regard to action beyond that. We must be clear about what can be achieved under the currently reserved legislation. If the matter was devolved, we would of course have much wider scope to act. I want to ensure that all that is clear by the time we get to the open event that I propose to hold later this year, to take the matter forward.

I could not agree more with the member. That is the tone that she should have taken from the start of the debate, because I am happy to work with her and others to do that. The initial way forward that I suggest is to have an open event, at which we can consider what has been done and where the barriers are. For example, although more women are coming forward and being appointed to boards, there are few women chairs of boards. There is much more to be done, even within the existing legislative framework. We need to be clear about what can be achieved in the current framework and what needs to change. The open event will give us the opportunity to get that clarity. I hope that the debate can begin to build a consensus about where we might go from here to take things forward and ensure that women absolutely are equally represented throughout public life, private life and the business sector. That would be good for Scotland and good for society. I move amendment S4M-03289.1, to leave out from “further understands” to end and insert: “welcomes the steps that the Scottish Government has taken to address this imbalance through the Diversity Delivers strategy, including the establishment of the public appointments and diversity centre of expertise to advise on and administer the public appointments process across the Scottish Government; recognises the work that has been undertaken to increase the application and appointment rates for underrepresented groups, including women in public appointments, resulting in 34% of public appointments in 2011-12 being held by women; recognises that, while there has been progress on some strands of diversity, further work is required, and therefore agrees that there should be an open event hosted by the Scottish Government and supported by the Public Appointments Commissioner to review the progress of the Diversity Delivers strategy in relation to gender equality and to consider further actions to make sure that there is further progress toward improved women’s representation in public life.”

I thank all the members who spoke in the debate. Unusually, there was increasing consensus as the debate went on, but that is no bad thing. Clare Adamson made a thoughtful speech, in which she talked about IT, which is a challenging sector for women, with only 19 per cent female representation in it. Her point was that quotas alone will not tackle the problem—women must put themselves forward. What women have achieved in the boardroom is very important because other women see them as role models, inspiring others within that company. That was an important point. John Park made a constructive contribution. The business case for gender balance is a strong one—I agreed with much that he had to say—especially in non-traditional industries. A real challenge is to ensure that women are able to come into those industries, never mind make their way up to the top of the organisation—the boardroom, for example. Importantly, he addressed the wider issues, such as childcare, that affect women’s ability to carry on with their career. Although we know about the legal position, there is no doubt that when women take time out, for example to have children—Christine Grahame illustrated the point well—they generally start at a different point in their career when they go back, and that is a problem. Christine Grahame highlighted many barriers and is clearly against quotas. She made the important point that gender balance is not about having more women so that they can deal with women’s issues. Gender balance is about having more women because that is the right thing to do. Whatever walk of life they are from, or whatever board or institution they are involved in, women will be as involved in the day-to-day issues of that institution as men. They will not deal with only certain issues. It is important to be clear about that. Alison McInnes made a good speech, a lot of which I agreed with. I thought that she was a little bit unfair about the diversity delivers strategy, because some progress has been made. We must acknowledge the fact that more women have been coming through the appointments process. I have spoken to women who, for the first time in many years, were encouraged to put themselves forward, which did not happen in the past. That is a good thing. I disagree with Alison McInnes on our ability to make progress on the issue with an open event. I thought that she dismissed that idea rather out of hand, which is unfortunate.

That is an important point. The position of people who have disabilities or those from ethnic minority communities has not really come through in the debate. In many ways, the same principle is involved. When we open up boardrooms and boards, we encourage people from a variety of backgrounds to put themselves forward. Malcolm Chisholm, as always, gave a very good critique of many of the issues. However, he must realise that the Equality Act 2010 permits political parties to have mechanisms that it does not expressly permit other sectors to use. We cannot dismiss that issue; we must look into it in some detail. How long do I have left, Presiding Officer?

I will finish on a constructive note. In her summing up, Annabel Goldie opened the door to dialogue across the parties and outwith the chamber. She laid out the extent of the problem clearly and in strong terms, but she remains to be convinced of the solution. We should take from today the starting point that there is a huge reservoir of goodwill, while recognising that what we have done so far has not delivered what women expected in terms of being in public sector boardrooms, and that we have far more to do. I hope that the event that I have suggested will give members across the chamber the opportunity to engage with outside organisations to work out what we can do—that should include a discussion on quotas—and what should be done, with recommendations going back to the Scottish Government. I hope that that suggestion will be taken in the spirit in which it is intended and that we can end today’s debate on the consensual note that it should have had right from the start.

The Scottish Government is committed to creating a lasting legacy and maximising the benefits for the whole of Scotland from Glasgow’s hosting of the 2014 Commonwealth games. Activity throughout the north-east is being delivered with national partners and the three local authorities. Thirteen community sports hubs are, or soon will be, delivering services to the local community. One business that is based in the north-east is benefiting from having won a Commonwealth games-related contract, with many more contract opportunities to come. Six youth legacy ambassadors are developing new skills by engaging in a wide range of legacy activity and championing that to their peers and communities. Local people and groups are also getting involved through our annual games for Scotland events and grant funding from the Big Lottery Fund’s 2014 communities programme.

Dennis Robertson focuses on an important issue. I am satisfied that there is good engagement with all local authorities in Scotland on the issue. We have made a commitment to deliver 150 community sports hubs throughout Scotland by 2016, and that is because many of them are the mechanism for opening up schools, so that schools are not closed beyond the school day. The facilities, which are often the best sporting facilities in a community, should be open in the evening and on the weekends. The community sports hubs provide us with a good way of achieving that.

We jointly published with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities the prevention of obesity route map in February 2010. The route map makes a long-term commitment over 20 years to tackling overweight and obesity issues in order to help to achieve a healthier Scotland and to contribute towards sustainable economic growth. The route map recognises that obesity is not just a health issue, but a consequence of our culture, society and lifestyle. We need to work across all areas of Government to ensure that local and national policies are directed at supporting people to achieve and maintain a healthy weight. A key element of the work to prevent obesity is aimed at schoolchildren and the early years.

The Nutritional Requirements for Food and Drink in Schools (Scotland) Regulations 2008, which we introduced, explicitly proscribe the sale of unhealthy food and drinks in all schools, including from vending machines. The impact of those regulations is evident in the results in the World Health Organization study that was published earlier this month, which showed that the consumption of fizzy drinks by 11 to 15-year-old schoolchildren has halved in the past decade. There are some excellent local initiatives to promote healthy eating in schools. When the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning visited Dunoon grammar school in January to see the British Heart Foundation’s latest food for thought campaign, he was very impressed with the piloting of healthy products in vending machines. However, we can always do more in that regard.

I thank Elaine Smith for her question, and for her long-standing efforts in that area. She is right: the evidence is clear that the earlier the intervention, the better, and that—as we set out in our route map—breastfeeding is an important part of preventing obesity. Health professionals provide much of the support for new mothers, but more innovative work includes peer support groups in which women work with young women in particular to help them to see the benefits of breastfeeding their babies. We would like more of that to happen.

Not for the first time, the member is being very economical with the truth. It has not been abandoned at all; in fact, it has been mainstreamed into the work of health boards. As the member knows as well as I do, not every health board used counterweight. We have allowed allow health boards to choose how they take forward this important work. I hope that that will correct the member’s misinterpretation of the facts.

The Scottish Government is committed to creating a lasting legacy and maximising the benefits for the whole of Scotland from Glasgow hosting the 2014 Commonwealth games. Edinburgh’s refurbished Royal Commonwealth pool reopened on 20 March 2012. It will host the diving events for the Commonwealth games and is now available for the local community to enjoy. More than 100,000 visits have been made since it reopened. In addition, four community sports hubs are now operating and delivering services to their local communities. Local businesses are benefiting, with nine Edinburgh-based companies to date having won Commonwealth games related contracts. Six young people from Edinburgh are part of Young Scot’s youth legacy ambassador programme, through which they will develop new skills by engaging in a wide range of legacy activity and championing that among their peers and local communities.

I was fortunate enough to visit the pool just before it reopened. It is a fantastic state-of-the-art facility of international quality. I look forward to the Commonwealth pool playing an extremely important role in the Commonwealth games in two years. I am sure that it will also attract a number of international events, which of course will benefit the local economy in Edinburgh.

I am pleased to open the debate by exploring the significant challenge that obesity presents to Scotland and the Scottish people. I will also set out how physical activity contributes to tackling the problem. Obesity levels are rising internationally, and Scotland is not alone in facing what has the potential to be one of the most difficult health challenges that we will see in our lifetime. I will put the issue in context. We have made good progress on a number of public health interventions, from smoking cessation to our approach to reducing alcohol consumption. Obesity is one of the next challenges for us, because our obesity levels are the third worst among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, behind the United States of America and Mexico. That is the stark reality that we face. I am sure that all members will agree that the rationale for addressing obesity is compelling, not just for our national good but for the health of every individual in our communities. If we were to do nothing, the direct cost to Scotland by 2030 would be around 70,000 more type 2 diabetes cases, 400,000 cases of hypertension and 21,000 more heart attacks. Those are frightening statistics, but it gets worse because as well as obesity having a direct impact on the health of individuals, it is likely that if obesity levels continue to rise the cost to the Scottish economy will be around £3 billion, or 2 per cent of Scotland’s gross domestic product by 2030. That is why we set out our approach in 2010 in the preventing overweight and obesity route map, which outlines our commitment to addressing the main challenges of obesity through four themes: energy in, the working age population, early years intervention and energy out, which is the focus of this debate. It is more than two years since we published the route map, and I intend to bring back to Parliament a full and comprehensive update report next year on the progress that we have made. Although our progress in a relatively short time is welcome, we need a transformational change to shift our culture. We aim to achieve our aspiration of the majority of Scots being in a normal weight range by 2030. Our national strategy will help us to deliver that, but it is important to re-emphasise that it will not be achieved overnight or even within the lifetime of this Parliament. The report “Growing Up in Scotland: Overweight, Obesity and Activity”, which was published last week by the Medical Research Council, reinforced the challenge as it showed that 22 per cent of six-year-olds have been found to be overweight. The report also showed that the majority of them had already been classed as overweight at four years old, which underlines the importance of addressing the issue. Members will be aware that we introduced a child’s healthy weight health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target in 2008 in recognition of the seriousness of the problem. More than 8,000 children have been engaged in locally based interventions and we have established a new target of more than 14,000 children coming through programmes over the next three years. That builds on and complements our recent take life on campaign, which targets families. We know that habits that are formed in childhood and adolescence continue into adulthood. Interestingly, evaluation of last year’s take life on campaign resulted in 76 per cent of parents encouraging their children to be more active and 59 per cent doing more physical activity with their children. We hope to build on that successful model in the future. It is recognised internationally that overall physical activity levels are declining, but Scotland is bucking the trend—albeit with small increases—in the number of adults who are active. Scotland has made every effort to push ahead with international best practice, and I am pleased to inform members that we have taken action in all the areas that are recommended in the European Union policy guidelines on physical activity. Increasing physical activity on its own is not the solution to obesity, but I firmly believe that, as part of a wider programme of interventions, it will go a significant way towards achieving lasting results and will improve health outcomes. Physical inactivity is one of our major health challenges and contributes to nearly 2,500 deaths in Scotland each year. The cost to the national health service is around £91 million each year, and a further £58 million is associated with the cost of medicines to treat conditions that are associated with physical inactivity. I find it astonishing that, although many other health risks are commonly understood, physical inactivity, although one of the major causes of mortality, is largely overlooked. I will return to that later. According to the World Health Organization, physical inactivity is the fourth leading health-risk factor and accounts for 6 per cent of all deaths globally, placing it behind hypertension, tobacco and high blood sugar. Last year, the four United Kingdom chief medical officers published their guidelines, which stated that adults should be active for at least 30 minutes at least five times a week, and that children should be active for 60 minutes every day. Evidence tells us that meeting the minimum target in the guidelines will reduce overall mortality by 30 per cent and that 30 minutes of walking daily provides more protection against death than any preventative medication. Put simply, if physical activity could be bottled and sold as a drug, it would without doubt be a superdrug. We are making progress, with 39 per cent of adults now meeting the recommendations in the guidelines, which is up from 37 per cent in 2009. However, the biggest progress is being made among teenage girls, for whom the figure has steadily increased from 64 per cent in 2008 to 70 per cent in 2010. That demonstrates that our targeted investment in that group is delivering results. Let me turn to what we intend to do to drive forward progress. Resources are crucial to achievement of results. I am delighted to announce that, despite the difficult financial environment and budgets being under pressure, we are maintaining the physical activity budget at £3.3 million per year for the next three years. We are also working with our delivery partners to introduce a more creative and innovative approach in this area. That builds on the success that we have delivered so far and includes continued investment in Scottish Athletics to support the jogscotland programme, which has over 430 jogging groups with almost 22,000 members. That approach is consistent with improving the alignment of sport and physical activity. We are also providing a substantial investment of £1.2 million each year to the Paths for All Partnership, which delivers a walking programme throughout Scotland and has a proven track record in engaging older Scots in particular. That recognises the tangible benefits that arise from providing older people with opportunities to be active and builds on the evidence of previous investment. We are also delivering efficiencies by aligning the Paths for All Partnership’s activity with other walking projects to build on their ability to deliver more than 11,000 people regularly taking part in the 440 community walking schemes throughout Scotland. I have been taken with the overwhelming evidence of the health benefits that come from walking, which is why I am delighted to announce the development of a national walking strategy that will set out our ambition and aspiration to ensure that the support and infrastructure is in place to maximise the opportunities for everyone to walk. We have also listened to the people of Scotland and increased the sustainable transport budget. That will help to develop the infrastructure of the national cycle network, which covers 2,000 miles and was responsible for 40 million journeys in 2010. The network is important because it connects communities and provides cycling opportunities. That is why I am happy to accept Alison Johnstone’s amendment. We will continue to use the excitement of the Commonwealth games and other events to deliver a legacy and to build on the success that we are already achieving. A major plank of the work is our focus on schools and the early years, and our commitment to deliver two hours of physical education for every primary school pupil and two periods for every secondary school pupil is only part of the story. Although we are making progress, with 64 per cent of primary schools and 67 per cent of secondary schools meeting the target, we are determined to do more. That is why we have made available to local authorities nearly £6 million of additional support to ensure that the gap is closed by 2014. The work forms an important part of our approach to early years intervention. It is designed to raise awareness and to educate young people about the importance of being physically active. The work includes dance, swimming and education projects and it builds on lessons that have been learned in our successful active schools programme, which has delivered 5 million opportunities to children and more than 79 different activities. We are also developing an active girls programme, which will be supported by about £1.5 million over the next three years, to build on the success of a number of dance-related projects that are aimed at teenage girls. Community sports hubs also play an important part, and the 57 that are in place, many of which are based in schools, are increasing opportunities to be active. That is consistent with our desire to open up the school estate and ensure that all communities have access to local school facilities. We aim to build on the good progress through the new school sports award that will be launched shortly to recognise and celebrate best practice in schools. However, I want to do more. Although about 43 patient referral mechanisms are already in place throughout Scotland, there is an opportunity to formalise the links and pathways between NHS referral and physical activity opportunities at community level. To that end, we will work with the Royal College of General Practitioners to develop a patient centred high-quality general practitioner intervention that will build on and complement existing referral systems. Up to £100,000 will be made available to support an exciting new approach to a health intervention that will seek to adopt a more intensive approach that will test a mix of rural and urban models. It will explore individual health risks and lifestyle choices and it will be delivered alongside an appropriate referral mechanism to community sports hubs, leisure centres, walking groups and sports clubs. It will also inform our approach for future referral and support. I can also announce that work is being done to draw up an implementation plan for the Scottish version of the Toronto charter, which is the gold standard of international best practice for investment in physical activity. That model was published in 2010 and it is internationally recognised as being revolutionary because it systematically explores the evidence to inform public policy investment by determining what works and what does not, through the lens of physical activity. The charter has the potential to deliver lasting results and to achieve the culture shift that we need in order to reduce both the financial costs and the human costs of inactivity. We all enjoy a lifestyle and an environment that encourage us to be inactive and to overconsume. It will require a shift in culture and thinking to translate that into a position in which being active becomes normal for everyone. I want Scotland to be transformed and to become internationally recognised as an active society, but that has to start with how we see ourselves and Scotland. The work that I have described should be open to scrutiny and review, and that is why I am committed to coming back to Parliament regularly to report on how we are progressing with the challenge of obesity. I am pleased to commend the motion to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the detrimental health impact that obesity can have on individuals, including an increased risk of type 2 diabetes, heart disease and some cancers, and the strain that it places on NHS resources and the wider economy; acknowledges the key contribution that physical activity can make to tackling these issues; recognises that, in Scotland, levels of participation in physical activity are increasing, defying the international trend; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to and initiatives promoting and encouraging physical activity across all Scottish communities; notes the scale of the challenge in getting people more active, and supports the drive to create a lasting active legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

Will the member give way?

Does the member recognise that Dundee City Council is one of the best performing councils when it comes to the delivery of the PE targets? Also, we have to rely on classroom teachers to deliver PE in primary schools because, with the best will in the world, six specialists across 38 schools are not going to be able to deliver two hours of PE to all pupils.

As many others have said, the debate has been largely consensual, so I will deal with the disagreements first and get them out of the way before I talk about members’ contributions. A number of Labour members mentioned the target of two hours of physical education a week in primary schools. It is absolutely my intention to tackle that long-standing target. I gently point out to Labour members that, three years into the Labour Party’s tenure, only 3 per cent of primary schools were meeting the two-hour target. Five years into our tenure, that figure stands at 64 per cent, and at 67 per cent for secondary schools. No one is speaking from a position of strength on this issue. However, we should agree that we have now set a date for the delivery of those two hours a week. I hasten to add that Labour’s manifesto had no end date for the issue and promised only to make progress on it. I do not think that that is good enough, which is why I have set an end date of 2014, to coincide with the end of the Commonwealth games. The target has been around for too long. As others have said, two hours of PE in primary school and two periods in secondary school should be a minimum. In itself, that is not enough. That is why the other things that are going on in our schools and communities are important. I will discuss those things in a minute. In her opening remarks, Patricia Ferguson noted that, as well as thinking about energy out and physical activity, we must also think about energy in and eating habits, which are equally important. Earlier, I said that I was not trying to cover all the four main pillars of the route map, but that I wanted to focus instead on just one. However, her point was absolutely right. I pay tribute to the North Glasgow Healthy Living Community initiative. Such community-based programmes are important, particularly when they can secure the trust of the community in order to help to change behaviours. Nanette Milne talked about advice in the early years. That is important. Alison Johnstone said a number of important things. She talked about the affordability of and access to facilities, and mentioned active schools. I hope that I can reassure her by saying that the majority of active school sessions are free, partly because 73 per cent are delivered by volunteers. That is a good thing. We have also said that affordability is one of the key tests of whether a community sports hub will receive money from sportscotland. We have to ensure that the local community can afford to use those facilities. It is important that the Paths for All Partnership is encouraging more women to be active. That is why we are continuing to give it funding. Nigel Don always has interesting remarks to make. I acknowledge that parents’ recognition of weight issues is important, as is the availability of walking and cycling routes. A lot of the work that has been done around walking groups in urban areas is intended to help people to make the most of what they have in their locality, rather than getting them to go outwith their locality to take part in walking activities.

I am happy to agree to that. There could be some interesting conversations along those routes. We should lead by example, and that is perhaps one way of doing it. I note, too, the comments about the use of the gym. That issue may need to be revisited over time. Margaret McDougall talked about the even earlier benefits of breastfeeding. There is always more that we need to do to promote and encourage that. She talked about the jumpstart programme in NHS Ayrshire and Arran—again, that is very important—and the benefit of the Commonwealth games for the people of Scotland. We want to deliver a minimum of 150 community sports hubs throughout Scotland, because that is a tangible, important benefit. Gil Paterson talked about the power of television and, in his case, “Hannah Montana” filling his television screen. “The Saddle Club” fills ours; my purse is emptied when we have to go to the riding school at the weekend, but at least that is a good physical activity. Mark McDonald talked about the control of food outlets. We are doing a lot of work with local authorities on what happens beyond the school gate. Mark Griffin made a very good speech, in which he talked about us not getting so obsessed with the two hours or two periods of PE that we do not consider what goes on in those two hours or two periods. That is absolutely right, which is why the aim of part of the funding that we have secured for that through Education Scotland is to consider quality. Education Scotland has a working group to look at how we can drive up the quality of physical education in primary and secondary schools. There are some great examples out there, but we need to ensure that that quality is happening everywhere. Like Mark Griffin, I pay tribute to North Lanarkshire Leisure. Its target is to deliver 50 per cent of North Lanarkshire’s secondary schools as community sports hubs. That is a good model for elsewhere, and I am keen to support it. Margaret Burgess gave a good personal account of some of the challenges that she has faced and the importance of walking, which has been a theme throughout the debate. Dennis Robertson reminded us of the outdoor opportunities in Scotland and talked about the excuses that people use. I would point members to a good YouTube video called “23 and 1/2 hours”, which is about how to be inactive for 23 and a half hours. It is food for thought. Similarly, Malcolm Chisholm talked about the role of outdoor education and Bob Doris talked about workplace intervention—

The point about workplace interventions is a good one. Many workplaces are trying to organise walking groups and activity groups at lunch times. However, the life transitions period is important, too, because when many young people go to college or university, some of their sport and physical activity habits change. We are working closely with various sectors to do what we can. Jackson Carlaw said that it all went downhill after he got married; I am sure that Mrs Carlaw would say the same. In fact, I have already phoned her to tell her—not really. He made the important point that his impression from anecdotal evidence is that more people are exercising. I agree. People are getting the message, but we must not be complacent. We have to step up the pace. Richard Simpson mentioned Dr Andrew Murray, our physical activity champion. He is by no means saying that we have to go on excursions, walk or run to the Sahara to meet the challenge of physical activity. He leads from the front and inspires other health professionals to recognise the importance of physical activity—that is important. If we could get every health professional to prescribe physical activity instead of other things, would we not be in a better place, given the opportunities that that would present? I will not discuss counterweight because I did so earlier and I want to end on a consensual note. The debate has been important, but it is not the end of the journey. I would be delighted to come back next year and give a full progress report on the obesity route map. I thank everyone for their contributions.

All NHS boards are required to deliver effective weight management services that are consistent with the available evidence and subject to on-going monitoring of their impact. We expect that to include nationally a mix of NHS and commercial weight reduction programmes.

We are certainly aware of the study to which the member refers, which provided useful data that will help to inform the healthy weight management strategies in Scotland. However, we need to be careful about applying the study’s findings to alternative interventions that were not directly considered in the study. As I said earlier, we are committed to ensuring that health boards have the choice of which services they wish to develop. We have, of course, backed that up with a substantial commitment of £1.5 million a year to boards for the period 2012 to 2015. It is therefore up to boards how they use that money and which services they choose to purchase.

The Scottish Government believes that access to quality facilities is important if young people are to enjoy the benefits of leading healthier, more active lifestyles. That is why we are committed to supporting the development of quality facilities throughout the whole of Scotland and why, over and above the £33 million that we have invested since 2007, we are developing 150 community sport hubs by 2016.

The level of charge is down to the local authority. I would certainly encourage local authorities to view the community sport hub as a way of opening up the school estate in particular in a very affordable manner. One of the considerations that is uppermost for sportscotland in any bid for community sport hub funding is that access is affordable. I hope that a number of new facilities will be opened to the community. Some of our best facilities are in the school estate, and opening those schools after hours and at weekends is a way to open up opportunities to take part in physical activity and sport in communities at an affordable cost.

In the debate in June shortly after my appointment as the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport, I set out my intention to come back to Parliament later in the year with an update on progress on our journey to 2014. I am committed to keeping all members updated on progress. I urge members to look at the new portal to see what is happening across all Scotland. I sent members the most recent biannual update on progress, which sets out what has been achieved since May. I will also ensure that members are sent the six-monthly progress report from Glasgow 2014 Ltd. I am happy to agree today to have regular meetings with Opposition spokespeople, which will meet what I understand is the sentiment behind the amendment in Patricia Ferguson’s name. I am pleased to have called the debate and to reassure members that significant progress continues to be made. I mentioned the new legacy portal, which acts as a one-stop shop for all games-related activities. In its short life, it has already had more than 16,000 hits, and it is becoming a key focal point for information on the legacy. Enormous progress has been made this year. I am pleased to say that we remain well on schedule and that the budget continues to be soundly based. Work is under way on almost all the remaining venues, and the outstanding facilities that are springing up in Glasgow will leave a legacy to be enjoyed for generations to come. By this time next year, the national indoor sports arena and velodrome complex will be finished and will have welcomed its first users. Construction began on the athletes village in June. In games mode, it will be home to 6,500 athletes and officials, but when the games are finished, the properties will be converted into 700 new homes as the core of the revitalised community of Dalmarnock. Of course, it is not only Glasgow that the games will touch. In my part of the country, the shooting events at Barry Buddon will be a great occasion and will bring economic opportunities to the area. The diving competition at the refurbished Royal Commonwealth pool promises to bring the excitement of the games to Edinburgh as well as to generate welcome revenue for the city. Even in difficult times, it is clear that there is still enormous buy-in for the games. I am delighted that more than £32 million of commercial income has already been secured. The sponsorship deals are with the established names of Harper Macleod LLP, Ernst & Young and Search Consultancy. There is still a long way to go to achieve the commercial income targets, but the organising committee is ahead of previous games at this stage and I hope that that promising position will improve further in the new year. We were delighted when the BBC was announced in June as the domestic broadcaster for the games. Ensuring that the games are well covered in the United Kingdom will be key to inspiring our athletes of the future. That contract will enable us all to share the moments of triumph, of which, I hope, there will be many. I will go into a bit more detail on the impact of the games on Glasgow. The Government is working to ensure that the benefits are felt Scotland-wide, but it is right to recognise that Glasgow is truly being transformed. At the epicentre of games activity, the M74 extension opened in June this year—eight months ahead of schedule and under budget. It is improving transport connections in and around the city. The east end regeneration route, which is a vital games link, will open next year. Work has started on refurbishing Dalmarnock station, to ensure greater access for the local community. All the games-related transport projects are on course. When they are complete, they will leave a lasting legacy of reduced journey times, lower congestion levels and opportunities for improved public transport that will benefit not just Glasgow but the whole of the west of Scotland. The Clyde Gateway programme continues apace to help to regenerate the area and to create much-needed jobs in the community. Clyde Gateway’s programme is a 30-year programme that is aimed at transforming the area. The games will give the programme impetus and help to transform an area that has suffered from deprivation for too long. Since 2007, £103 million has been invested through Clyde Gateway, which shows the Government’s long-term commitment to the area. We are on track and, although there is no room for complacency, I am confident and encouraged by the progress that has been made. That confidence is shared by the Commonwealth Games Federation, which audits our preparations. Its October 2011 inspection confirmed that it is satisfied that our planning for the games is on track. In addition, the federation saw a “clear focus on generating value and legacy for the people of Glasgow and Scotland”. That external confirmation that we are on target, on budget and on schedule is very good indeed. The federation also remarked on the strong partnership working that it had seen when it visited us in October. It bodes well for our preparations that links between games partners are still strong after four years of working together. I want to say a word about evaluation, which was raised by several members during the debate in June. I am very clear about our ambitions for 2014, but I am equally clear that progress needs to be robustly monitored and evaluated. Work is well under way to design what is called a meta-evaluation for the 2014 games and their legacy. The aim of that work will be to assess whether and how the Commonwealth games legacy has been delivered. It will assess our progress on the outcomes that we are looking to achieve across all areas of legacy over a number of years before, during and after the games. Partners in national and local government, the third sector and academia are all involved in that process. In January, an evaluation working group will convene for the first time to progress the meta-evaluation. We expect baseline measures to be in place by the end of February.

I had an early meeting in Manchester. I went down there and had a good look at the legacy that the games left, along with some of the issues that Manchester thought would be of benefit for us. Officials have done a more detailed follow-up to that meeting, so Kezia Dugdale can be assured that if there are any lessons to learn, we will learn them. Manchester has been quite successful at promoting itself as an international sporting venue and Glasgow has already begun to do that by securing a number of sporting events for after 2014. Let me turn to our legacy ambitions. Enormous benefits are already coming to Scotland as a result of our hosting of the games. We have been clear that our ambition is a legacy for all the people of Scotland, and in communities up and down the country, the games are beginning to inspire people and change lives. I have always been very clear that helping Scots to become more physically active is our overriding legacy ambition, which is why we are building on the success that we have already achieved in making and keeping Scots active. The results from the last Scottish health survey showed that 72 per cent of people had participated in sport in the preceding four weeks, and that 83 per cent of Scottish adults had visited the outdoors for leisure or recreation. That is evidence that Scotland is indeed more active than we sometimes give ourselves credit for, but we need to build on that and use the excitement of the games to re-energise our efforts. I am delighted that one of the most successful elements of that is the active schools programme, which has given 5 million opportunities to young people to take part in more than 70 different physical and sport activities that were provided last year, and were underpinned by a staggering 10,000 volunteers. We should celebrate that. We continue to invest in ensuring that we provide easy access to local facilities for communities across Scotland, and I am delighted to announce that there are now 72 hubs in the pipeline, with 41 community sports hubs up and running throughout Scotland. I am delighted with that progress because the hubs are providing a home for the community to come together. They cater to the local needs of each community and support participation in physical activity across the country. They demonstrate our commitment to ensuring that all Scotland’s people and communities can benefit from becoming more active. We want to build on that—which is why I announce today that we will deliver at least 100 hubs by 2014. However, we will do more, with a commitment to deliver a further 50 hubs before the end of this parliamentary session. We expect at least half those 150 hubs to be based in schools, which will help significantly to open up the school estate. Following the Commonwealth games, Scotland will be a stronger sporting nation and this commitment reinforces our view that community sports hubs will play a critical role in delivering on our aspirations. I want to say a few things about high performance sport, because winning medals in the 2014 games will be important. For that reason, we are continuing to invest heavily in the future generation. Sportscotland will maintain the increases in investment in the past three years of £7.5 million, giving a total of £15 million of additional investment to support our athletes and develop the governing bodies over the six-year period. In these difficult times, the games are increasingly giving a welcome boost to the wider economy, with businesses large and small winning valuable contracts from both Glasgow 2014 and London 2012. Scottish businesses have won 133 of the 171 contracts that have been awarded through the Glasgow business portal, on which more than 16,000 Scottish companies are registered, and have won 158 London 2012 contracts. Through our work with Scottish Enterprise, we continue to support Scottish businesses to ensure that they are as competitive as possible, and we have invested a further quarter of a million pounds in BusinessClub Scotland to ensure that our businesses continue to benefit from hosting major events. Thousands of jobs have already been maintained to construct key infrastructure projects around the games. For our young people in particular they are providing a much-needed step on to the employment ladder and are giving real social and economic hope in a challenging environment. Not only are infrastructure programmes such as Clyde Gateway and the M74 helping our economy, they are giving real jobs to real people, and I am determined that as a lasting legacy of the games we will create a more skilled workforce and give our people the tools that they need to compete in the changing workplace. Of course, the 15,000 volunteering opportunities will also help to give people valuable experience to enter the workforce. London 2012 will dominate much of the media attention next year and our plans for making the most of the event are being developed. We are delighted to be welcoming the Olympic torch relay to every Scottish local authority area, which will provide a great opportunity to showcase our unique landscape and heritage to a worldwide audience. Olympic sport will also come to Scotland, with eight football matches taking place at the national stadium at Hampden. Of course, we have a particular interest in the Olympics as a valuable learning experience for our own journey to 2014. It will be a launch pad for us and we are determined to make the best of it. I am delighted to stand here today, 945 days before the Commonwealth games opening ceremony, and to share with members the progress that has been made. We will deliver an outstanding games on time and on budget. Our plans for leaving a lasting legacy are well developed and are beginning to make changes in our people’s day-to-day lives. We bid for the games because we saw their potential to inspire. We may find ourselves in very different financial circumstances now, but that vision is already becoming a reality. I am pleased to commend the motion to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the good progress being made by the Games partners to deliver the 2014 Commonwealth Games on time and on budget; welcomes the view of the Commonwealth Games Federation’s first Evaluation Commission that Games planning is on course and that the Games partnership is a strong one; recognises the tangible benefits already realised through collaborative working between the Scottish Government and its many partners, and recognises that the current and planned activity will maximise legacy for the whole of Scotland from both the London 2012 Olympic Games and the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

Like others, I think that we have heard some good speeches and some good suggestions in what was a consensual debate. I will try to respond to as many of those suggestions as possible, but if I do not, I assure members that they have been noted. Patricia Ferguson asked a number of questions. I agree with her that the creation of a lasting legacy is a challenge, but is absolutely critical to our success. I agree absolutely with what she said about the involvement of other local authorities. The games legacy for Scotland portal outlines some of the work that is being done. Patricia Ferguson mentioned the work of the previous Public Audit Committee. She will be aware that the games budget now includes an inflation forecast, following a request from that committee in early 2010. I assure her that there is a significant contingency budget within the games budget. The ticketing strategy is still under development, but we will certainly look at the Olympic experience and the strengths and weaknesses of the Olympics ticketing strategy. I was very pleased to hear that Patricia Ferguson is taking up zumba, which fits in very well with the let’s get Scotland dancing programme, which Fiona Hyslop looks after. Nanette Milne referred to the petition from the Children’s Orchard, which I will look at, along with other ministers. John Mason made some very important points. One that I want to highlight was his comment about the community facilities within the NISA and velodrome complex. Local communities have had a fair amount of upheaval in relation to the development of the sites, so it is right and proper that they see a direct benefit in terms of the community facilities that they gain. Neil Bibby talked about some of the apprenticeship programmes that Glasgow City Council is running, which are also important. Through Skills Development Scotland, we support those to the tune—I think—of £1.43 million. That partnership work is important. Someone made the point that it does not matter whose public pound it is, because it is all the public pound at the end of the day. What matters is what that money delivers. Neil Bibby also made the point that the legacy from the international children’s games is important. I experienced that highly successful event for myself. The organising committee will, of course, consider free and discounted tickets as part of the ticketing strategy but, as I said, that strategy is at an early stage of development. Sandra White was right to comment on the involvement of Blindcraft and veterans in the refurbishment of Commonwealth house. I attended the Commonwealth house opening ceremony. The standard of work in the fixtures and fittings is fantastic, so they have done a wonderful job. Sandra White asked me a couple of specific questions about improvements at Kelvingrove underground station. I will get back to her about that, because I will have to take it up with Glasgow City Council and ask it about any plans that it has. Tavish Scott asked a couple of questions, including one about capturing some of the sporting moments in art form. Fiona Hyslop is, handily, in the chamber, so I am sure that she heard that. Those moments need to be captured so that future generations can get a feel for them. Tavish Scott also mentioned that he is a golfer. I do not wish to detract from the Commonwealth games debate, but he will be aware that one of the important legacies of the Ryder cup is the club golf programme. It is one of the most fantastic successes, with a 20 per cent conversion rate for clubs. I assure Tavish Scott that the map to which he referred will be fixed. He also asked questions about jobs. I assure him that, as part of the meta-evaluation that I mentioned in my opening speech, an economic evaluation will consider the detail of some of the questions that he asked. I hope that that will fulfil his desires in that regard. Paul Wheelhouse talked about community sports hubs. I reassure him that I want the whole of Scotland to benefit. However, councils need to be proactive in leading the bids from their areas and it is fair to say that some have been more proactive than others. I encourage all councils to examine closely the potential for community sports hubs in their areas. I reassure Mr Malik that the approach that we are taking to 2014 is very different from that taken to the legacy from the Edinburgh games. Many lessons have been learned since then. On increased visibility beyond 2012, Mr Malik makes the important point that we want continuity of interest. If we keep that interest going all the way through to 2014, it will provide an important platform. Community cohesion is also important. We will examine opportunities to enhance not only our links with Commonwealth countries, but community cohesion in Scotland through the Commonwealth themes. I am happy to write to Mr Malik with a bit more detail about that. Mr Malik made an important point about support for small and medium-sized enterprises. Many of the contracts have been won by SMEs but, without a doubt, some will need to be supported to get the best out of bidding for contracts. We will do that through our enterprise agencies. Bob Doris talked about the work that is going on. He mentioned not only the city centre investment, which has been important for Glasgow, but the fact that Commonwealth games investment is being made in some of the most deprived communities in the city. It will make a real difference not only to the physical landscape but to social regeneration in those areas. That is crucial. Jenny Marra talked about trafficking. She can be assured that Kenny MacAskill, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, has said that he will discuss with Helena Kennedy how to make progress on matters that are raised in her report. I am happy to write to Ms Marra with more information on that or to ensure that the cabinet secretary does so. Alison Johnstone raised several issues about the role of women in sport. We certainly want to ensure that the profile of women in sport is heightened and we will look at ways of doing that. She also raised the issue of ethical considerations in the sponsorship realm. The games organisers are alert to the potential damage that an inappropriate sponsor could cause to the image of the games or to the attractiveness of the brand to other potential sponsors. They are well aware of the issue. I say briefly to Graeme Dey that I am aware of the shooting governing body’s desire for a lasting legacy. We are looking at how we can secure a lasting legacy around a competition training facility and I will write to him with more detail on that.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I will pick up that issue with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and look at whether there are any plans for such training. We will get back to the member on the detail. As I have an extra minute, I can respond to further points, which I am keen to do. Annabel Goldie raised some important matters. I reassure her that sport and physical activity in state sector schools are being given a priority that they have never had in the past. I acknowledge that there are challenges and I assure her that I have made it one of my personal priorities to nail down the issue of PE in the curriculum. More will be said about that in the new year. Let us not underestimate the impact of the active schools network. Five million sessions have been held across 70 different sports and physical activities—there was nothing like that when I was at school. Children are now exposed to different sports and physical activities in a way that has not happened before. There is more to do, but we are doing the right things. We are opening up the school estate through the community sports hubs, but we need to do more of that and ensure that it happens in every school. Kezia Dugdale made a very good speech in which she covered some important issues. We want to ensure that the next generation is one of the key beneficiaries of the Commonwealth games legacy. Some good work is taking place around employment initiatives—she mentioned a number of those. The personal best scheme pilot in Glasgow has been evaluated and we are looking at how we can take it forward, not only in Glasgow but throughout Scotland, in a way that has the biggest impact. I am happy to keep her updated on how we are doing that. It is important to highlight having community benefit clauses in contracts. I have gone through as many of the points that have been raised as possible. I am sure that if I have missed any, members will write to me about them. I thank members for their positive contributions to the debate.

The aim of programmes to tackle overweight and obesity in children is to support children and young people to grow through their overweight to achieve a healthy weight. As a minimum, all Scottish Government-funded programmes require participating children to be weighed and measured on entry to and completion of programmes.

A lot of work has been done by health boards, in particular Grampian, to ensure that it is not just children who are overweight but under-16s who are underweight who have access to the right programmes and support. The member has cited one of those support arrangements in Grampian, where the issue was the subject of quite an extensive health committee investigation that led directly to improvements in the support for children in the north of Scotland who have weight issues. I hope that I can work with the member to continue to strive to improve those services.

Mr Kelly has forgotten an important part of the process. It was the police who asked for the bill. Strathclyde Police’s chief constable demanded that something be done. I apologise if Mr Kelly was going to mention that, but that is an important part of why action was taken. The police asked for something to be done and for legislation to be introduced.

The Scottish Government is committed to creating a vibrant, multicultural one Scotland and to using the 2014 games to bring communities together and make stronger links across the Commonwealth. As part of the curriculum for excellence, we are already using the games to provide an excellent context for learning and to enable young people to develop as responsible global citizens.

I am certainly keen that all communities in Glasgow—and, of course, throughout Scotland—are as involved as possible with all aspects of the Commonwealth games. I am keen that the African and Caribbean community is also involved in that, and I would be delighted to visit the centre in Glasgow to hear more about the African and Caribbean Network’s work.

The priority for the organising committee will be to find a replacement chief executive as soon as possible because of the importance of delivering the games. That is what the organising committee is all about, and it is doing a very good job in that regard. I make members aware—if they are not already aware—that we announced today that the BBC has been appointed as the domestic rights holder for the 2014 Commonwealth games. That brings a welcome contribution to the games budget. I hope that that is something that Murdo Fraser and members from all parties will welcome.

The key steps towards supporting sports development and increasing physical activity levels were set out in our manifesto, and we are working with our stakeholders to deliver them during the current session of Parliament.

I will certainly look at Aberdeenshire Council’s support for sports development. I am aware that sportscotland has put in a lot of effort in speaking to all local authorities about their sports development plans. It is important that there is a good relationship between sportscotland and local authorities, because the active schools network is delivered in partnership between them. The active schools network is performing well in all local authorities. However, I will look into the issue that the member raises and write to him.

I very much welcome the opportunity to debate the contribution that sport makes to our nation. I think we can all agree that sport really does transcend boundaries. For many, it is an abiding passion that generates a strong sense of loyalty and pride. For others, it is a welcome distraction and a source of release from the pressures and stresses of our modern everyday lives. Whatever sport means to us, its impact can be far-reaching. For the nation, our economy, cultural heritage, international standing and reputation are all influenced by sport. For the individual, sport can prolong life, improve physical strength and protect mental wellbeing. My appointment as Scotland’s first Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport is a tremendous honour. It brings significant opportunities and also a number of key challenges. I look forward to engaging with the Parliament on a regular basis as I take forward the Government’s agenda in this area. I make it clear at the start of the debate that, where there are good ideas or suggestions that I think will help to deliver the best possible outcomes for sport and physical activity in Scotland, I am certainly willing to engage with and listen to colleagues on those matters. I turn to the focus of our debate. The contribution of sport to Scotland is, in my view, vastly underestimated. Quite often our attention rests briefly on individual sports or events without our considering the totality of the benefits that they bring to the nation. Direct sports-related consumer spending alone amounts to more than £1.8 billion a year and accounts for more than 51,000 jobs in Scotland. Major sporting events have an annual net impact on Scotland of £25 million—not including the domestic spend associated with those events. Even without the anticipated income stream from the Commonwealth games, EventScotland forecasts that the net impact from sporting events over the next 10 years will be in the region of £560 million—and that is a conservative estimate. Added to that, there are savings to the national health service from a more physically active population, which run into millions of pounds. For example, a 1 per cent increase in sport and physical activity would yield £3.5 million savings each year from coronary heart disease, stroke and colon cancer alone. In Scotland we are uniquely placed to reap considerable benefits from sport and physical activity. Not only will 2014 see us host two of the world’s greatest sporting events in the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup; it will of course also be our year of homecoming. Before then, Scotland will play host to a number of events including the international children’s games in Lanarkshire, the mountain bike world cup in Fort William and the British women’s open at Carnoustie. Looking further ahead, we have the open championship and the world gymnastics championships coming up—and there will be more to come. Of course, even greater income could be generated for sports if more broadcasting of the major events took place. As some members will be aware, the call for more rugby broadcasting was debated in the last parliamentary session and received widespread support. Today we have had a further call from Scottish Rugby for that to happen. The Scottish Government fully supports that call. I will say more about that in my closing remarks. Hosting the Commonwealth games will place Scotland under intense worldwide scrutiny. My responsibility will be to deliver the games on time and on budget and to provide a showcase for Scotland at its best. It is around the games that our vision for a sporting nation will crystallise—a vision of Scots helped to become more active, physical activity embedded in our culture and, of course, our athletes excelling. We are already seeing tangible results from our investment in the games, through not only infrastructure improvements and the creation of state-of-the-art facilities, but the award of contracts with a combined total of £227 million to Scottish companies. We are laying the foundations of a lasting legacy from the games and I am committed to making that legacy relevant and tangible for all Scots. I will return to the Parliament later in the year to debate that aspect of the games in greater depth. Major sporting events can stir our passions and rally a sense of nationhood, but the maximum benefits of sport have been realised for the people of Scotland at the community level. Community engagement and development lie at the heart of our manifesto commitments on sport. That is why we will increase our investment in and support of the 150,000 adults who volunteer regularly to deliver sport in their communities week in and week out. We will build on the success of the first 56 community sports hubs, which are being delivered in 12 local authority areas, by creating at least 100 new hubs by 2014. Sportscotland is taking that work forward. Community sports hubs have at their heart local sports participation, local engagement and local leadership. They are a catalyst for local partners, groups and individuals to work together for sport. They address the community’s needs by offering clubs and groups easier access to sports facilities and by providing community volunteers with opportunities to play a bigger part in leading sport in their area. I want to do more to encourage greater community engagement in sport. I want to offer help where facilities can be reinvigorated by communities that seek to take on the responsibility of management or ownership. That is why I announce today our intention to create a new fund to encourage community ownership and management of sports facilities. The fund will provide seedcorn funding for communities and groups to get the right advice about sourcing funds, constructing robust business plans and ultimately achieving success when a compelling case exists. The new fund will make all the difference by providing modest amounts of financial help to get things off the ground. In recent years, the numbers and types of sports and physical activities that are on offer to children and young people have undergone a remarkable transformation. The activities are perhaps very different from the sports that we played and the physical education that we undertook when we were children. The secret to our success in achieving our long-term goals will be to motivate more children to participate in sport and physical activity. Studies show that school-based sport and PE can build confidence, self-esteem and social skills, as well as embedding a lifelong love of sport and physical activity. That is why we are absolutely committed to delivering two hours of PE for every primary school child and at least two periods of PE for every secondary pupil in secondary 1 to S4. Good progress has been made—from the 5 per cent attainment level before 2007 that we inherited, 55 per cent of primary school children now benefit from at least two hours of PE and 60 per cent of secondary schools now deliver at least two periods of PE across S1 to S4—but we need to do more. With the Minister for Local Government and Planning and the Minister for Learning and Skills, we will begin discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on how we can ensure the delivery of those important commitments by 2014. It is not just PE that is important in the school setting. The active schools network has achieved remarkable success in recent years. More than 2,500 schools take part in the programme and, in the past year, it generated 5 million opportunities for young people to participate in more than 70 different activities that were delivered by more than 10,000 volunteers, made up of teachers, parents, senior pupils and coaches. That is not all about traditional and well-loved school sports, important as they are. Increasingly, outdoor activities such as mountain biking, surfing, skiing, canoeing and even highland games sports are being offered through the programme. That is a good thing. That success deserves to be rewarded and encouraged, which is why we are committed to continuing to provide up to £13 million of annual investment in the active schools programme. In the current financial climate, that sum is not insignificant. It recognises the considerable achievements to date and the expectation of more to come. However, I intend to go further. I want to reward excellence in school sport and physical activity. Many schools have gone the extra mile to provide first-class resources and opportunities for pupils to excel in sports. Perth academy is one example that springs to mind; there are many others. However, despite their achievements, often those schools do not get tangible recognition of their success. I want to change that. That is why, inspired by the Scottish Sports Association, we will introduce a new schools sports award programme that will give proper recognition and reward to individual schools that embed sport and physical activity in their culture and strive to achieve excellence. The national award scheme will visibly demonstrate schools’ commitment to and achievement in sport and physical activity and will act as a catalyst for more integrated community links. I am happy to keep members informed of the development of those plans. Local schools lie at the heart of our communities. I am keen to explore further the potential for their greater use to promote sports and physical activity. I will seek early discussions with COSLA on how we can take that forward and further open up the school estate. Sportscotland, as our national delivery body for sport, is key to the success of making the improvements that we all want. The organisation is in good hands, with an excellent chair in Louise Martin. Sportscotland has been instrumental in reforming the accountability mechanisms for our sports governing bodies, which are also key to successful delivery. The sports governing bodies encompass the full span of activity, from increasing participation to supporting elite athletes to perform on the national and international stage. During 2011-12, sportscotland will invest £14.9 million in governing bodies. In my closing remarks, I will say more about what that investment will deliver. It would be remiss of me to end my opening speech without reference to our national game: football. The events of recent months have brought to the fore some of the game’s less pleasant aspects, which have tarnished football’s image. However, under the First Minister’s leadership we are beginning to tackle some of those deep-seated problems. Last week, there was Cabinet agreement to introduce legislation to tackle unacceptable behaviour at football matches and to crack down on those who make threats of serious harm to others, whether displayed on banners, sent in the mail or posted on the internet. Sectarianism and bigotry have no place anywhere in Scotland and are not welcome in our national game. A partnership approach is essential if we are to tackle the problem successfully. That is why we are working closely with football clubs, football authorities and the police as part of the joint action group to deliver on the eight-point plan that was agreed at the football summit in March. The JAG is focused on driving real and lasting change in Scottish football and will report with its recommendations before the start of the next football season in July. In his second report on football reforms, former First Minister Henry McLeish set out significant proposals for reform of the Scottish Football Association’s governance structures. His view was that, without those fundamental reforms, progress on wider issues affecting the game would not bear fruit. I am glad to be able to inform members that the SFA, under the leadership of Stewart Regan, has taken the recommendations to heart. At its annual general meeting next week, member clubs will be asked to endorse the SFA board’s support for a radical overhaul of the organisation’s governance, disciplinary and accountability structures. Both the First Minister and I fully support those proposals and encourage their adoption at next week’s meeting. Working with the SFA, we will review the successful youth action plan to ensure that our support for the youth game in developing grass-roots football across local communities continues. Given the importance of football to Scotland, it was right for us to give a commitment in our manifesto to use funding from the young Scots fund to provide a new national indoor football centre and associated national football academy. Delivery of that key commitment is an exciting prospect. I look forward to updating members on it as our plans develop. Sport has a significant contribution to make to the nation and to us as individuals. Under this Government, our commitment to maximising the benefits to be derived from sport is guaranteed. I move, That the Parliament recognises the important contribution that sport makes to Scotland’s economy, culture and international standing; welcomes the government’s commitment to increase participation in sport and physical activity, thereby creating a lasting legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth Games; notes the benefits to the physical and mental wellbeing of the Scottish people through participation in sport; acknowledges the priority given to increasing physical education in primary and secondary schools, and notes the progress being made in improving community access to sporting facilities.

I am grateful for the way in which members have responded to the debate. Like others, I praise the excellent maiden speeches that we have heard this afternoon from members on all sides of the chamber. I said in my opening remarks that I would come back to a couple of issues. I turn first to sportscotland and the reforms that are aimed at bolstering the accountability of the Scottish sports governing bodies. All investments made by sportscotland are now linked strategically to agreed outcomes that reiterate the key priorities for funding. That is important because it links directly to targets for increasing participation, which means a focus on getting children and young people into sport. Also involved are requirements for volunteers and coaching and elite performance, which is important as we look towards raising the bar from Delhi and increasing our medal take. Real progress has been made with regard to how resources were given out previously. I also mentioned broadcasting in my opening remarks—as have others during the debate. I share the view expressed by Scottish Rugby that we need to increase the level of rugby coverage on terrestrial and satellite television, but I would go further and say that we need to increase the level of broadcasting across a range of sports. I know that other members support that view. As the First Minister said in his statement to Parliament last week, many of our leading cultural figures have backed the call for a Scottish digital channel. In the previous parliamentary session, as we know, the call for a Scottish digital channel was unanimous across the chamber. I believe that such a channel would provide a unique platform for Scotland to showcase the full range of sporting events that take place throughout the nation, and I urge members to support us in that cause. I stressed in my opening remarks the important role of schools in instilling in their pupils a lifelong passion for sports and physical activity. Our new school sports award programme will give that due recognition, but we should remember the excellent work that is already under way in promoting school sports. Events such as the Bank of Scotland national school sports week, which I will launch next week, play an important part in maintaining our children’s motivation and enthusiasm for sport. More than 175,000 pupils participated in last year’s event, and this year’s event is destined to be even more popular. Our proposals will complement rather than replace the important role that the private sector plays in promoting sports and physical activity. I will now consider some of the issues that members have raised; I apologise if I do not manage to get round them all. I will attempt to write to members who have raised specific questions if I do not manage to answer them. Richard Simpson asked in his opening and closing speeches where the community sports hubs are and where they will be. Well, they are everywhere and they are going to be everywhere. The aim is to have at least 100 community sports hubs in all 32 local authorities. I am happy to provide members with a list—although I will not do so just now—of those hubs that have been approved so far. Richard Simpson asked about the community ownership and management fund that we have announced today. There will be an initial budget of £500,000 to get that off the ground. Richard Simpson also asked about the legacy of the Commonwealth games, how successful they will be and whether their success will just be measured by the Scottish health survey. It will not. There will be other measurements, such as what the community sports hubs and active schools deliver in the way of increased participation, and of volunteers and their activities. I will be able to lay all that out in more detail in a debate about the Commonwealth games that is to be held later this year. Several members mentioned swimming. I remind members that sportscotland has encouraged the swimming governing body with an investment of a significant amount of money during the past few years. We also invested a significant amount of money in the swimming top-up programme, to ensure that every child can swim before they leave primary school. That is the right focus because it targets those who are unable to swim. There is an equalities agenda around that situation and it is important to focus on it. Richard Simpson raised the issue of Alva pool, which Keith Brown, the constituency member, has already brought to me. I have encouraged sportscotland to engage with the community organisation about the pool. Running a swimming pool is not an easy thing for a community organisation to do but sportscotland will continue to provide the help and advice that it is currently providing. Humza Yousaf made another great maiden speech; he talked about the self-belief and optimism running through Scotland’s veins as we look forward to the major events that are coming our way. I could not agree more. Patricia Ferguson talked about a national plan for sport, which we already have to some degree, although aspects of it might sit in different places. There is an issue about bringing that plan together as a cross-Government initiative to look at the value of sport. I will consider that. The school sports awards are exactly what Patricia Ferguson was talking about when she mentioned a sport version of the eco-schools model. The awards reward excellence in sport. They should not end with the Commonwealth games and we want to ensure that they do not. Tavish Scott’s point about leadership is very important. If we could bottle the leadership that is shown in many schools and transport it to all our schools, we would solve a lot of the problems that we face with participation in PE, sport and other physical activity. We therefore need to look closely at leadership and how we encourage it. James Dornan, who represents the home of Scottish football, talked about the halcyon days of times gone by. Perhaps we can rekindle that spirit. His point about traditional Scottish games is important and one on which we should perhaps reflect. George Adam made another great maiden speech and paid tribute to Jim Mitchell. He also talked about St Mirren. I had the great experience of visiting St Mirren. I was impressed with the facilities and with the example of what a community club can achieve. They see themselves very much as a community club. Drew Smith made another very good maiden speech. I remember the walk in Fife; it was a beautiful day. His point about supporters’ involvement in football is one that we take seriously. We also take seriously our partnership with Glasgow City Council for the delivery of the Commonwealth games and I assure members that that partnership will continue. Clare Adamson pointed to the international children’s games and Siobhan McMahon mentioned the volunteer interest that we have. That is something we could capture for the Commonwealth games, which will need 15,000 volunteers. Perhaps we will come back to that. I correct Mary Fee on an important point. There has not been a reduction in the number of active school co-ordinators. The full-time equivalent hours are as they were but those who were in part-time appointments are now in full-time appointments, which is a point that Mary Fee praised during her speech. I hope that she can be advised on that point. I thank Margo MacDonald and the cross-party group on sport for their kind comments. I have some sympathy with the suggestion that we need to pull together physical education, physical activity and sport. We should not see them in isolation; rather, we should see them as things that come together as an offer to children. We can consider that. I will provide more details about the school national awards scheme in due course. The clubgolf effort is providing a lot of new junior members for golf clubs, and we should not underestimate its importance. Ruth Davidson made a good point. The Scottish Government invested money in outdoor education linked to the curriculum for excellence in 2009-10 and 2010-11. I can provide more details about that. The debate has been very positive. My door is open. We do not have all the good ideas, although we have many. I look forward to working with members across the chamber in the next few years.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing a debate on such an important topic as chronic pain. The issue has interested her since the establishment of the Parliament. Like other members, I acknowledge Dorothy-Grace Elder’s role in putting chronic pain on the map. Ian McKee’s final speech in the Parliament was worth listening to. He always has something intelligent and useful to add to a debate, whatever the subject, and I thank him. Mary Scanlon was right to start by acknowledging the progress that has been made. Of course, there is always more to be done. Christine Grahame mentioned important issues to do with DWP assessments and tests not recognising chronic pain as an issue. The motion focuses on Scottish patients with chronic pain who travel to Bath for treatment. The crux of the matter is that Scottish clinicians who are responsible for pain management take the view that a small number of patients, mainly adolescents, can benefit from the service at Bath. In some cases, the whole family needs help in understanding how to manage the young person’s pain. Referrals to Bath are managed by the national services division of NHS National Services Scotland, which has put in place robust processes to govern referrals but is not in a position to countermand a clear decision by a consultant that a patient needs the treatment that is offered in Bath. It might be worth noting that referrals reached a peak of 34 in 2005-06 and that there were only 18 referrals in 2009-10. Overall, fewer patients are being referred to Bath than used to be the case. I wonder whether that is a reflection of the ability of chronic pain services in Scotland to manage patients. I hope that as services in Scotland improve, fewer referrals to Bath will be required. Ultimately, however, if a clinician thinks that Bath is the most appropriate place for treatment, we must accept that judgment.

Mary Scanlon’s point about the patient pathway is important. The solution is a managed clinical network. Good evidence is emerging from Glasgow on the benefits of the approach, which I want to be taken forward. There is no doubt that pain management services in Scotland remain patchy, as the GRIPS report made clear. Our response to the recommendations in the report has been concentrated on the development of a Scottish service model for chronic pain, about which I will say a little. First, the model is based on the provision of pain education for the Scottish population, which includes promoting people’s ability to self-manage and promoting the information that is available from the NHS inform website about lower-back pain, to help people to return to work. If a person had experienced pain for more than 12 weeks, they would be encouraged to refer themselves to a voluntary sector organisation-run self-management course or to their primary care team. They would then be referred to what the model calls a level 1, or outpatient, pain-management service. If necessary, they could be referred on to a level 2, or more specialist, in-patient, service. The model includes level 3, highly-specialised interventions, such as spinal-cord stimulation and residential pain-management programmes. Mary Scanlon made an important point about spinal-cord stimulation. Access to what can be a life-transforming treatment, as she acknowledged, is provided for in the chronic pain service model that is under development. The chronic pain steering group will oversee implementation, to ensure equity of access for everyone who might benefit from the treatment. Spinal-cord stimulation is very much on the group’s radar screen. The model also underlines the importance of early access to emotional and psychological support. Its aims are, in summary, to improve the prevention and management of chronic pain, to improve services at all levels and to ensure that people get the earliest and most appropriate treatment, locally where possible, but with ready access to the more specialist tiers of the service. Taking the model forward will be the top priority for our next lead clinician for chronic pain and the steering group that the previous lead set up to support him. Interviews for the post were held yesterday, so we will know the result very soon. The chronic pain steering group will then carry out a scoping exercise with NHS boards to assess the level of service that is available in each area and how it relates to the service model. That will allow for a comprehensive examination of the pain management services throughout Scotland and what Scotland needs, including the level of demand for a residential facility of the kind that Bath offers. The experience of people living with chronic pain highlights the importance of good communication between primary and secondary care, as well as the need for a multidisciplinary approach. People also stress the crying need for good information and the healing effect that proper peer support can have. All those factors underline the importance of a managed clinical network approach to pain services. I thank all those who have put so much work into the development of the chronic pain MCN in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. It has promoted equity of access to services by making sure that the Clyde area is included in the network’s scope. It is also producing really helpful information for patients and for staff who work in primary care. I urge all other boards in Scotland to learn from that MCN’s achievements. The chronic pain steering group has also focused on an analysis of the need for education on chronic pain for those who work in primary care. It recently considered the findings of a report, which was commissioned by NHS Education for Scotland, that helps us with the way ahead. Other valuable work includes NHS Quality Improvement Scotland’s decision to support the development of a clinical guideline on non-malignant chronic pain. There is an opportunity for people to have their say about the key questions on which the guideline should focus. That will also be a topic at the launch of the Scottish pain research community at the end of this month. The steering group has also been developing a community website to act as the basis of a chronic pain information resource. It is intended primarily for NHS Scotland, but it will also be accessible to the public. Each board will have its own page on which it will be able to describe the pain management services that it provides. I consider that to be a real driver for equity of service, as boards and the public will be able to compare the range of services that are available in each part of the country. I do not for a moment deny that there is still a journey to travel, but it has been helpful to set out during the debate some of the progress that has been made. The debate was constructive, and I thank every member for their contribution to it. 13:12 Meeting suspended until 14:15. 14:15 On resuming—

Local change plans have been considered by the ministerial strategic group, and partnerships will be notified about their allocations in due course. The joint improvement team is supporting partnerships in implementing change plans.

The member has raised a number of points. Those data will be collected from 1 April, so we will be able to track the issue very closely from that date. Richard Simpson should acknowledge that the six-week measurement has been in place for quite some time. Delayed discharge has always been an issue, particularly under the previous Administration, when the numbers were significant. Delayed discharge is a concern, but this Government has reached a figure of zero delayed discharges on the six-week measurement for three years in a row. That was never achieved when the member’s party was in government. As I have said time and again, more progress needs to be made. The change fund is designed to do just that because it is about changing fundamentally the patient journey in order to avoid people turning up at the front door of a hospital in the first place and ensuring that when they do, they are in for the minimum time, and it is about allowing us to tackle delayed discharges once and for all. I hope that Richard Simpson will support us in that work.

Anne McLaughlin has made a very important point. From the start, we have made it clear that third sector interests and carers’ interests, in particular, should be represented in the development and signing off of the change plans. That process has been difficult because of the time constraints on the development of the present set of change plans, but it has taken place, probably to a greater degree in some partnership areas than in others. We expect partnerships across Scotland to build on that over the next 12 months so that the next set of change plans have far greater input from the third sector right from the start, and we will certainly push partnerships to ensure that that happens.

There is strong evidence of the benefits to people who have had a stroke of their being admitted to a stroke unit within a day of the event. We monitor, on an annual basis, NHS boards’ performance against that element of the NHS Quality Improvement Scotland clinical standards for stroke. To deliver further improvements consistently across the country, we are introducing a new health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—target from April. By March 2013, boards should ensure that 90 per cent of all patients admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of stroke get into a stroke unit on the day of admission or the following day. We have been working directly with all boards, including NHS Fife, to support them in developing that aspect of their local delivery plans.

I agree with Marilyn Livingstone that it is important that we avoid beds being taken up by people who are ready for discharge. That is why we have taken a strong national position on delayed discharge and why we have established the £70 million change fund to make the necessary fundamental changes. It is also why, in the past six weeks, I have twice met the leader of Fife Council and the chair of the health board to ensure that progress is made in Fife. They have been meeting weekly to monitor the improvements that have brought the number down to single figures. I acknowledge Marilyn Livingstone’s interest in the subject. She came to a meeting with me to hear more about the work that needed to be done and I am happy to keep her informed of the progress that is being made in Fife. It is important that people have access to the beds that they need.

I confirm that the Scottish Government remains committed to the introduction of the display ban. Subject to the satisfactory conclusion of the on-going legal challenge, we will be working towards implementation of the display ban from April 2012 for large retailers and from April 2015 for small retailers. The change to the original implementation dates will also give retailers more time to prepare for the changes.

I agree with the member. That is why the recent legislation is focused on reducing the attractiveness and availability of tobacco products and preventing access to them by young people. That is also why increasing the penalties for breaching that legislation is so important. I remain hopeful that we can continue to build on Scotland’s journey towards becoming smoke free. We have come a long way from where we were on the acceptability of smoking in Scotland even 20 to 30 years ago, never mind hundreds of years ago, and we should all welcome that.

I am delighted to be able to inform members that, at sportscotland’s recent board meeting, an award of £5 million to Aberdeen Sports Village Ltd for that project was approved. It is now for the council and its partners to take the necessary steps to ensure that the pool is delivered for the people of Aberdeen and the north-east. Work on the site is scheduled to begin in late summer and its completion is due in autumn 2013.

I wish Nicol Stephen all the best. It was fitting for him to ask that question, as he has pursued the issue with rigour. It is my pleasure to be able to give him positive news about the confirmation of the money, and I am sure that he will want to join many of us in 2013 to see the magnificent facility open.

Yes, I can. As I said in my original answer, £5 million was awarded to Aberdeen Sports Village Ltd at sportscotland’s recent board meeting. As Nicol Stephen said, that came about because of the positive support from all partners and from private donations. The role of the University of Aberdeen has been very important, of course. I am sure that it is felt on a cross-party basis that what has happened is a cause for celebration.

Implementation of the strategy is progressing well. For example, care standards and a national skills and competencies framework for health and social care staff are on track to be published this year. A formal report on year 1 of the strategy’s implementation will be published in June, as per the commitment in the strategy.

I thank John Farquhar Munro for his kind and supportive words and I wish him well in the future. I know of his interest in the dementia strategy. The issue has been important to the Government and to me, because it has the potential to touch so many people’s lives, so it is appropriate that John Farquhar Munro has ended his parliamentary career with a question on the issue. I wish him all the best.

I acknowledge the member’s long-term interest in the issue and the good work of the cross-party group, which was very much involved in the development of the dementia strategy. The research network’s funding is secure until March 2012, as she said. Funding for research into dementia is important and I am sure that that will help to inform discussions on future funding of the network.

Amendments 1, 2, 4 and 5 relate to the procedure that surrounds orders for the suspension of the review system during periods of epidemics or other similar emergencies. As the bill stands, to revoke such orders when the period of emergency is over, it would be necessary to use the same emergency affirmative procedure as applies to the making of such orders. The amendments will enable negative procedure to be used to revoke such orders, which we consider is more appropriate. Amendment 6 is consequential on amendments that were made to section 28 at stage 2. It will simply remove a reference to “regulations” that is no longer relevant to that section. I move amendment 1. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to. Section 8—Review of medical certificates of cause of death

I have to say that I did not know that we had such grammar boffins in the chamber. One learns something new every day. As amendment 3 might assist the reader of the legislation in understanding what can occur during the review process, I welcome it.

I do not support amending the bill to introduce discretionary powers to create electronic medical certificate of cause of death forms for use during the test site phase. That would be unnecessary, and would be likely to delay the start of the test sites in the new system. I have already made a commitment to exploring the feasibility of electronic MCCDs. Such a feasibility study would examine various options, including the different information technology solutions that are available and the different methods of verifying the identity of the certifying doctor. As we all know, devising IT systems can be complex, costly and time consuming, with long lead-in periods. We are talking about a new IT system for which the business case has not yet been made and the costs, practical considerations and timescales have not yet been fully explored. I do not wish to jeopardise the implementation of the new death certification system. It is fair to say that the new processes that the bill will introduce mark a significant departure from current practice. There is a risk that trying to test the operation of a completely new process at the same time as introducing a new electronic system would be overly complex and that the operational difficulties of one might have a negative impact on the other. For that reason, we think that it is sensible to test the operation of the system outlined in the bill first. Only then will we be able to judge whether it is necessary to introduce electronic completion of MCCDs. However, as I have said, I see the potential benefits of electronic completion of MCCDs and I undertake to consider the feasibility of introducing such a system. Amendment 7 would require additional information to be added to the MCCD for use during the piloting of the test sites. I cannot support that. Again, there is a risk that making the inclusion of that information mandatory would result in complications and cause delays during the testing of the new system. For example, in cases in which the deceased was to be cremated, the amendment would require the recording of the next of kin’s acceptance that the information on the MCCD form was correct. Delays could quite easily result if there were difficulties locating the next of kin or it was not known at the point of completion of the MCCD whether the deceased wished to be cremated. Further, it would potentially be insensitive to pressure the next of kin to make a decision about the adequacy of the MCCD so close to the death. That is why we have provided an opportunity in the bill for certain family members to apply within three years of the death to have the MCCD reviewed by an independent medical reviewer. Also, we do not think that it is appropriate to require the other additional information to be included in every MCCD used during the piloting of the test sites. That would make completion of the forms more complex and time consuming, which might have a negative impact on the main objective of testing the system that is set out in the bill. The bill makes provision to allow additional medical information to be included in MCCDs. The General Register Office for Scotland has recently consulted on that issue. There is therefore no need for that information to be added to MCCDs for the purposes of the test sites. The results from the test sites may lead to some of the changes that Richard Simpson is arguing for today. For those reasons, I oppose amendment 7.

We are debating a bill that will provide us with a proportionate and robust approach to the scrutiny of death certification. The proposals will lead to a modern Scottish death certification system that is sensitive to bereaved families’ needs. The bill will introduce a single system of independent scrutiny of medical death certificates that will apply to deaths that do not require a procurator fiscal investigation. The system is based on one of the models that the independent expert burial and cremation review group proposed. The review group was established in 2005 and reported in 2007. Last year, I consulted on all its recommendations. The bill relates to the certification of death aspects. Most consultation respondents supported our preferred model, which forms the basis of the bill. They included all the respondents who represented patients and consumers, as well as the majority of local authorities and of public bodies and half the medical respondents, including the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow and the General Medical Council. The new system will replace the current crematoria medical referee system and the associated forms and will therefore abolish all the cremation fees that families pay to doctors. The bill will remove the historical differences between cremation and burial, which were introduced when medicine was less advanced and when it was believed that more stringent measures were needed for cremations, because the evidence of the body would be destroyed. In fact, as the independent expert review group concluded, after a body has been embalmed and buried, often little forensic information is available even when the body is exhumed, particularly if it is exhumed after a significant time. This is why we came to the view that the additional checks in cremation cases led to expenses and delays without providing benefits for families or value for money. No death certification system can guarantee to prevent criminal activity such as that which Harold Shipman carried out, but our proposals are robust and have been designed to deter malpractice and provide public reassurance. It is important that the new death certification system will benefit bereaved families, to whom we owe a duty to ensure that any new system will minimise distress, avoid undue delay to funerals and be affordable. Nowadays, the majority of families opt for cremation. Once the new system commences, they will no longer have to pay cremation fees, which are currently £147 plus an additional fee for the medical referee. Instead, a universal fee of about £30 will be charged. In addition, individuals will for the first time be empowered to request a review of the information in the certificate if they have concerns. I stress that, at the heart of the future Scottish system, the emphasis will be on improving the quality of death certification. To that purpose, the independent medical reviewers will undertake 1,000 random comprehensive reviews, as well as additional targeted reviews. Actions following those reviews will be part of a quality improvement programme, and will include direct feedback to the certifying doctors, further investigations of the case, links with clinical governance, and training and educational activities. The role of the new national statistician will be important. Regular statistical tests will be run on all death data and any unusual results will be identified and reported to the medical reviewers. Furthermore, following concerns expressed in the committee about deterrence and public reassurance, medical reviewers will also randomly scrutinise 25 per cent of all deaths—around 13,500 in all—by way of shorter level 1 reviews. That means that, when those deaths are combined with the number of cases that are reported to the procurator fiscal each year, around 50 per cent of deaths in Scotland will be subject to scrutiny. In other words, a doctor will have a 1 in 2 chance of their certificate being scrutinised. At stage 2, we introduced amendments in response to concerns raised by the Health and Sport Committee and by stakeholders about where responsibility for checking foreign certificates associated with deaths overseas should lie. I reflected on that matter and listened to stakeholder concerns about the proposals in the bill to give that function to superintendents at local burial grounds and crematoria. The bill was then amended at stage 2 to require the medical reviewers office to carry out that function instead. The bill’s fee provisions have been amended to allow for fees to be set below cost recovery. That follows a commitment that I made earlier, when I outlined additional reviews that will give rise to increased costs but which are to be paid for by the Scottish Government rather than through fees. The fee therefore will remain at around £30 per case, including costs for collecting the charge. We also amended the bill to clarify that we do not intend to charge a fee for the checking of foreign certificates. If the bill is approved today, we will consult further on operational matters and the secondary legislation that will be required to implement the system. We acknowledge the need to continue to work with stakeholders, including the general public, on the test sites—which are scheduled for the following year—before the implementation of the new system, which is scheduled to take place during 2013-14. Of course, it is not just a matter of legislation and guidance; good communication and awareness raising will also be key activities in the next phases. I believe that we have a solid base on which to build and I look forward to the work coming to fruition. I thank the Health and Sport Committee for its sterling work on this bill. As ever, the process has been very constructive. I also thank the committee’s clerks, who worked very hard, and I put on record my thanks to the bill team, who took on a significant piece of work with this bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The debate has shown that, although there are still differences of opinion on some matters, the Parliament has engaged positively with the bill and has raised some important issues, which is encouraging. I have listened with great interest to the many and varied points that have been made about the proposals and I will try to respond to as many of them as possible. Richard Simpson has, with some justification, doggedly pursued the issue of electronic medical certificates of cause of death. I envisage that work will start very soon on scoping the feasibility study on electronic MCCDs, and in the spirit of consensus I say to Richard Simpson that some of his pointers on where the starting point should be—instead of starting from scratch—are very helpful. He also asked a specific question about the charge for overseas deaths, and I can confirm that the £30 fee will apply in those circumstances. It is worth putting on record my response to Richard Simpson’s point about the CHI number, which he raised in debating the amendments. I confirm that the General Register Office for Scotland already plans to add that to the MCCD, which I hope the member will welcome. Mary Scanlon made a number of points in her opening and closing remarks, and I will pick up on one in particular: health care associated infection. We should bear in mind that the MCCD is a record of the cause of death and as such should not list all the conditions that the patient had at the time of death. Mary Scanlon will be aware that an inquiry is currently examining the outbreak of Clostridium difficile in the Vale of Leven hospital. The inquiry’s terms of reference require an investigation into the recording of deaths associated with C diff in the NHS for the purposes of death certification. It might be premature to pre-empt the outcome, but I am sure that Mary Scanlon and many others will consider the specific issue and any recommendations that emerge.

There is a difference between that and a list of every condition, as I am sure we agree. Ross Finnie made a number of points and I am pleased that he found the letter on the statistical basis of the findings helpful. He raised the need for scrutiny to be open and transparent. I point out to him that the senior medical reviewer must provide an annual review of medical reviewers’ activities, which, I hope, will aid the transparency of the process. I acknowledge Ian McKee’s interest in these issues, which he has pursued rigorously through the bill’s various stages. I know that he is yet to be persuaded on some matters, and I hope that the test site process will offer him and the other members who have raised concerns some reassurance on those issues. Rhoda Grant suggested that one of the test sites should be in an island authority, and we can certainly consider that, although as yet no decisions have been made about definite locations. We will take on board and reflect on her point about the implications of poor weather and transport disruption. Stewart Stevenson highlighted the importance of being responsive to faith group issues. I think that that has been the case throughout the bill process, and our reassurances have been well received by the faith communities, which is to be welcomed. Yet again, the bill process has in many ways demonstrated the work of the Parliament at its best. It has worked very effectively in taking through the bill, hearing the evidence and coming up with a series of recommendations that I have no doubt have improved the bill. I do not see that as a negative at all: it is very positive that the Parliament has had—as in so many cases—a positive impact on a piece of legislation by improving it. We have an opportunity to reform and modernise death certification, and I invite the Parliament to agree the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, which I believe will achieve that.

Will the member give way on that point?

I welcome the debate, not least because it provides quite a rare opportunity. It has well and truly exposed the Liberal Democrats’ hypocrisy. I have found myself agreeing with members I would not normally agree with. Let us stand back and look at the context of the debate, which is important. In Westminster, Liberal Democrat MPs are cutting the Scottish budget by £1.3 billion, and Liberal Democrat MSPs are refusing to enter into a debate in the Scottish Parliament about the consequences of those cuts for Scottish services. The Liberal Democrats have no ideas. Every idea that is put forward, whether it is on police, fire or health and social care services, is opposed. I will go further than that. If a party has had a hand in cutting the Scottish budget, it almost has more of a responsibility to come to the Scottish Parliament with ideas about how the consequences of those cuts can be dealt with. What we have heard this morning has really exposed the Liberal Democrats. They say one thing in one place and another thing in another place. Cathie Craigie put things well when she said that they have “a face for every door”. One thing that has not emerged in the debate is the real irony in the talk about health and social care. The lead agency model, which is the SNP’s preferred model, originated in Highland Council, which the Liberal Democrats run. I pay tribute to Michael Foxley for having the initiative to look at reforming public services, but his Scottish Parliament colleagues come here and criticise the very model that the Liberal Democrats are pursuing in Highland Council. I am surprised that the hypocrisy and astonishing irony of that has not come out in the debate so far.

It ill behoves the Liberal Democrats to question the savings that will be made through reforming public services, because in Westminster they have pushed through the abolition of quango after quango for the reason that it will save money. It is absolutely right to get rid of many of those quangos, but surely the Liberal Democrats cannot use the financial argument for a bonfire of the quangos in London and come here and say, “Reforming services will save no money.” That cannot be correct. Surely public services in England are not so different from public services in Scotland in that regard. The Liberal Democrats cannot say one thing in London and something completely different in Edinburgh. Jeremy Purvis cannot have a face for every door—people will see through that. They are already seeing through it. The Scottish Government is committed to integrating health and social care. I will stick to those issues for the remainder of my comments, because police and fire services have been well debated this morning. Our goal is to ensure that people have access to sustainable, appropriate services that meet their needs, not services that are planned and delivered according to organisational boundaries. Like Jackie Baillie, I have worked on the front line in social care. I am struck by the fact that three of the main parties in Parliament have reached the conclusion that we must have a single, integrated system of health and social care. The only exception is the Liberal Democrats. That is interesting. I need remind no one here of the financial constraints that face us. Front-line services that protect the most vulnerable in our society should be the priority for every member of Parliament. For our part, we are prepared to have a dialogue with others about the best way to ensure that the front line is maintained. We know from the evidence from our reshaping care for older people programme that we have to act now and that we have to act decisively. We have to be ambitious and innovative to ensure that we meet people’s needs, particularly those of our growing elderly population. As Jackie Baillie rightly said, after all the years of good progress in some areas but not enough progress in others, we cannot wait for some future local solution to emerge and for everyone suddenly to agree. Older people cannot wait for everyone to wake up and smell the coffee. It would be irresponsible of members not to realise that. Carrying on with services as they are currently configured—the status quo, which the Liberal Democrats support—is not affordable. It will cost us an extra £1.1 billion by 2016. If we do not do something, that resource will come out of the front line, which is unacceptable. Our goal instead is to help older people to stay in their own homes or a homely setting for as long as possible. That is what people want and it is what clinicians tell us is the best for people, whenever possible. To achieve that, we have to take responsibility nationally and locally for good stewardship of the public pound. Of course, at the end of the day, the public pound is the public pound, whether we are talking about the NHS or local government. What we have to decide as leaders is how that public pound is best deployed to keep people safe in their own homes in these times of budget constraints. Where does that leave us? There is only one answer in health and social care, and that is a single, integrated system. Yes, we have to have a debate about the best model. The lead agency model has great merits, because of its simplicity. However, the destination for three of the parties that we have heard from this morning is not dissimilar. The good thing to emerge from this debate is the responsible and mature approach of many in Parliament to these important and difficult issues. The one glaring exception is the Liberal Democrats. This morning, they have been found wanting.

The integration of health care and social care is a key issue for people who live with conditions such as Parkinson’s disease. We are tackling that in several ways. In the next financial year, we will invest £2 million to support local partnerships with the integration agenda. We have set up a £70 million change fund to increase communities’ capacity to support people through partnerships between health care, social care and the third sector. Self-directed support has great potential to help people to integrate all the services that they need. That approach, of course, applies to people with Parkinson’s disease.

The lead agency model is one model for fully integrating health care and social care, in which the council commissions the NHS to deliver social care under one system. As in the Highland area, discussions can take place about what the local authority may commission to be delivered. The basic point is that the outcome for service users and carers is that their services will be delivered under a single system. I know that Labour takes a different position on the delivery model—it proposes a national care service—but I hope that we can agree that the outcomes for older people, people with Parkinson’s and people with other conditions are the most important thing. In my view, the outcomes will be best served by a single system and an integrated model.

It is important that we establish the facts. Mr Fraser is right to say that there has been a reduction in seven health boards, but he is not right to say that there has been a reduction across Scotland. Actually, there has been a 6.4 per cent increase in the number of health visitors. It is also important to say that there has been an 82 per cent increase in the number of public health nurses. We need to be accurate.

I will make the same point that I made to Murdo Fraser. The Hall 4 guidance has been reviewed, and the new guidance was launched last January. It supplements the existing guidance, and—to address the nub of the issue—allows that there must be discretion, which is what health visitors were seeking. They did not want to be constrained by guidance that would not allow them to use their professional judgment. I hope that Des McNulty welcomes that.

Does the member share my understanding that nurses coming into the profession want that kind of flexibility to allow them to make career choices as they go through their professional life?

A very good example of that is the emphasis that is being put on self-management, which is about people being helped to manage their own condition. That is extremely effective.

Why not?

I certainly welcome the contributions to this morning’s important debate. It was very consensual in the main, with one notable exception—as always. I want to take a moment to dwell on a bit of an uncomfortable truth. I say this not in a partisan way—even though it is me saying it—because it applies to us all. There is a bit of an irony in the fact that we are having this debate the day after the motion on the budget was passed, because throughout the negotiations with every party in the budget process, the early years and early intervention agenda was never raised. I want to dwell on that for a moment. Perhaps what Karen Whitefield said has some truth to it: we all want short-term outcomes and gains for the things on which we choose to spend money, but this is an area in which that clearly does not happen. Perhaps when we were all talking about our priorities during the negotiations, that was somewhere in our mind, but we must challenge ourselves on that. It is worth us all reflecting on it. If we are truly to translate what we all say and believe—and there is clearly a consensus around this—into action, we will require collectively to make some difficult decisions about where not to invest. Murdo Fraser suggested that we should not invest in abolishing prescription charges, but why prescription charges? It could have been any of the things that were put forward as alternatives to the budget. I hope that Murdo Fraser takes that point in the spirit in which it was intended. We all have something to reflect on. I agree with the point that a number of members made about successive Governments having had the best of intentions. Richard Simpson is right to some degree: a lot is happening, but perhaps too much is happening and what is happening is too disparate. Perhaps we need to reach conclusions about what we think will work and do that well everywhere. That is difficult, given some of the governance arrangements in our key agencies, but perhaps we need to begin to think about some of those issues. I will go on to say a little bit about why I think that the family-nurse partnership is a good candidate for that. In January, I launched a number of key documents that underpin our commitment, some of which have been referred to already: “A Refreshed Framework for Maternity Care in Scotland”; “Reducing Antenatal Health Inequalities”; “Improving Maternal and Infant Nutrition: A Framework for Action”; and “A New Look at Hall 4—The Early Years—Good Health for Every Child”. All that is good and we are going in the right direction. I suppose that the challenge is to make it happen and to overcome some of the workforce issues, where integrated working is not happening as we would like. Richard Simpson ended on the lack of joined-upness. Interestingly, if we look at Highland, where a lot of interesting things are going on, we see that there the GIRFEC model is fully implemented. That model very much overcomes the problems that Richard Simpson mentioned with different records and a lack of communication, which are so significant for child protection. The challenge is to ensure that GIRFEC is happening everywhere, and that is not without its challenges. We know what works, but we need partners throughout the country to make GIRFEC the priority that it should be. Richard Simpson also talked about the alignment of professionals—such as paediatricians and paediatric nurses coming together with social care staff—and how we can make that happen. Again, interesting work is being done on that in Highland under the lead agency model. There has been a lot of focus on the adult social care element of that, but there has been less attention on the fact that children’s services are also coming under one roof. There might be something in that. We talk about people working together, but perhaps they actually need to be together to make things work. Perhaps we need to rethink how we structure the workforce. I will make a further comment on the subject of the workforce before it goes out of my mind. A few comments have been made this morning about who the workforce is in this important area. Christine Grahame, I think, made the point that the workforce is not just a health visiting workforce but must be seen in its broader context. There is a reasonable story to tell on that. The number of district nurses has gone up by 544 since 2007. There are another 150 public health nurses, another 123 health visitors and, indeed, 71 more school nurses. Those of you who are quick at maths will realise that that means that we have nearly 900 additional staff whose focus is very much on this area. The question is whether they are being deployed in the most effective way, because it is what we do with the workforce that counts, and I think that there are some issues. We await with anticipation the modernising community nursing board’s report, which will be published at the end of the year, because we have to take a hard look at how we deploy those resources, the training that staff receive, the skill set that they have, and what we expect them to deliver and prioritise. We need to be clear about that. I will touch briefly—because I am running out of time—on family-nurse partnerships. I take on board Richard Simpson’s point that the programme is expensive, but the best programmes are not always the cheapest ones. The evidence that we should acknowledge is not necessarily Tony Blair’s report on family-nurse partnerships but the huge amount of American evidence that shows that, over the lifetime of the child, the investment undoubtedly produces benefits. Under the programme, the vulnerable family has a close relationship with the nurse, who is often the only stable influence on the family, because they might not have the granny who can give advice and there might not be anybody else around. The nurse can be a solid rock and open doors not just on health matters but on many other issues that the family will face. There is solid evidence that we reap the benefits when the child reaches their teenage years, so I am a fan of the family-nurse partnership approach.

I think the approach works. We look forward to doing more with it, and I think the evidence will speak for itself.

We are encouraging implementation of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland’s clinical standards for neurological health services. That will help to improve access to services for those with neurological conditions such as Huntington’s disease, wherever in Scotland they live.

I am aware that there are specialist nurses in eight NHS boards. Obviously, we would encourage more specialist nurses to be recruited, particularly given that we know that they are good value for money, and we encourage boards to do that. Also, it is fair to say that the progress that we believe will be made through the investment in the neurological managed clinical networks—which we have given money to each board to develop—will make a real difference to patient care. I am certainly willing to have a look at the specific issue that the member raised. I am sure that there are good reasons for that related to the local arrangements, but I am willing to have a look at the issue in more detail and I will write to the member.

Scottish Government spending on support to carers has not reduced. With the approval of the budget, members will be pleased to note that the £1 million that we allocated for 2010-11 for short breaks will now be rolled forward to 2015, making £5 million in total over that period. Now that the budget has been approved, there is £5 million for the carer information strategies in 2011-12, and both of those programmes support carers in remote and rural areas.

When they are considering how to spend their share of the £5 million for carer information strategies, we would expect health boards to consider local need. They should be discussing with local carers and carer organisations the priorities for spending the money. I suggest that Jamie Stone raise that point with the health board as a possible way forward.

I believe that it certainly is, and I will be happy to write to the member with more detail of the plan and how I see it being taken forward.

The Scottish Government, through a series of measures, has taken significant steps to increase the number of people registered with an NHS dentist in the north-east. From June 2007 to June 2010, patient registrations have increased by 146,992 in NHS Grampian and NHS Tayside.

This is a very important issue, and we have been trying to focus in particular on areas where there are still access issues. Indeed, we have been very successful in that respect, although I know that the area that Nigel Don represents still faces some challenges. We have the remote areas allowance, which provides up to £9,000 for independent and salaried dentists who are classed as remote, and we are also encouraging dentists to locate in towns such as Montrose. Indeed, the health board has been very effective in encouraging dentists to set up in areas where people might still require access to an NHS dentist. The member should perhaps contact the health board to get a bit more detail on the future plans for that particular area.

The number of dentists coming into the NHS has increased over the past two or three years and I find it very encouraging that so many dentists see the NHS as their future in their profession. Five years ago, there was a feeling that dentists were drifting out of the NHS, and the change in that situation is down to the significant investment that has been made in NHS dental services. The NHS can make dentists a good offer. Although I do not have specific figures on the number of dentists who left and then have come back into the NHS, the increase that I referred to is likely to be a mix of those dentists and, of course, new dentists coming out of our dental schools and wanting to work in the NHS in Scotland.

We are expecting significant progress this year. Of course as the member will be aware, and as I have said in response to previous questions, despite our efforts, the recruitment of dentists and the increase in registrations across Scotland, we have still faced a challenge in Portree. That is why it was right and proper to identify the area for investment through the primary care fund, and we certainly expect major progress to be made this year. I am very happy to provide the member with more detail of that plan.

The Scottish Government has been discussing the need for better integration of health and social care with a range of stakeholders over the past four years. As part of that work, NHS Highland and Highland Council decided to implement a lead agency model based on strong evidence of benefits for service users. We have now made it clear that that is our preferred model for integrating health and social care and a lead agency group will be established to take that work forward.

Yes, I can give that guarantee. Of course, the staff involved will also be fully consulted. When one speaks to service users and carers, it is clear that they want an integrated single system. After all, what matters to them are the outcomes of what is delivered and they, like me, feel that those outcomes can be significantly improved with a single system for the delivery of health and social care.

The governance structures will be those of the NHS. There are two key reasons for that. First, it makes more sense to me to deliver an integrated system through the wider geographical areas of the boards, given the economies of scale that are involved. Having said that, I think that it is important that local authorities continue to have an input to plans. Under the lead agency model, they will continue to do that. They will be the commissioners of services from the NHS, so they will not be excluded from the process. That is important. Secondly, under the new governance arrangements, it will be much easier to deliver a more consistent service throughout Scotland. The approach has a number of benefits; I have set out the key ones.

There are 451 individuals employed as part of the active schools network who are helping to provide opportunities for children and young people to be engaged in physical activity and sport. In addition, there are over 10,000 volunteers, made up of teachers, parents, coaches and students, who all help to provide opportunities for children to take part. In 2009-10, they delivered 5 million opportunities for children to take part in sport and physical activities in and around schools. Discussions are on-going with local authorities for 2011-12, but I understand that all have indicated a commitment to the active schools programme and that sportscotland will continue to provide investment of £13 million this year.

Yes, we are working hard to ensure that that happens, as is sportscotland, which has developed a close relationship with each local authority. I am very confident that not only will the active schools network go from strength to strength but—and this is important—we will see even more opportunities for children to take part in sport and physical activities in and around schools. When we link this investment to the investment in community sport hubs around Scotland, we have good reason to be optimistic about it delivering real progress.

A publication date for the report on bone-anchored hearing aids, to which Linda Fabiani’s question refers, has yet to be agreed. However, when the audiology services advisory group met yesterday, it discussed the report’s final draft, so I fully expect it to be published very soon. I will send Linda Fabiani a copy of the report as soon as it becomes available.

Yes. I recognise Linda Fabiani’s interest in the matter, which she has pursued rigorously. She will be aware that the group’s report very much deals with that issue. As far as I am aware, it would have been discussed at yesterday’s meeting, although I will write to the member to confirm that. As I said in my initial answer, the report will be coming out very soon indeed, and its contents will, I hope, help to take the matter forward.

Local authorities, with their strategic partners at local level, are responsible for supporting local carers forums. In some areas, their responsibility might be devolved to regional umbrella voluntary bodies. Local authorities are also responsible for taking decisions on how regional care forums are supported.

I am aware of the issue, and my understanding is that Highland Community Care Forum has a service delivery contract with the Highland Council and the health board, covering a number of elements including support to some of the local forums in the authority area. The contract will end next month, although I understand that there are extensions for some elements, so as to maintain continuity of service. My officials have had contact with the council and the health board, which have provided assurances that there will be continued engagement on the part of the council and the board with the wide range of local forums across Highland. My understanding is that both organisations seek to enhance the infrastructure that supports local and community groups to organise very important activities that promote the health and wellbeing of older people in particular, as well as others in their communities. I certainly hope that the local forums will be able to continue and that a way forward can be found. On the question of independence, the forums will, no matter who supports them, maintain their independence, and that is right and proper.

National figures on the use of insulin pumps show that provision more than doubled between 2007 and 2009, albeit from a low baseline. We fully expect that when the Scottish diabetes survey for 2010 is published in April, it will show that that trend is continuing. The Scottish diabetes group will continue to monitor progress on a board-by-board basis on our behalf.

I very much recognise David Stewart’s long-standing interest in this area. As he is aware, we continue to encourage NHS boards to increase access to insulin pumps, but we must recognise that it is quite a complex process. A key factor is the availability of staff to deliver the very structured education programme that is associated with being on a pump; I know that David Stewart knows about that in great detail. It is step-by-step progress. We would all wish that it was quicker, but I am heartened that we are going in the right direction, albeit perhaps a bit more slowly than we would hope. As I said, it is hoped that the report will offer some more room for optimism when it is published in April by showing that the trend in the right direction is continuing.

I thank Des McNulty for once again bringing this important issue before Parliament. I begin by joining members who have paid tribute to the unstinting effort and commitment of all those who give so much of their time and energy to help Scotland’s magnificent hospices to continue to offer the highest quality of care to people in great need. As has been said, this is the second members’ business debate on St Margaret’s in under a year. I want it to be clear that we fully recognise the strength of local feeling about securing the future of the hospice. Members throughout the chamber have demonstrated the strength of cross-party support for the campaign. To date, it has remained a non-political campaign, and I urge all members to continue to make it so, because that is its strength. I do not intend to rehearse all the arguments and history in relation to St Margaret’s, not least because everybody in the chamber knows them well. I want to use the time to look forward. As members will know, St Margaret’s currently provides two discrete areas of care: the 30 continuing care beds, and palliative and end-of-life care provision. Both areas of care currently attract funding under separate arrangements from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. I put on record that no one has ever questioned the excellent quality of care that is offered by St Margaret’s. Nonetheless, as we have debated here before, the role of a health board is always to ensure that it provides health care services that best meet the needs of local people, which will sometimes require a review of services. A succession of local reviews identified an on-going need for 60 continuing care beds in the west of Glasgow, and the board gave notice at that time that it no longer required the beds that are provided by St Margaret’s. It is correct that the board wished to provide continuing care from Blawarthill hospital, but I clarify that that did not represent a simple transfer of beds from one location to another. It was the board’s intention to locate continuing care beds within the existing 60-bed capacity at Blawarthill, and it was that decision that resulted in the 30 beds at St Margaret’s being under question. Members will be aware that there have been significant recent developments in relation to the Blawarthill project. The developer of the site, which would have provided sheltered housing, mainstream housing, a nursing home and the 60 continuing care beds, is no longer in partnership with the nursing home provider that was procured to run the care home by Glasgow City Council. I understand that the council has indicated that it would need to restart the procurement process to identify a new provider and that that could take a further 12 months. The management of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde have carefully considered the implications of those developments, not least the prolonged delay in upgrading the existing continuing care accommodation at Blawarthill. In that context, the board has been in discussion with the council about the potential for using part of the site for its planned 120-bed care home for west Glasgow. The board will consider a paper at its next meeting on 15 February that will recommend the approval of further negotiations with the council about the future use of the site. On what implications those developments have on the board’s plan for continuing care provision in the west of the city, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has confirmed its intention to carry out a further review, as members have said. I have been assured that the review will consider all the viable options, including maintaining the 30 continuing care beds that are currently provided by St Margaret’s hospice. It is right that that review is completed by the end of the summer, as planned, because, as Des McNulty said, it is important that the uncertainty for staff and those who care deeply about St Margaret’s is not prolonged. However, it is important that the review is robust and takes full account of all the circumstances. Members will be aware that all boards are required to carry out their statutory obligation to engage appropriately with local people on the redesign of health care services. Any proposals that are considered major service change must be subject to formal public consultation and, ultimately, ministerial approval.

I understand Des McNulty’s frustration, which a number of members throughout the chamber share. I will try to be helpful in that regard. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has provided us with an unequivocal assurance that it will be willing to consider and discuss all viable options for future service provision, and the funding that goes with it, with the board of St Margaret’s. Let me be clear: we will ensure that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde gives full consideration to the issue of the continuing care beds at St Margaret’s. I urge St Margaret’s to take full advantage of what Ross Finnie quite rightly described as a new opportunity that has presented itself to find an agreement on the way forward. I understand that the health board intends to open up further discussions with the hospice in the coming weeks.

Des McNulty misunderstands what I said. I hope that he will not do that, because I think that we can seize this opportunity to get the result that he and many others have expressed a desire to achieve. We expect the discussions to start now. That is why I said “in the coming weeks”, not at the end of the summer. Des McNulty said—I hope that I am quoting him correctly—that he wanted to know that there would be a proper process and a proper discussion between the health board and St Margaret’s. What I am saying to Des McNulty tonight is that we can assure him that there will be a proper process and a proper discussion.

No thank you. I remain confident that, by working together, it is possible to seize the opportunity that has undoubtedly arisen through the situation at Blawarthill to have the discussion that perhaps should have happened, has not happened and should happen now about the option of retaining the beds at St Margaret’s. I understand the strength of feeling about that. For our part, we will ensure that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is at the table with an open mind. That is the role that I think is most appropriate for the Scottish Government to undertake. I can certainly give members throughout the chamber that commitment this evening. Meeting closed at 17:53.

Will the member give way on that point?

It is for national health service boards to determine their workforce requirements, including for specialist nurses, based on the clinical needs of the population and service developments in their area. Specialist nurses must also be seen in the context of the multiprofessional team that includes medical and allied health professionals in caring for those with specific conditions, including MS. NHS Western Isles is in the early stages of establishing a managed clinical network for neurological disorders, which will be an important and significant component of the delivery of appropriate care to those who have MS in the Western Isles.

If Rhoda Grant would like to write to me with more information about that, I would be happy to look at it. At the end of the day, however, it is for each NHS board to make its own provision. We very much value specialist nurses and I certainly look forward to seeing the Western Isles proceed with its development in that area. I am happy to look into the issue that Rhoda Grant raised.

I am pleased to open the debate on the general principles of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill. Before I turn to the substance of my speech, I want to thank a number of people. First, I thank the organisations and individuals who helped to shape the legislative proposals and those who provided evidence to the Health and Sport Committee—our proposals have benefited from their expertise and experience. Secondly, I thank Christine Grahame and the Health and Sport Committee for their detailed scrutiny of our proposals and considered conclusions in the stage 1 report. I stress that I will continue to listen to and work with stakeholders when taking forward the proposals in order to ensure that we have a sound and workable system. The bill will introduce a single system of independent scrutiny of medical death certificates that will apply to deaths that do not require a procurator fiscal investigation. It will replace the current crematoria medical referee system and associated forms and will, therefore, abolish the cremation fees that families pay to doctors. As well as removing historical differences between cremation and burial that were introduced when medicine was less advanced, the new system will provide us with a robust and modern approach to scrutiny of death. As the committee acknowledged in its scrutiny, a death certification system cannot prevent criminal activity of the kind that was carried out by Harold Shipman, but our proposals have been designed to deter malpractice and to provide public reassurance. They have been developed with the people who will be most affected in mind. Foremost of those are bereaved families, to whom we owe a duty to ensure that the new system minimises distress, avoids undue delay to funerals, and is affordable. Consequently, the reforms will result in a financially sustainable and proportionate system. At the heart of the new system will be an emphasis on improving the quality of death certification. Improved quality of information on cause of death will help us to understand the distribution and determinants of mortality and to identify at-risk populations. It will inform quality improvements in national health service services and provide better information to help us to deal with outbreaks of infectious disease. The provisions will create the posts of medical reviewer and senior medical reviewer, who will be independent medical practitioners. Their key function will be to review death certificates. The bill provides powers for the reviewers to scrutinise an agreed number of death certificates each year. Those arrangements have been discussed in detail with the committee. Medical reviewers will undertake 1,000 comprehensive, random, real-time level 2 reviews and they will carry out additional targeted reviews, when they believe that there may still be cause for concern, after discussion with the certifying doctor. Crucially, the bill will also for the first time empower individuals to request a review, where they have concerns. Taken together, the package of reviews will amount to around 2,000 cases a year. Furthermore, medical reviewers will randomly scrutinise 25 per cent of all deaths—around 13,500 in all—by way of shorter level 1 reviews. Medical reviewers will also assist families and authorise funding for post mortems in certain circumstances if the death has occurred abroad, the cause of death is unknown and the funeral is to take place in Scotland. I now turn to the key issues raised in the stage 1 report. The report highlights a number of matters on which I have been asked to report back to the Health and Sport Committee. It also contains some specific recommendations for amendments, which I have considered. I will, of course, consider those points carefully and sympathetically and report back in detail to the committee shortly. I am grateful for the committee’s recommendation that the general principles of the bill be agreed. I am also grateful for its general welcome for our proposals to reform the death certification system and to align procedures between burial and cremation. I also welcome its response to the additional proposals that I outlined during stage 1. The appropriate level of scrutiny has clearly been a key consideration for all of us. We have worked hard with the committee to try to reach a satisfactory conclusion. I will clarify what the proposals entail and reflect on the reasons for reviewing the current system. Under the current system, in which up to 3 doctors countersign cremation forms and receive a substantial fee from families, there is no guarantee of detecting malpractice. We know from discussions with many stakeholders and from the conclusions of the independent review group—which examined the subject in recent years—that existing checks may, in some cases, be perfunctory. In addition, quality can be poor and there is no systematic approach to improving quality nationally. We should not forget that the failings of the current system led the previous Administration to establish the independent review group and to the group’s recommendations for change. Our proposals, as they will be amended after stage 1, will deliver a deterrent effect, be proportionate and deliver on quality. On deterrence, level 1 reviews will maintain the checks by a second and now fully independent doctor for 25 per cent of all death certificates, with an option for each of those reviews to be increased to a more detailed level 2 review if required. Level 2 reviews will provide detailed checks of 1,000 certificates. Importantly, those checks will be entirely random and doctors will not be in a position to predict when their certificates will be scrutinised. Additional targeted scrutiny will also be carried out where medical reviewers have identified issues locally, based on analysis by the new posts of statisticians who will examine all death data. Further reviews will also be initiated by families or other interested persons. In fact, our proposed reviews, combined with the number of cases that are reported to the procurator fiscal each year, will mean that around 50 per cent of deaths in Scotland will be subject to more robust scrutiny than under the current system. The bill’s provisions on quality will establish a quality improvement programme to change behaviour and practice around death certification. The programme will place the medical reviewers’ reviews within an audit cycle of continuous improvement. Informed by the evidence that has been gained from a number of sources—including NHS deaths data, General Register Office for Scotland statistics, national statistics and patterns of death produced by the national mortalities statistician, random reviews and interested party reviews—the reviewers will carry out interventions ranging from targeted reviews, to critical clinical governance links with NHS boards, to training. Those interventions are intended to follow up concerns and bring about changes in behaviour and practice—some immediate, others over longer periods of time—and will be monitored so that they can be adjusted over time. The 1,000 random level 2 reviews will provide a Scotland-level benchmark and year-on-year monitoring information that will allow us to gauge progress in driving up quality standards for death certification. The number of reviews that will be conducted remains flexible and can be changed upwards or, possibly, downwards in the light of the evidence that we gather from early implementation of the new system, including the proposed test sites. Our proposals on proportionality will maintain an appropriate balance between cost and scrutiny. Let us not forget that any increase in scrutiny will have an impact on costs. The proposed system is affordable to the public and I have agreed with the committee that the Scottish Government will bear the cost of the additional reviews that we discussed at stage 1. That amounts to around £600,000 in addition to the set-up costs that we already intend to fund. The anticipated fee charged to the public is £30. For those who currently pay cremation fees, which is around 60 per cent of the public, that represents a substantial saving of about £120. I appreciate the committee’s positive comments about the setting of the fee and the abolition of the higher cremation fee in favour of a lower universal fee for all deaths. We will continue to work constructively with stakeholders on developing an effective fee collection mechanism. The proposed legislation has been designed to require an annual report to Parliament on the activities and performance of the medical reviewers. That will allow for a transparent examination of the operation and impact of the new system by all interested parties, including colleagues in the Parliament, and for adjustments to be made to the level of scrutiny, as required. I have also committed to report back to the Health and Sport Committee following the operation of the test sites before full roll-out. That will take account of stakeholder input and will feed into the monitoring and evaluation plans. The committee considers that faith groups’ needs—particularly the needs of the Jewish and Muslim faith groups—for a quick funeral should be specifically reflected in the bill. I assure members that we have carefully considered the issue and have met faith groups’ representatives. We have considered the committee’s point thoroughly. The expedited procedure that is included in the bill is intended to benefit a range of individuals who need to arrange a funeral quickly. That includes faith groups, although it will cover other circumstances. I welcome the committee’s attention to the impact of the proposals on certain remote and island communities. I confirm that it is absolutely not my intention to disadvantage remote communities. We will examine that aspect specifically during the test-site phase before implementation. We will also consult funeral industry representatives from remote areas regarding the specific issues that are raised. The committee also raised the question of where responsibility for checking certificates that are associated with deaths overseas should lie. Having reflected on that matter and listened to stakeholder concerns about the proposals in the bill to give that function to superintendents at local burial grounds and crematoria, I will amend the bill at stage 2 to require the medical reviewers office to carry out that function instead. I hope that that will address the concerns of stakeholders and the committee. I welcome the committee’s comments on training and education. The bill seeks to improve existing training requirements and we will be examining the issue of supervision and training in more detail. On electronic certification, I recognise the potential benefits that it could bring and I will further explore the feasibility of introducing such a system. Legislation already exists to allow for the introduction of electronic medical certificates of the cause of death, should implementation be desired. The committee expressed a concern that the number of medical reviewers might not be adequate. We believe that our figures are robust, and they have been revised to take account of the additional proposed reviews. However, the number of reviewers is not specified in the bill and can therefore be adjusted. Furthermore, in the year before implementation, we will run test sites, a key evaluation aim of which will be to provide more detailed information on the duration of reviews. That will let us know how many staff are required. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill.

The 50 per cent includes referrals to the procurator fiscal.

I thank everyone who spoke in the debate, which has been—as the stage 1 report is—constructive and has brought to the fore important issues in relation to all the subjects that the bill covers. Before I talk about those issues, I will take a moment to reinforce the importance of the measures that are set out in the bill, which are firmly embedded in the Scottish Government’s aim “to deliver the highest quality healthcare services”, as we set out in “The Healthcare Quality Strategy for NHSScotland”. As I made clear in my opening speech, the bill will deliver a single system of independent scrutiny of all deaths that do not require a procurator fiscal investigation. There is no doubt that the current arrangements for death certification require reform, as many members said. The provisions in the bill will introduce a new and modern approach to scrutiny of death. The current approach is based on double or triple-checking the certification for cremation, at a cost to families of £147 and with no link to quality improvement, and there is currently no scrutiny of deaths when burials are conducted. The approach to which we propose to move is intelligence led, targeted and based on quality improvement. It does not discriminate between methods of disposal of the body. It is based on random checking of certificates, which is followed up in an audit cycle, and supported by improvements in training and education. I confirm for Richard Simpson that 25 per cent of deaths are currently reported to the procurator fiscal: that covers unexpected or sudden deaths and deaths that occur under suspicious circumstances. That will not change; indeed, our proposals will result in around 50 per cent of all deaths being subjected to detailed scrutiny. I hope that that will provide some reassurance to the public—I will come to Ross Finnie’s point in a moment, because it is important—and act as a deterrent against malpractice. I have listened with great interest to the many and varied points that members have made about the proposals, and I will now address as many of those as I can cover—which, given the time, will probably be all of them. Christine Grahame and a number of others talked about an electronic system. I accept that that was mentioned in the review group’s report, but it did not go into any detail. There was a passing reference, but there was no detailed evidence or scrutiny in terms of a cost benefit analysis. As I have said, we should consider what can be done in that regard, but I caution against Richard Simpson’s suggestion that we wait for an electronic system before we use the test sites, because that would lead to huge delays and to an immediate increase in cost to develop that technology. We should work on the technological requirements to get something up and running before roll-out, but people talk about electronic systems as if they can be taken off the shelf and plugged in. We all know that introducing electronic systems in the NHS and in public services generally is difficult and expensive, and takes time. We need to be aware of that before we put down preconditions, but I have made a commitment to look at the matter, certainly while the test sites are on-going.

That was a very helpful intervention. Of course, we would expect the starting point to involve looking at what is already there rather than at developing something from scratch, but we will take the process forward as planned. Richard Simpson also talked about training. Junior doctors already receive training in death certification, and their competencies are tested and they are supervised in completing certificates in their first year. However, I have listened carefully to what has been said about training and education and I will reflect on that.

I would prefer to go away and reflect on Helen Eadie’s point rather than try to give a response just now, but I will certainly look into that matter in more detail. Richard Simpson also raised the matter of viewing the body, which has been an issue throughout the debate. It comes down to a decision about proportionality. A trained professional will always examine the body to verify that life is extinct, and I think that everyone accepts that that is the case. As I said earlier, 25 per cent of deaths are referred to the procurator fiscal if they are unexpected, sudden or suspicious. The doctors who took part in the review process advised us that viewing a body is generally of no greater assistance than the medical records, and I and my officials have said that during the committee process. There is a judgment to be made about how important viewing the body is in the process. Mary Scanlon and Rhoda Grant both raised issues concerning remote and island communities, and it will be important to pick up those issues during the test site period. As I think I said at committee, one of the test sites will cover a remote and rural area. In the meantime, officials are contacting the relevant funeral industry and local authority representatives to discuss the issues in preparation for the next phase. We are very much sighted on some of the concerns that have been raised by Mary Scanlon and Rhoda Grant. I do not think that there should be concerns about implants, which Mary Scanlon also spoke about. In the future, details will be captured on amended MCCD forms across the UK by certifying doctors who have access to medical records. The current practice will continue: funeral directors will check whether implants such as pacemakers have been removed, and they will make any arrangements for any internal devices to be removed before disposal takes place. Funeral directors’ technicians are trained to remove such devices. Alternatively, they will get a medical practitioner to remove them. I turn now to a point that Ross Finnie made, because it was one of the critical points of the debate. He talked about the 10 per cent rate of sampling, and about whether or not the proposed compromise on the increase in the proportion of sampling is adequate. There is, of course, a debate to be had on the matter. At stage 1, the committee heard from the statisticians with whom we have been working. To give some reassurance on the issue, we are happy to write to the committee with more detail regarding the consideration that has been made, in order to help the committee to understand how the statisticians came to some of their judgments. I think that was one of the main points that Ross Finnie was driving at. Reference has been made to Dr Jeremy Thomas’s evidence, which was quoted by the committee in its stage 1 report with regard to the 10 per cent sample size, which Dr Thomas said was necessary to have “a realistic chance” of identifying errors. Dr Thomas has confirmed that that refers to review procedures for diagnostic histopathology. For members who, like me, do not know what histopathology is, it is “the microscopic examination of tissue in order to study the manifestations of disease.” The issue is whether or not the 10 per cent sample that has been referred to in that context is really comparable with the sample sizes for death certification. I am not saying that the point is wrong, or that it is like comparing apples with pears, but we need to be cautious about the 10 per cent figure and about what was meant by it.

I am happy to give that reassurance and to come back to the member on that important point. Ian McKee raised the issue of delegating the functions of medical reviewers for training and education. I confirm that that does not mean that third parties cannot exercise that role. The purpose of the bill’s provisions on that is to ensure that functions are carried out only by a dedicated group of persons. The reviewer’s role is one of leadership; it is not to take over functions that are already carried out by others, for example the royal colleges. Rhoda Grant made an important point about whether people might be put off from registering deaths because of fees. It is currently a statutory duty to register a death, and that will not change. Equally, although the intention is to collect the new statutory fee at the point of registration, it will proceed regardless of whether payment is made at that point. Under the current system, most people who register a death pay a fee to obtain a full extract of the entry in the register of deaths. Collection and reimbursement of the new statutory fee will follow the same approach. For those reasons, we do not consider that the requirement to pay a fee will deter people from registering a death. However, we will monitor the situation.

Part of the solution to that will be communication about the new procedures. We will have to look at how we can send out a reassuring message. The important point is that registration will proceed regardless of whether payment is made at that point. Perhaps we need to pick up on the issue of communication to the public about the process so that we can give reassurance. I take great comfort from the fact that there is a desire across the chamber to look at the issues and to come to some conclusions. We have made a lot of progress along that road already. There might be a few issues to be resolved, but I am sure that we can resolve them. I believe that the proposals that are before the Parliament will provide robust deterrence and reassurance to the public, although I accept that we need to come back to the committee on some points. It will also harness the benefits of a targeted quality improvement approach that is proportionate and keeps the financial burden on the Government, as well as on bereaved families, at a reasonable level. Michael Matheson reminded us all that, for every increase, whether it be in the level of scrutiny or an immediate roll-out of an information technology system, there will be a cost. In these difficult financial times, there is a limit on what the Government can contribute to that, although I have already put in some additional resources. If further increases are to be cost-neutral, there will be a direct cost to families, and I would like to avoid that—as would everyone else in the chamber, I am sure. We have to get a system that can reassure and comfort the public while costs are kept proportionate. I think that we can get there. There are still some issues to be resolved, but I am heartened by the tone of today’s debate. I look forward to working with the committee as we continue to progress with the bill.

On that point, it is worth reminding Richard Simpson—as I am sure he has been reminded before—that most of the centres closed under the previous Labour-Liberal Administration. I caution him about saying too much about that.

It has been an interesting and helpful debate. I commend Rhoda Grant for bringing the debate to Parliament and I am pleased to have the opportunity to conclude the debate on behalf of the Scottish Government. I make it clear at the outset that the work of Highland Community Care Forum and local forums is to be commended. They undertake a lot of important work in engaging with local communities and providing much-needed services to service users and carers, such as the advocacy that was referred to earlier. I am sure that all members support community engagement, advocacy and support for carers. The work chimes very well with what we are seeking to achieve at a national level. Advocacy services are important, especially for people with learning disabilities and mental health problems. We know that advocacy can make a difference and we have various strands of work under way to ensure the appropriate provision of advocacy services throughout Scotland for people who need them. Our carers strategy, which was published last summer, also reinforces the importance of advocacy to the most vulnerable carers. Community-led action to establish networks of local support groups is immensely important in remote rural areas. The most vulnerable people rely on those groups to help them to come together to support each other, to exchange views, to receive information and advice, and so on. Even when the volunteers are over 80 and serving soup, it is about building community capacity and supporting people who are already doing that work. Community engagement, too, when done properly, is immensely empowering and rightly gives people a say in how their communities are run, what services they value and how those are provided. People then have a stake in the community and are equal partners in all the decision-making processes. Highland Council must make its own decisions about retendering, negotiating new contracts, extending existing contracts, how it takes forward community engagement and how it supports community groups and builds capacity at a local level. I make it clear, however, that procurement decisions should rarely be based on price alone. The Scottish Government’s guidance on the procurement of care and support services underlines the need for greater emphasis on quality than on cost. The procurement of care and support services should involve service users and carers as active partners in defining their needs and the outcomes that they require. That is one of the guiding principles in the guidance. The guidance also recommends that councils be proactive in involving service providers in service design and the development of service specifications. They should aim to maximise service providers’ specialist knowledge and experience while ensuring that they do not gain a competitive advantage in the subsequent procurement process. In all of that, what are important are the outcomes that are achieved for people who live and work in the area, including—or especially—the most vulnerable, such as the older population, those who are ill or frail, children, people who are isolated and carers. I am sure that there will be a role for both the statutory sector—the council and health board—and the voluntary sector in helping to achieve positive outcomes. Effective partnership working is key to better outcomes.

I suppose that service users will be looking for the best advice. I understand the concerns that exist, but we must look at this from the same end of the telescope as the service user is looking at it and support the best-quality advice. We should bear those matters in mind, as they are important. I understand that Highland Council has indicated that the existing level of resources for support to carers will be maintained. If that is indeed the case, that is welcome. The organisation or organisations that deliver support to carers in the future must deliver good outcomes for carers and those they care for. I am pleased that there is a commitment by the council, health board and the voluntary sector to provide much-needed support to carers and young carers, including those who live in the remotest areas. We want there to be local implementation of our national carers and young carers strategy. Subject to approval of the draft budget bill, we will have a further £5 million across Scotland in 2011-12, on top of the £9 million over three years to 2011, for carer information strategies. NHS Highland will get its share of that money to further support carers and young carers. We have also awarded £5 million to the voluntary sector for the provision of short breaks across Scotland. Funding for the first round will be given to good voluntary sector projects after bids have been assessed. My understanding is that the council is seeking to achieve even more support for community groups to support activities ranging from social groups and networks, such as lunch clubs, classes and health-promoting activities, to formal service delivery. There is a role in Highland, and throughout Scotland, for community capacity building, including expanding volunteering and establishing social enterprises. That ties in with our reshaping care programme. Our community capacity building strand of work will help to support the implementation of the change fund—the £70 million to help to optimise the independence and wellbeing of older people at home or in a homely setting. We envisage that the community capacity building work will mean close working with established third-sector organisations of all types and sizes and with specific geographical and interest-group communities. I will end on a positive note by observing—in relation to Richard Simpson’s point about the integration of health and social care—that there is an emerging political consensus that the end point that we all want to get to is a single system that integrates health and social care. There is a healthy debate to be had about the best model for getting to that point. There are merits in the lead commissioning model, not least because the legislation, going back to the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, is complex and a lot of complex legislation would be needed to change that. However, we can agree on the destination point, because we think that that is best for service users and patients. If we can agree on that, we will have made some progress. This has been a useful debate. I hope and expect that the local forums that Rhoda Grant has brought to our attention will continue to be supported and that there will continue to be good engagement with local forums and groups. Meeting closed at 17:38.

I welcome this opportunity to update Parliament on the dementia strategy and the progress that we have made in implementing it since June. I start on a sad note. Many members will be aware that Jim Jackson, who was Alzheimer Scotland’s first chief executive, died unexpectedly on 12 January. As well as being chief executive of Alzheimer Scotland, he was deeply involved in dementia research at an international level. I know that members will want to pass on their sympathies to his family. Many people with dementia and their carers do not receive the services that they need or want, despite the level of resources already in the system—an estimated £1.7 billion—to support people with dementia. The number of people with dementia is expected to double in the next 25 years. That is why we said that we are not looking for more of the same services and that we need to reshape fundamentally the model of care for people with dementia. We are working closely with our partners in health and social care in the statutory, voluntary and private sectors to work out which are the best ways of making the changes that we need in dementia care. At each stage of the someone’s journey in dementia there are things that we need to do better. We need to give better support after diagnosis; we need to improve people’s experience when they are in general hospital settings; and, at all times, we need to ensure that people are treated with dignity and respect. The strategy reflects our endorsement of the cross-party group on Alzheimer’s “Charter of Rights for People with Dementia and their Carers in Scotland”. We identified two key areas on which we intend to focus: ensuring that people receive the right information and support after diagnosis; and improving the care and treatment of people with dementia in general hospital settings. To deliver on those objectives and on the strategy’s overall objectives, we are committed to a series of actions over the next three years. I will set out some of those actions and provide an update on our progress. We are developing standards of care for dementia. One of the strongest messages from people with dementia is that all too often the nature of their illness means that they struggle to protect their rights. They do not always have access to the services that they need, and there is still too much stigma around and discrimination against people with the illness. Work on the standards is under way. We have commissioned the Mental Welfare Commission to develop the standards, and that work will be completed later this year. We are developing a skills and knowledge framework for dementia. Staff who work with people with dementia need the right skills and knowledge if they are to deliver services in a way that treats people with dignity and respect. We, NHS Education for Scotland and the Scottish Social Services Council have started the first stage of that work, which is being led by a programme board that is chaired by the chief executive of Alzheimer Scotland, Henry Simmons. It will be completed this year. We intend to provide funding of £300,000 to support Alzheimer Scotland to build on its pilot of specialist dementia nurses in national health service boards so that one such nurse can be introduced in each board area in Scotland. We have already seen the impact of dementia nurses, working to support other staff, on the quality of care and safety of people with dementia in care homes, at home or in hospital.

Through our normal NHS performance management arrangements, we will ensure that there is a specialist dementia nurse in each health board area and that the resource I mentioned goes there. We need transformational change across the health and care system that goes beyond changes to individual elements of the system. We invited partnerships of NHS boards and local authorities to test in one area how whole-system redesign of services for dementia could be achieved. I was hugely impressed by the number of partnerships that entered into that process and by the enthusiasm for tackling the challenges. We are providing funding and support for three demonstrator sites—Midlothian, Perth and Kinross and North Lanarkshire—and that work has started. We will continue the work to increase the number of people with dementia who have a diagnosis. Getting a diagnosis of dementia is frightening, but it is also a way to access information and support. We set a target to increase the number of people who are registered by their general practitioner as having dementia. We expect to meet the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target across Scotland ahead of schedule and we will continue to monitor progress. Last year, the Big Lottery Fund announced that it would invest a share of £50 million in supporting all aspects of the lives of people with dementia and their carers after diagnosis. Such person-centred early intervention is key to ensuring that people can live well with dementia and is a great example of partnership working between the voluntary and statutory sectors. We need to promote positive care to prevent behavioural issues from arising or reaching a crisis point and we need to consider how we use psychoactive medication. We will do research to consider in more detail how psychoactive medication is used in dementia treatment across Scotland, to understand better the right level of prescribing. For some people, such medication is the right choice, but we must ensure that medication is used appropriately. We will continue to support world-class research into medical treatments for dementia and into the delivery of care. We established the dementia clinical research network for Scotland in 2008 and have supported it with funding of more than £1 million. Alzheimer Scotland has highlighted that network’s importance. People with dementia and their carers have a major role to play in bringing about change by becoming partners in research and we encourage them to continue to do so. I am clear that the strategy needs to deliver tangible results quickly if we are to achieve change on the scale that is needed to meet the challenges that we face. We have established a monitoring and implementation group that involves key partners who are ensuring that we continue to make progress. More important, the group is considering whether the care and treatment of people with dementia are improving. It will publish a report at the end of each year and will make recommendations on what needs to be put in place in 2013 as a successor to the strategy. I am pleased to move the motion. We have no issue with accepting the amendment. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the progress being made by the NHS, local government, scrutiny bodies and partners in the voluntary and private sectors, including Alzheimer Scotland and the Scottish Dementia Working Group, in delivering the commitments set out in Scotland’s first dementia strategy, building on the Scottish Government’s establishment of dementia as a national priority and on the Parliament’s Cross-Party Group on Alzheimer’s Charter of Rights for People with Dementia and their Carers in Scotland, and further welcomes the Big Lottery Fund’s investment in support for people with dementia and their carers after their diagnosis.

I welcome the many very good speeches that have been made during this important debate. The quality of debate demonstrates that members have taken an interest in dementia over a long time and share a real commitment to influencing a transformation of dementia care and support. That commitment is also shared by the range of individuals and organisations throughout Scotland that contribute to the dementia strategy’s implementation. I have been impressed by local partners’ enthusiasm for the strategy. There is a real appetite for making the changes to which many members referred. I also give particular recognition to people with dementia and their families and carers for their huge contribution to the dementia strategy in the working groups and consultations leading up to the strategy’s publication and, now, its implementation. We felt that it was really important to hear from those who are directly affected by dementia and from their carers. I mention in particular the Scottish dementia working group for its huge role in all the work. All its members have a diagnosis of dementia and they have campaigned and raised awareness of the need for better dementia services since 2002. I was gratified by the amount of time that they devoted, and continue to devote, to that work. They bring valuable expertise to the agenda. It is also appropriate to mention the MBE that was awarded in the new year honours list to James McKillop of the Scottish dementia working group for services to people with dementia. The honour reflects the considerable value of his contribution to that area of public life. It is great to see recognition of that. I turn to some of the points that were made in the debate. Richard Simpson mentioned the core funding for the continuation of the dementia services development centre. It receives section 10 core funding under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, which will continue into 2011-12. Future years will be considered at the appropriate time, but our support for the centre has been made clear. Mary Scanlon touched on depression and mental health and wellbeing. We are writing to boards with the applied psychology report, which identifies the need to increase the workforce, particularly in response to the needs of older adults, so we are picking up on some of the issues that she raised. Jamie Stone gave a personal account of his family’s experience of dementia. He acknowledged that things have moved on a long way from the 1970s but, as many people said, there are still challenges. I think that it was Hugh O’Donnell who said that we still have challenges within our care sector. Irene Oldfather has had to leave to get her flight, but it was good that she rearranged things to take part in the debate. I recognise her role within the cross-party group on dementia. She made some important comments on end-of-life care, which is incredibly difficult for families. Ian McKee also picked up on that point. Irene Oldfather also mentioned the Mental Welfare Commission’s “Best of Intentions” report, which reminds us that, although huge progress has been made, there is still more to do. Helen Eadie talked about the long goodbye. I have heard that phrase before, as I am sure we all have. It captures some of the difficulties in personal relationships. Stewart Stevenson laid out what that really means for partners or other family members who feel the loss even though the person is still alive. Those are difficult emotional issues to deal with. Rhona Brankin talked about her family’s experience of the use of antipsychotic medication. The situation that she described is exactly what we want to avoid. She mentioned the updated guidance on prescribing, which is a good thing, but she indicated that more work needs to be done to stop inappropriate prescribing and I acknowledge that. Richard Simpson talked about this too. We need to research and understand where it is appropriate to prescribe antipsychotic drugs, because there will be cases in which it is appropriate, but we absolutely must stop inappropriate prescribing, and the case that Rhona Brankin described was one of those. I thank members for their speeches in a very good debate. I will be happy to keep them informed of the progress that we make.

Guidance to local health, housing and social care partnerships on accessing the reshaping care change fund was issued on 23 December. The guidance asks all partnerships, including those in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, to submit local change plans to the Scottish Government by 28 February. It sets a clear expectation on partnerships to include carers and carers organisations, as well as other third and independent sector partners, in preparing and agreeing their change plans.

The Scottish Government has provided more funding for carers during the past four years than was provided previously. I hope that the member acknowledges that. We have provided support in a number of ways. For example, much of the carers information strategy money has gone directly to support local carers centres and carers organisations. That direct support to carers has been much appreciated by carers organisations. I regularly meet carers organisations at national level and I made it clear to local partnerships that I wanted carers to be around the table at an early stage, while plans on the change fund were being drawn up. Carers organisations welcomed that, and I expect local partnerships to go forward on that basis.

My officials last met Supporters Direct Scotland on 2 July 2010.

I very much value the role that Supporters Direct Scotland has played during the past three years. I also very much support an enhanced role for supporters in football clubs. On the proposals for league reconstruction, what is important is that the clubs come to a position that they can agree on, to take Scottish football forward. I am not sure whether the intervention of politicians in such matters would add anything to the debate.

The gross cost of dispensing prescriptions in the community to patients across Scotland between April 2009 and March 2010—the most recent full year for which figures are available—was £1.139 billion. That total includes net drug costs and related remuneration for dispensers. The outturn drug costs for 2010-11 and 2011-12 will depend on various factors, including individual decisions by prescribers. Those are not forecast centrally and as responsibility for meeting prescribing costs is devolved to national health service boards, each board sets its own prescribing budget.

As I am sure the member is aware, continuing administrative savings of up to £500,000 are associated with the abolition of prescription charges, but the vast majority of the practitioner services division's activity will remain necessary. Around £1.3 million will be saved in respect of fees that are paid to dispensers for sales of prescription prepayment certificates, and there will be a variety of other savings. For example, there will a saving in the time that pharmacists and assistants in pharmacies spend on checking patients' exemption status, although such savings might be a bit more difficult to calculate.

The Scottish Government currently has no plans to increase the number of donor milk banks in Scotland, but we are aware of  the valuable service that donor milk banks can provide, particularly the donor milk bank in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, which is collaborating in United Kingdom-wide research into the specific benefit of donor breast milk as opposed to formula milk for premature infants. Maternal and infant nutrition policy for neonates will be informed by the outcomes of that research.

The member may want to write to me with more detail of his constituent's concerns. One issue is that the Glasgow facility must have a number of mechanisms for screening milk and ensuring that it is safe. A number of processes are involved, and it may not be feasible and, in the current climate, cost effective to set up a number of milk banks elsewhere. However, I am prepared to explore further whether there are issues vis-à-vis the transportation of breast milk from elsewhere that can be overcome. We can look at those in the context of the research that is under way and to which I referred in my initial answer.

As I said in my response to Brian Adam's question, I am happy to look at ways in which we may be able to do more on breast milk donation. I know that Elaine Smith takes a close interest in the promotion of breastfeeding, so I am sure that she is aware of all the initiatives and campaigns that have been undertaken and of the fact that a great deal of work is done in our maternity services to ensure that mums are well aware of the benefits of breast milk for their babies. We will continue to do that work rigorously. I am sure that the new infant nutrition strategy that will be launched later this month will be of interest to Elaine Smith, and I will ensure that she gets a copy.

That information is not held centrally. As the member knows, the Scottish Government has recently issued a draft national strategy to address the needs of those on the autistic spectrum and their families. There are recommendations in the strategy for increasing access to and delivery of diagnosis in adults. The consultation has just concluded and it is anticipated that implementation will begin shortly.

A small research team, commissioned through the autistic spectrum disorder reference group, is putting together a two-tier proposal to tackle the issue of data and the lack of data. The first tier of the research will consider the issue of providing a national figure for those awaiting diagnosis. The information will also be available by national health service board areas. The second tier of the research will consider developing a system that will capture the data, so that the information on numbers will always be available. Officials are meeting the research team to discuss the proposals in more detail and I am happy to furnish the member with more information about that.

A 10-year programme, "The same as you?", which was designed to improve services and support for people with a learning disability, has just concluded. It is currently being evaluated to analyse what has worked well and to  identify the gaps in services that still exist. The final evaluation report will be submitted to me in the summer.

I recognise the issue that Richard Simpson raises, and the report raises a number of concerns. The medical, nutritional and physical needs may be being met in the care home, but the question is whether quality of life issues are being adequately addressed when someone who is relatively young is placed in a care home for older people. The solution to that is empowerment, choice and more control. One way forward is through the self-directed support mechanism, to enable people to consider whether they wish to receive support as an individual in their own home. We need more imaginative thinking around collective living to make that easier for people, and new models of care rather than the more limited models that we have at present. I am certainly keen to discuss that on a cross-party basis if the member so wishes.

I will not dwell on all of Hugh O'Donnell's points, because that would not be terribly helpful. However, I pay a bit of a tribute to the previous Administration by saying that he must recognise that a lot of work was done by the reference group—£4 million was a significant investment in autism. I have conceded that Hugh O'Donnell's actions have convinced us all that more work has to be done. Surely, at this point, it would be better to agree on that and to move forward in the spirit of co-operation.

It is clear from the debate that members across the chamber are very keen to see improvement in service provision for people with autism and their families. The debate has been consensual and I have been heartened by members' genuine commitment to do more to build on the foundations that are in place and to ensure that further improvements can be made to services and to people's lives. I have noted throughout the debate that members have raised several concerns about whether the member's bill would deliver what it set out to do. I will not rehearse all the points, but I will refer to some of them. Claire Baker said that the committee's legacy paper would be important in keeping the issue on the boil. That suggestion is sensible. She and Ken Macintosh called for an extension to the reference group's membership, which I am sure we can consider further. Margaret Smith talked about the need for a robust strategy that would deliver change. That is absolutely the challenge and is most important. However, it is worth saying that it is not all about the autism strategy. The strategy will have to make links to other really important initiatives, which are in some ways equally important and which can—and, I believe, will—make a fundamental difference to the lives of people with autism. In appearing before the committee, I talked extensively about the self-directed support strategy and the bill that is to follow. The information and evidence from the test sites that have operated tell us that one group that benefits most from the change to self-directed support— whether through a direct payment or through more control and influence over the package of care and services—is adults with autism, and particularly young adults with autism. That relates to points that Ken Macintosh made about people's aspiration to have better quality lives, whether through accessing employment—if that is a possibility—through accessing education and training, or through being able to engage in activities that other people perhaps take for granted, but which people with autism require support to undertake. Self-directed support is a good answer to many of the questions. The debate has—rightly—focused on the autism strategy, but the strategy must make the clear links to other important developments, such as self-directed support. Christina McKelvie talked about monitoring of the strategy by the Government and the committee, which I welcome. That dual approach to ensure that we continue to ask questions and to monitor the strategy, its development and delivery is critical. As other members said, Chris Harvie made several important points. What he said boiled down to the benefits to society of encouraging and allowing the blossoming of people's lives. It is clear to me and to other members that many people do not realise their potential, because services are not responsive enough and they do not have the life chances that many of us take for granted. Chris Harvie hit the nail on the head—the issue about is opening up opportunities to people. As Nanette Milne said, people with autism differ hugely across the spectrum. I have no doubt that, with the right support, even people with autism who have profound difficulties would be able to do many things in their lives—things that would enrich the quality of their lives. We have to ensure that services are responsive. That does not necessarily mean that services have to be more expensive or complicated; it means freeing up things, thinking differently about the type of services that people want and delivering them differently.

Some of the work that is being done around self-directed support tells us that that can be achieved, not necessarily for more cost but by listening about what people's priorities are and what is important in their lives. I have one final point to make, Presiding Officer. During the course of the debate, I have not been able to furnish Parliament with the figures on future resources for autism. I have made a commitment to go back to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee with that  information once the outcome of the budget bill is known. I am happy to confirm that again today.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the member's bill on autism that Hugh O'Donnell has brought before Parliament. Like others, I thank him and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their efforts.  I am confident that all of us in the chamber share the common goal of wanting the lives of people with autism and their families to be improved and to be the best that they can be. A great deal has been achieved in Scotland, but we agree that the time is right for a national strategy for autism, and I acknowledge Hugh O'Donnell's role in bringing that about. I believe that the Government's draft autism strategy, on which a period of public consultation has just concluded, will deliver what the bill sets out to do, but I am not complacent. Respondents to that consultation have made it clear that services need to improve. I accept that that is the case, which is why I am strengthening its content to include the development of service standards so that those with autism and their families will know what they can expect to be offered. We do not need legislation to get there, particularly as we can start the process now. Following the legislative route would result in delays while the bill undertook its passage and would mean that a strategy would probably not be published until early next year, with associated guidance being delayed until the summer of 2012. I want to act now by developing a clear implementation plan, coupled with arrangements for monitoring progress. We should recognise that the work of the national ASD reference group in implementing the recommendations of the Public Health Institute of Scotland's needs assessment report, which was supported by £4 million of funding, was a world first, but it is important that we stay ahead, and I believe that the strategy has come at the right time to ensure that we do. Mr O'Donnell argues that a strategy that is underpinned by legislation is appropriate. My concern about adopting such an approach is that, in doing so, we would set a precedent whereby a strategy would not be viewed as a strategy unless it was underpinned by legislation. Karen Whitefield made a similar point. Furthermore, I do not believe that the evidence for the statutory legislation in England and the concerns that are being expressed by stakeholders about their expectations not being met support a legislative approach. To that end, I support the view of the committee that ineffective legislation would disappoint people with autism and their families, who have high expectations that the bill would make meaningful changes to the services that are available to them. Legislation needs to add value and make a real difference to the lives of people with autism. I do not believe that the bill would do that, and that view is shared by the committee, which states in its report that the bill and the subsequent strategy would  "neither overcome the barriers to service delivery nor satisfy the expectations of people with autism." However, I strongly agree that more needs to be done to ensure that existing legislation is implemented and monitored effectively. As I stated at the committee's meeting on 17 November, I will develop mechanisms to monitor and evaluate existing legislation.

I am certainly happy to give the member the reassurance that he seeks. Much needs to be done to address the continuing concerns about waiting for diagnosis and assessment, and to improve people's experience of the transition from children's to adult services. I think that one important way of doing that is to increase the uptake of self-directed support.

Okay. I have laid out why I do not believe that legislation is required, but that is not to say that Hugh O'Donnell's bill has not raised some important issues. I am keen to reassure people that, as a Government, we take those issues extremely seriously and act accordingly.

Services such as community mothers and other peer-support programmes are recognised by the Scottish Government as a valuable method of supporting mothers who choose to breastfeed. The Scottish Government is about to launch "Improving Maternal and Infant Nutrition: A Framework for Action". One of its actions is that a national framework for breastfeeding peer-support programmes be developed and such programmes be made available in each NHS board area, targeted at areas with low breastfeeding rates.

Given the massive cuts to the Scottish Government's budget from the UK Government, the settlement for local government has been widely welcomed as good. It is up to each local authority—including North Lanarkshire in the member's area—to decide how to spend that money. I hope that the council wants to give priority to supporting breastfeeding initiatives and community mothers. My expectation is that NHS Lanarkshire will continue to support community mothers in the best way that it can and I am happy to provide the member with more details about its plans for doing so.

The Scottish Government recognises the valuable economic benefits and employment opportunities that snowsports bring to Scotland and we continue to support their development. Through sportscotland, VisitScotland and our enterprise agencies, we provide funding to enable the industry to realise its full potential. Building on the success of last season, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have commissioned a strategic review of snowsports that is designed to identify what further can be done to develop this important industry.

I have been up to Glenshee a couple of times this season and I can confirm that the facilities and conditions are fantastic. I  encourage others to go. The A93 is a local road that stretches from Perth and Kinross to Aberdeenshire and winter maintenance is a matter for those local authorities. I know that those local authorities take the requirement to keep the road open very seriously, because of the economic benefits that Glenshee brings to the area. I saw for myself how hard they were working to ensure that cars could get access to the Glenshee centre but, of course, we will keep a close eye on these matters.

I am always happy to meet or have my officials meet to discuss such matters, but we have to recognise the real constraints on capital investment across the board, which make it extremely difficult to make capital investment of that nature. There is, of course, always the opportunity for commercial interest in such ventures. I encourage Jamie Stone to encourage, in turn, commercial interest in that initiative.

I, too, congratulate Robert Brown on securing this important debate. It is  estimated that about 23,000 Scots are visually impaired as a result of age-related macular degeneration. I am sure that we all know someone among our family or friends who is affected by the condition. The Scottish Government takes the condition seriously and I am therefore pleased to reply to the issues that are raised in Robert Brown's motion. Before I respond to the specifics of the motion, I will say a little about where we are in respect of developing and improving eye care services in Scotland. Following the introduction of the new NHS eye examination in Scotland, we are now generally acknowledged as a world leader in the provision of high-quality and effective eye health care services, and that is a good place to be. The Government has made substantial funding available for optical practices to purchase digital cameras and other associated equipment to undertake the new examination and take photographs of the eyes to monitor related health conditions. Clearly, we have the infrastructure in place to provide improved eye health care to the people of Scotland. Encouragingly, the take-up of the new eye examination, which is free and will continue to be free, continues to grow. In the year ending 31 March 2010, approximately 1.8 million NHS eye examinations took place in Scotland, which is up almost 90 per cent on 2006, when the new examination was introduced. That amply demonstrates that people in Scotland are taking on board the message about the importance of maintaining good eye health care and are making good use of the services that are in place. When the "Review of Community Eyecare Services in Scotland" was published in December 2006, it recommended making changes to improve the integration of community eye care services; the quality of patient care; and the efficiency of the service. To help facilitate those changes, we made available £2.6 million of pump-priming funding. NHS boards, in partnership with their stakeholders, submitted proposals for that funding for improving the delivery of eye health care services to adults and children. That source of funding has supported the implementation of the principles within the eye care review. A wide range of projects received pump-priming funding, including an ethnic minority eye health project in Glasgow, which has helped to increase the awareness in ethnic communities of the importance of good eye health. I was pleased when John Legg offered RNIB Scotland's assistance to the Scottish Government to help keep a track on the progress of the various pump-primed projects and with the subsequent monitoring.  An evaluation framework was developed to reflect the principles within the eye care review, which enables NHS boards and their partners to report the progress of pilot projects. The report shows that NHS boards and their partners have evidenced commitment to improving services and outcomes for visually impaired people. The principles within the review have been fully embraced, with significant modernisation of services taking place in order to improve the quality and consistency of care that is being delivered across Scotland. Although, not surprisingly, some projects have developed faster than others, there has been systematic development of integrated eye care networks throughout Scotland, with partnership structures and leadership being well established. Progress that is reported indicates that approximately 80 per cent of the population now has access to integrated eye care services. That is a major achievement. Although integrated eye care networks are focused within community services, some networks have been further enhanced to include acute services. For example, in Lanarkshire, a particularly effective low vision service has been established. Stakeholder events have been undertaken and focus groups have been established across project areas to inform and influence the planning and development of services. In summary, the investment from the Scottish Government has created an opportunity for a national approach to the improvement of services for people with a visual impairment.

Robert Brown makes a fair point. OCT machines are an important element of what we are trying to do. I am sure that he will be pleased with some developments that will take place in the new year in a health board that is close to his heart, which will, we hope, improve matters. On age-related macular degeneration, others have mentioned RNIB's "Cost Oversight" report, which examines the cost of eye disease and sight loss in the United Kingdom today and in the future. The report makes stark reading. For example, the direct, indirect and quality-of-life costs of sight loss in the UK in 2008 were estimated at £22 billion. Looking forward, given the increase in the elderly  population over the five-year period from 2008, those costs are projected to increase significantly by a further £7.6 billion in 2013. The report also focuses on age-related macular degeneration and concludes that, if we can provide early detection and access to treatment, the cost of partial sight and blindness to the individual and society will be contained. However, this is not just about money. It is, above all, about the quality of life of the people of Scotland. Of course, we want to prevent avoidable sight loss whenever possible. The introduction of the universally free eye examination has been, as other members have said, a major step forward. It allows patients to receive free of charge an appropriate health assessment of their whole visual system, and it helps to provide early identification of eye conditions such as AMD. It gives optometrists and ophthalmic medical practitioners the professional freedom to perform the tests that are appropriate to patients' symptoms and needs, and it allows for the management of a wide range of common conditions in the community. Importantly, the eye examination promotes optometrists and OMPs as the first point of contact for eye problems. Early referral to the hospital eye service can only be beneficial for patients who might be suffering from AMD, as it is important—as other members have pointed out—that wet AMD is treated as quickly as possible. I am acutely aware that members who are participating in tonight's debate believe that it is vital that NHS boards are able to meet demand for treatment effectively, now and in the future. I assure members that patient safety is always at the forefront of our concerns. That is why we devote so much attention to ensuring that patients who are waiting for review appointments for chronic conditions are seen within clinically appropriate waiting times. In the area of eye health, officials are working with eye care Scotland and NHS boards to assess current capacity for return out-patient appointments to manage chronic eye conditions such as diabetes, glaucoma and age-related macular degeneration. Recommendations will be forthcoming on the effective management of return out-patient services to ensure that capacity is available to meet projected changes in demand, and I am happy to keep Parliament updated on that. I do not pretend that in the current circumstances those issues will be straightforward to address, but the recommendations will help us to identify whether any service redesign or other change is required to meet that demand. One recent step will, I believe, make a significant contribution. We recently approved the business case to provide an innovative link  between optometrists and ophthalmology departments. That important development, which has been warmly welcomed by all parts of the profession and by members on all sides of the chamber, should increase efficiencies and speed up the process for patients who need to be seen quickly by hospital eye departments. A steering group has been formed to take forward the project and it will hold its first meeting in January. We are also making funding available to NHS boards to enable them to develop their individual implementation plans.  I welcome tonight's debate, and I assure members that we aim to continuously improve our eye services for patients, particularly for those who suffer from AMD.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

I welcome the speeches that were made during the debate, which was important and interesting. Members across the parties showed their knowledge of, and commitment to, equality in mental health. Many mentioned the need to capture more detailed information to monitor how effectively the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 lives up to its principles of equality and non-discrimination. The reduction of health inequalities is a key priority for the Government. Inequalities that relate to deprivation are well known, but there are also important health inequalities that relate to ethnicity and other aspects of diversity within the Scottish population. The Government's view is that we need to identify ways to collect, store, share and report on equalities data in order that we can do two things: first, we need to monitor and better understand the differences between equality groups' access to, and use of, services; secondly, we need to profile and capture more detailed information on the individual patient, with the aim of understanding and being able to respond to their specific needs. As I mentioned in my opening speech, work has already begun on improving data capture across health services. We have also included an objective in the health care quality strategy that commits us to developing a programme of action to ensure that, by the summer of next year, people's equality needs are gathered, shared and responded to across health services. In the time that I have left, I will respond to some of the points that were made in the debate. I start with bed numbers. A number of members mentioned the number of under-18s who have been admitted to adult wards. Members quite rightly referred to the figure of 149 such admissions, which was an increase from the previous figure of 142. However, we need to put  that in context, because it is likely to have resulted in part from the transitional arrangements that accompanied the closure of the in-patient facility for young people at Gartnavel royal hospital and the opening of the new in-patient facility at Skye house. A number of members—in particular, Richard Simpson—raised the issue of children's beds. Skye house in Glasgow has 24 beds, which represents an increase from 16. There are currently 12 beds in Edinburgh and six in Dundee. The total so far is, therefore, 42 beds. We are also working closely with boards in the north and the south-east of Scotland in relation to their needs for children's beds. I am happy to keep the Parliament informed on progress on that. One issue in getting the right number of beds is the need to strike the right balance between in-patient beds and investment in community services. I point out that we have made an additional £5.5 million available next year for investment in community services. We acknowledge that some people will require in-patient beds, but prevention and early intervention was a theme in the speeches by members throughout the chamber this afternoon, and we hope that investment in community services will, in some cases, prevent the need for admission to in-patient beds. Members will also be aware of the important additional funding to support CAMHS, with £2 million of new money each year to accelerate the development of specialist services. Importantly, there is also funding for training the workforce, with £6.5 million of new money over three years to ensure that we have enough specialist psychology staff, including support for additional training places and posts. That is an important investment. The issue of independent advocacy came to the fore in a number of members' speeches. The 2003 act is clear in its definition of independent advocacy and the legislation is, of course, always paramount. I return to Hugh O'Donnell's point: local authorities and health boards have a statutory duty to secure the availability of independent advocacy services. I understand the point that he made, but the legislation is clear about the expectations around that. Nevertheless, we need to ensure that we keep a watching brief on the matter, as we do not want any confusion to arise. I will certainly have a look at that. Elaine Smith asked a number of detailed questions. I do not have all the information in front of me that would enable me to respond to her questions in detail, and I am also over my time, so I will write to her. Similarly, Christina McKelvie raised a number of important issues about prisoners, so I will also write to her.  I end with a point about the timescale. I confirm that we are still on schedule for the transfer of the service from prisons to the health service to take place in autumn 2011.

I welcome this opportunity to debate equalities issues in the context of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, and recognise the Equal Opportunities Committee's interest in the area, which accords with the Scottish Government's commitment to a fundamental improvement in how mental health service users are treated in Scotland. This is, of course, a timely point to take stock, as the fifth anniversary of the act's coming into force was just recently. I thank the committee very much for its fourth report of 2010, on post-legislative scrutiny of the 2003 act. I am particularly pleased that the report highlights the ground-breaking nature of the act, particularly its being based on a set of founding principles, which include requiring all those who  act under its powers to have respect for the principles of equality and diversity; non-discrimination; participation by the patient in decisions; the least restrictive option; informal care where possible; maximum benefit to the patient; reciprocity; welfare of the child; and, of course, respect for carers. Those principles are found in the very first section of the act, but they do not sit in isolation either within the act or within mental health care and treatment generally. Rather, those principles represent a fundamental attempt to improve how mental health service users are treated generally in Scotland. The very name of the act, with its deliberate reference to "Care and Treatment", also emphasises the core approach to mental health services that Scotland has embraced, whether in relation to those who are in need of compulsory treatment measures or otherwise. Although the act is still relatively young, ministers have been pleased that it has been generally well received by service users, their carers and mental health professionals since it came into force in October 2005, and that its approach and principles have been popular. Legislative change is, of course, only one cornerstone of a modern and fit-for-purpose mental health system in Scotland, and the Government recognises that new legislation in itself does not develop services nor create new treatments for mental disorder, although the act's principles, such as reciprocity and maximum benefit, can be seen to influence them. Therefore, in addition to legislative change, other policy initiatives, such as on service development and delivery, mental health improvement and support for change, are equally important. One can see, for example, the principles of non-discrimination, participation and respect for carers reflected in the introduction of a statutory right for everybody with a mental disorder to access independent advocacy. The act places a duty on local authorities and the NHS to secure the provision of advocacy services at the local level for everybody who needs them. The Government recognises the vital work that carers do. As members know, the new carers and young carers strategy for Scotland, which we produced jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, was launched on 26 July. It emphasises the importance of advocacy support, especially to those who care for the most vulnerable, and identifies a suite of action points to provide information, advice and advocacy support to adult carers and to improve the quality, consistency and availability of advocacy support for children and young people. Similarly, the principles of equality and welfare of the child—whereby the welfare of the child must be paramount—has led to the development of  specialist child and adolescent mental health services in Scotland for children and young people, and for their families and carers, who are dealing with the most serious mental health problems. That development also extends to forensic mental health services to meet the needs of children and young people in Scotland. There are currently three dedicated young people's in-patient facilities in Scotland. The number of young persons who require secure care for mental health problems is currently too small to support a dedicated unit. However, the Government is working closely with NHS boards to ensure that, when a young person has to be admitted to an adult ward, their care is age appropriate and tailored to their specific needs. A recurring theme of the committee's work more generally has been the lack of available baseline equalities data on which comprehensive and meaningful scrutiny of equalities impacts can be undertaken. In September 2009, the Government wrote to all the chief executives of NHS boards, asking them to make improvements in equalities data capture and monitoring, and in March 2010, an NHS action group—improving equalities data monitoring—was established. Action plans were put in place and there have already been some signs of improvement in the level and quality of information that is being recorded. I would be happy to keep the committee updated on that. The act also makes provision for the Mental Welfare Commission to monitor the key principles of equality and non-discrimination. The Government will be considering with the commission and other stakeholders how best to address any gaps in certain types of data and the scope for capturing more data in all the equality strands. Again, I will be happy to keep the committee informed of those discussions. In 2008, the Government commissioned an independent review of certain aspects of the act. Following that report, which was published in 2009, we went out to consultation on the package of recommendations that were made by the review group. In October 2010, we published our response to the review group's report and indicated how we intend to take forward issues in relation to advance statements, named persons and independent advocacy, among others, through changes to legislation and existing practice, where appropriate. The Government therefore remains committed to improving mental health legislation. I look forward to hearing members' comments during the debate.

I, too, thank Jim Hume for introducing this very important debate. I recognise his very direct and personal interest in this serious and complex issue. The sudden and unexpected death of a youngster is absolutely a tragedy. As members have said, such deaths are frequently caused by an inherited cardiac condition. It can be an inherited disorder of the rhythm of the heart, such as long QT syndrome, or an inherited disorder that causes abnormal thickening of the heart muscle in, for example, cardiomyopathy. Although the motion refers specifically to sudden arrhythmia deaths, I will broaden my reply to cover sudden cardiac death of young people in general. What makes these deaths particularly devastating is that the young person usually has no symptoms; there is no indication that they are at risk.  The conditions are difficult to diagnose. At the moment, there is no diagnostic test that can predict with accuracy the outcome for any individual. That is why the national screening committee advises against having a population screening programme for sudden cardiac death. As Richard Simpson outlined, there are also concerns about wrongly labelling someone as being at risk. That could restrict the activities of many children who never go on to develop clinical problems. As has also been said, it could also cause difficulties in adult life with employment, insurance and mortgages. However, the committee is very clear that close relatives who have lost a family member to sudden cardiac death should be offered tests and advice. We have accepted that advice. There is a section on inherited cardiac conditions in our better heart disease and stroke care action plan. The key to getting a better grasp of these conditions is to bring together cardiologists, clinical geneticists and pathologists, since each have a part to play. We are very fortunate in Scotland to have a mechanism that does just that, and very effectively. I refer to the familial arrhythmia network Scotland, or FANS, which is much easier to say. I put on record our appreciation of the work that FANS is doing through its lead clinician, Dr Anna Maria Choy and her colleagues. FANS is clear that reducing the risk of sudden cardiac death involves a number of different approaches. First, it means targeting the young people who are at highest risk. That includes those with a close family member who has been diagnosed with an inherited condition that carries a risk of sudden cardiac death. It also includes young people who are taking part in competitive sports. As has been pointed out, the Government  is funding the cardiac assessment of young athletes programme at Hampden Park, which is a voluntary programme that is open to young sportspeople aged between 15 and 25. The programme breaks new ground by using an echocardiogram—a two-dimensional image of the heart—to help with the accuracy of the assessment process. Recently the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced that we are providing further funding to allow the programme to run for another two years. The results will help the national screening committee’s further consideration of the issue. The next issue on FANS’s list is improving professional and public awareness of inherited cardiac conditions. On the professional front, FANS organises national symposia and it is undertaking a survey to gauge the level of knowledge of the conditions among general practitioners, cardiologists and nursing and allied health professionals across Scotland. To raise public awareness, the network produces newsletters, leaflets and patient materials. It also has close links to key voluntary sector organisations such as Scottish Heart at Risk Testing and the Cardiomyopathy Association in Scotland. I pay tribute to those voluntary bodies for the valuable work that they do to provide information and support to families. That includes the work of the British Heart Foundation, which last year launched its genetic information service to help relatives deal with the consequences of losing a loved one to an inherited cardiac condition. The service’s helpline assists bereaved families to have an assessment at a specialist clinic.  Jim Hume asked about the training of existing PE teachers in heart conditions. I am happy to look into that, but it may already form part of heartstart, the cardiopulmonary resuscitation programmes that the British Heart Foundation offers in schools. I will pursue the matter and let the member have more information. Improving referral and care pathways is another of FANS’s objectives for reducing the risk of sudden cardiac death. The FANS website provides information for patients and health care professionals on who should be referred to specialist cardiologists and clinical geneticists and where they are based. Referral of those with a suspected inherited arrhythmia to one of FANS’s regional services has been included in the NHS Quality Improvement Scotland clinical standards for heart disease. FANS has developed and ratified clinical protocols, which it keeps up to date so that clinicians can deliver the best evidence-based care. It is also developing standards of care for inherited cardiac conditions. That will pave the way for audits, leading to subsequent improvements in the practice and delivery of care. FANS is also working with the Information Services Division of NHS National Services Scotland to develop a national registry of inherited cardiac conditions. That will make it easier to screen and follow up individuals and families, while avoiding duplication of expensive tests and reducing patient inconvenience. Through the pathologists who are involved with FANS, the registry will be linked to the UK sudden cardiac death pathology database, which was launched late in 2008. Pathologists will obtain important information from careful post mortem examination of young sudden death victims. The database will ensure that that information is recorded and retained centrally and help those who are assessing the relatives of the young people concerned. It will also provide better data on the frequency of sudden cardiac death. I should say a word about the availability of public access defibrillators. Our heart disease and stroke action plan highlights their importance and calls on the cardiac managed clinical network in each NHS board to carry out an assessment of the need for them. I am again grateful to the British Heart Foundation for providing information from its mapping exercise that shows the location of public access defibrillators across the UK. That will help the MCNs with their assessment of local provision.  I very much support what the motion says about the need for greater awareness of sudden cardiac death. I hope that it will be clear from what I have said that the Government takes the issue seriously. We have highlighted it in our action plan and are fortunate that FANS is so active in the area. I congratulate all its members and the voluntary sector bodies that are associated with it on the excellent work that they are doing to improve services for all of those who are at risk of sudden cardiac death.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

I join others in welcoming Karen Gillon's motion and the opportunity to debate the wider positive impact of the third sector more generally. The challenges of the weather mean that the debate is timely because, as Karen Gillon and others have said, organisations such as the WRVS provide comfort and a vital service to people in their homes who could otherwise feel very isolated. There are challenging financial times ahead, but that sometimes makes us look at the opportunities—which perhaps have not been looked at in the past when budgets have not been under such pressure—to make real changes to the way in which services are delivered in Scotland. We have to seize the opportunity. There have been great improvements in health care and life expectancy. That is fantastic, but those improvements bring with them challenges, for example in ensuring the health and wellbeing of vulnerable groups who are living longer. As Jackie Baillie has outlined, we all know that there will be less money available to invest in the future. That means that we must do things differently and better, working in partnership to ensure that we are delivering every bit of value that we can get from the resources that we have. Added value can be seen in many preventive services operated by volunteers in communities and by third sector organisations that focus on providing early intervention and anticipatory and preventive support in the community. Services such as the Clydesdale community transport and good neighbours project can and do deliver better outcomes for our older people. If better outcomes for older people can be achieved at a lower cost, that is a powerful incentive to invest in local preventive services. Failing to do so will simply shift the burden of care back from communities to acute services, and we cannot allow that situation to develop or, indeed, continue as it is. The availability of options and early support to help older people to make the right choices is a key part of maintaining their independence and wellbeing, so we must ensure that a range of  services is available to support older people to maintain their independent living. We recognise the pressures in a challenging fiscal climate, which is why we took the decision to allocate a £70 million change fund from April 2011 to help statutory and voluntary partners to focus on redesigning and improving older people's services and to bring about a real shift in the balance of care. We must address the increasing pressure on our resources by redesigning the way in which we provide services. If we do not, the only way of controlling budgets will be to reduce the quality and quantity of care, and none of us wants that to happen. It is unavoidable that we must plan and deliver services in a far more integrated way; if we do not, the combined pressures of financial constraint and demographic change will result not only in fragmented, poor-quality services, but in failure to provide effective stewardship of the public pound. We must deliver services in an effectively integrated way between GPs, hospitals, community-based health, social care and housing teams and, crucially, the independent sector. If we do not, we will be looking at a potential crisis in service provision. We must find creative and cost-effective approaches to keeping people healthier and more independent in their own homes and out of the formal care system for as long as possible. I believe that that is in everyone's best interests. The third sector and voluntary services are already helping people to live independently in their own communities using persuasive, convincing and well-evidenced approaches. They are generating services from within communities using local experience, knowledge and insight. Those are effective because they reconnect local people with their communities in ways as simple as befriending, arranging trips to local shops and having a chat over a cup of tea. Those things can make a big impact on someone's quality of life and can help to combat loneliness and isolation, particularly in the communities to which Karen Gillon referred. Our reshaping care for older people programme recognises that in its inclusion of community capacity building as a core theme. We are committed to working together with the third sector to reshape care for older people—quite simply, it cannot happen without the third sector. The motion calls for greater integration of voluntary services within health and social care and for them to be resourced accordingly. From frequent discussions with stakeholders and folk within the third sector, I know that there is already a shared drive to make things work via the change fund, which has been created following discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and NHS chairs. The change fund—guidance for which we are finalising with partners  at the moment, including third and independent sector interests—will present an excellent opportunity for partnerships to show what they can achieve with resources, focusing on people's needs, not on structures.

I recognise the point that Johann Lamont makes. We have done a lot of work around the volunteering effort within the health service, for example, ensuring that the volunteers and the structures around their support are consistent in helping the health service to achieve its aims. The challenge is to make sure that the volunteers who come through those structures—I recognise that there are other structures—are looking at more community-focused support, rather than support being within hospitals. Those opportunities exist and a lot of people want to volunteer. I am keen for us to make sure that they are received well and supported in a consistent way. We need to ensure that the voluntary and third sectors are included. I made it clear that, when the local partners gather to come up with the plans that will have a direct impact on where the money from the change fund goes, in Karen Gillon's area or other members' areas, the voluntary and third sectors must be around that table at the start, not as an afterthought once the plans have been drafted. They must be involved in deciding where those resources can go and where they will have the biggest impact. We want to avoid people turning up at the front doors of our hospitals. We want to keep people safe in their own homes. We must think about what services can be developed or how we can build on the successful services that are already there—as Jackie Baillie pointed out, there is some really good evidence about some of the projects that work well. This is a timely debate. It is clear that we must further cement the successful relationships between local government, the Scottish Government, the national health service and the third sector, based on a shared understanding of the challenges that have been outlined tonight. Everybody understands the issues and knows where we need to go. The issue is how we can make that happen. I believe that the change fund will give impetus to ensuring that we can deliver in communities across Scotland the things that we know will work.

I am happy to do that. I know that the Scottish Ambulance Service has already examined how, for example, volunteer drivers are supported. However, I am not sure whether it has considered some of the voluntary projects that are already providing community transport and how to get a better link-up in that regard. I will take that issue away and consider it further.  Today's debate has given us an opportunity to acknowledge the role of the third sector as a full partner in taking forward a huge change in how we deliver services to not only older people, but a range of communities who need that support. It has been a pleasure to speak in the debate, and I will get back to members with the information that they have requested.  Meeting closed at 18:07.

We met the Scottish branch of Parkinson's UK on 1 September 2008 and on 15 May 2009. We discussed preparations for the world Parkinson's congress, which was held in Glasgow this September, at which the chief medical officer delivered the opening address. We also discussed the organisation's get it on time campaign and specialist services for people living with Parkinson's. The Scottish Government is committed to helping people to live well with long-term conditions such as Parkinson's. Parkinson's UK in Scotland was fully involved in developing the clinical standards for the condition and the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 113 on Parkinson's.

I acknowledge what Margaret Mitchell says about the get it on time campaign. The issue has been discussed on a number of occasions in the chamber. It is an important issue, and we have made sure that NHS boards are aware of their responsibility to ensure that the right practice is happening on the wards. As Margaret Mitchell outlined, it is very important that those who work on the front line understand that and that patients get their medication on time, as they should do. We will continue to make sure that boards continue to deliver that service, and I am happy to keep Margaret Mitchell abreast of any developments on that front.

The Scottish Government recognises that prevention of mental ill health and timely diagnosis followed by appropriate intervention are key to improving treatment and outcomes for patients. Although we believe that there has been no change in the number of people who are ill, the number of people registered with their general practitioner with a diagnosis of depression has increased from 6.2 per cent in 2006-07 to 8.6 per cent in 2009-10. The number of people registered with a diagnosis of dementia increased from 29,761 in 2006-07 to 35,816 in 2009-10, and we expect to meet the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—target in advance of March 2011.

I acknowledge the member's long-standing interest in these matters—she has raised the issue in the chamber on a number of occasions. The Public Audit Committee was right to recommend that we review the antidepressant target, given that the research showed that, in 98 per cent of cases, people on a prescription are receiving medication appropriately. We are  committed to ensuring that their needs are met in an appropriate way, as per the clinical diagnosis. However, the member is right to talk about the need to look at the issue from the other end of the telescope, as it were, and to ensure that people can get access to psychological therapies. That is why we committed ourselves to developing a target for access to psychological therapies for inclusion in the HEAT targets in 2011-12. This is the first time that such a target has been established, and I think that it will be important in ensuring that people, particularly those with more mild depression, anxiety and low mood, get access to those talking therapies and a range of other therapies that can help to reduce the likelihood that a more serious mental health problem will develop.

I am sure that Richard Simpson will be aware of the amount of new work that is going on with the boards and NHS Education for Scotland. I hope that he will recognise that, despite the rather unfortunate comments that his party made about disbanding NES, it is doing a really important job in ensuring that the education is in place that will enable us to reach the target to improve access to psychological therapies, as well as other important work. NES is funding psychological therapies training co-ordinator posts in boards to provide the educational infrastructure that is necessary to ensure that the training and supervision are well organised and sustainable, and that the therapies have maximum service impact. NES is also funding a psychological interventions team to co-ordinate work, particularly in relation to improving patient pathways and referral criteria to help to improve access to services. My concern is that Richard Simpson, in making his proposal, criticises NES and undermines the good and important work that it  does. Perhaps he will reflect on his party's comments in light of that work.

NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has confirmed that inpatient services will transfer from the Mansionhouse unit to the new south Glasgow hospital in 2015, in line with the board's acute services review plans.

I understand that the plan has been part of the acute services review plans for some time and that a timeframe of 2015 was laid out around the plans and is on-going. As the member knows, the south Glasgow hospital project is an important, flagship project, which will allow first-class beds to replace some of the very old provision at the Mansionhouse unit. I would have thought that the member would welcome progress on that.

Section 13ZA of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 was commenced in March 2007, to clarify to local authorities when they can provide community care services for someone who lacks capacity, when a guardianship order is not in place. To assist further, guidance was issued on when the powers may be used, to ensure that there are no unnecessary legal barriers to adults with incapacity receiving the services that they need. The Scottish Government also published a good practice guide in June 2010. Glasgow City Council, in partnership with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, has developed the guide for use locally and will implement a performance framework to ensure best practice. Further work is under way, as part of the national dementia strategy, including development of a skills and knowledge framework for staff and common standards of care for dementia, both of which tools are designed to help to improve service response in those and other care settings.

Robert Brown needs to understand that the process can be complex. The courts and local authorities, including Glasgow City Council, do their best to expedite the process when guardianship orders are applied for. Detailed decisions about individuals are involved, which sometimes take time. Safeguards are built into the process, which can also take time to work through. I am sure that Robert Brown recognises the importance of ensuring that the correct procedures are followed. As for the relationship to delayed discharge and the delayed discharge census, dealing with cases of adults without capacity takes time and the local authority and the national health service board can do nothing while the cases go through the legal process. It would be unfair to include such cases in the delayed discharge figures, because local authorities and NHS boards can do nothing about cases that are in the court process. Of course, it is  important to keep delays to a minimum. We expect that to be the position. I hope that I have explained to Robert Brown why some cases take time. Once the court process is complete, I am sure that local partners do everything in their power to put people into appropriate care settings.

The Scottish Government will allocate £70 million in 2011-12 in the NHS budget to a change fund for NHS boards and partner local authorities, together with the third and independent sectors, to redesign services to support the delivery of improved care outcomes for the growing older population. The change fund will be used as bridging finance to lever improvement throughout older people's spend in health and social care and will provide an opportunity to make better use of the total resources that are available in health and social care, in recognition of pressures on older people's services across Scotland.

Absolutely. I recognise the previous difficulties to which Bob Doris refers. We have made it clear that the partners must work closely together. Only with the partners' agreement will any resources be released. If the resources are to go to the local partnership, it is vital that the partnership works as one to receive the resources. As for the voluntary sector's role, I have made it clear that the voluntary sector must be around the table at the start of the process to decide on the priorities for which the resource should be used. It is clear that the voluntary sector will be key in delivering some of the more innovative services in the community. We have made it clear to local partners that the voluntary sector has a key role in that.

Despite the fact that Jackie Baillie is trying to scaremonger, she will appreciate the difficulties in which the Scottish Government budget is operating. [ Interruption .]

Two thirds of the cuts to that budget were planned by Alistair Darling. Rather than scaring the most vulnerable people in our society, to deal with the difficult situation that faces us we are taking direct action and ensuring that the resources tied up in the acute sector are released to support people in the community.

Instead of sniping loudly from the sidelines, as Richard Simpson does so well, we are getting on with the job in hand and ensuring that services for vulnerable people are protected.

This has been a largely consensual debate, and a very useful one. Jackie Baillie was quite right to talk about the voluntary sector and support to unpaid carers. To reassure the chamber in that regard, I say that we have made it clear that when local partnerships are discussing how they are going to spend the £70 million of new pooled budgets in their local development plans, the voluntary sector must be around the table at the very start of the discussions, to ensure that its interests are represented in those plans. There has been a lot of talk about the integration of health and social care, which, as I have said on a number of occasions, I whole-heartedly support. Further, this chamber—following a debate on another Conservative motion, I believe—previously endorsed the principle of the integration of health and social  care. However, we should think carefully about the model that we choose. I am pleased that Richard Simpson has clarified Labour's position, because I think that it would be a mistake to set up a new bureaucracy. In this financial climate, we can ill afford to spend more money on financial bureaucracy and less on the front line. I also think that we have to think about, for example, the cost of transferring 60,000 people on to agenda for change conditions, which would come with a huge price tag. However, other models could achieve the same outcomes that people want but could do so more quickly and less bureaucratically. I am open to discussing what those models might be.

We are considering that model, and a number of others. Good commissioning models have been tried and tested down south, such as ones that involve the council commissioning the health service to provide adult social care. All that I am saying is that we should think carefully about which model best serves the needs of Scotland. Ross Finnie—actually, it might not have been him; I think that it was Helen Eadie—

Ross Finnie made a number of good points, I have to say. Sandra White talked about the other uses of the care home sector, such as respite and intermediate care. She was right to point out that the issue is not just permanent residential places; there are many other important uses. Helen Eadie and Richard Simpson, as well as others, talked about delayed discharge. That is an important issue, and the Administration has given it some serious attention and has made it a priority. I point out to Richard Simpson that the previous Administration set the zero target but never achieved it—not once. We have achieved the zero target at the last three April census points. I accept, however, that there have been in-year challenges in certain areas, and I will be the first to say to those partnerships—

When we took over, 650 people in blocked beds were over the six-week limit. We have dealt with that. However, we must sustain it. Richard Simpson is right to point out that some partnerships face challenges. I assure members that I have made it clear to those partnerships that they need to get back on track. We have made it clear that the pooled budgets have to be used to redesign services to make that sustainable. That will be one of the top priorities for the use of the pooled budgets. Rob Gibson made one of the most important points in the debate when he talked about unlocking some of the resources that are caught up in providing services for older people in those acute hospital beds. He is right that those resources need to be released, which is why we will ensure that the pooled budgets can be used to do that. In that way, we can release another resource that can be used to keep people safely in their homes, which is what many members have said they want to happen. I thank everyone for their speeches, particularly Jamie Stone, who made an excellent contribution. I assure members that the contributions that have been made in this debate will feed into the reshaping care programme that we are taking forward.

Will the member give way on that point?

It is about 10 minutes late. Does Jamie McGrigor acknowledge that many local authorities, such as the City of Edinburgh Council, are looking closely at their care-at-home services? If they pay £21 an hour for their in-house services compared to £14 an hour for external services, for example, they are trying to work out what the added value is for the £21 an hour. The solution—I think this is the way those authorities are going—is that in-house care would be focused on more complex care, such as for people with dementia, for which the staff have a higher level of training, rather than some of the more routine tasks that other contracts may cover. Is that not a good way to proceed?

I welcome the opportunity to debate care services for older people and the important programme of change on which we have embarked. The current systems for delivering social care will not support increasing numbers of frail older  people. That is why, as outlined in the spending plans and draft Scottish budget for 2011-12 that we announced yesterday, we are making available £70 million to be used in partnership across health and social care to focus on delivering improvements in older people's services. Residential care is just one of a complicated labyrinth of interrelated tough problems that we must tackle. We will tackle it, but we cannot do so in a disjointed, short-term way. To help us to understand the complex issues that we are discussing today, l will touch on a few of the facts about care home provision for older people in Scotland. At the end of March this year, there were 943 care homes, providing 39,150 places. Almost 14 per cent of residents were in local authority homes, 75 per cent were in private homes and 11 per cent were in voluntary sector homes. However, the picture is changing. The number of residents in local authority homes has fallen by almost 15 per cent in the past 10 years, to just over 4,000. At the same time, more than 30 per cent of care home residents are self-funders, because they have capital in excess of £22,750. That number is increasing year on year. Self-funders pay their own fees, over and above any entitlement to free personal and nursing care. Publicly funded residents have capital of less than £14,000, and the local authority pays for their care over and above the contribution that the individual makes from their pension, benefits and other income. It is clear from the statistics that local authorities depend to a very large extent on the independent sector for the provision of residential care to the older people in their areas—and I refer back to what I said about 14 per cent of residents being in local authority homes. In response to long-running concerns about the stability of the care home sector and the quality of the care that is provided, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities developed the national care home contract, in negotiation with Scottish Care, the body that represents the independent care home sector. The national contract was introduced in 2007-08, and the rationale for developing it was to standardise the terms, conditions and fees for publicly funded clients and to incentivise improvements in quality, through the grading system. All the published research on care home costs shows that there is a wide variation in the weekly costs of residential care, regardless of who owns and manages the home. That is true for all sectors, drawing on comparisons within and across sectors. In spite of those wide variations, COSLA and the independent care home sector have successfully negotiated a standard national contract rate for publicly funded residents over the past few years, which has removed the need for  costly and time-consuming negotiations between each of the 32 local authorities and the care home providers in their areas. Importantly, that has been linked to driving up quality. I know at first hand from the recent Scottish Care conference, which Mary Scanlon attended, just how strongly the independent sector feels about the apparent inequity in the charges for local authority care home provision, compared with the amount that local authorities pay for a publicly funded care home place under the national care home contract. As with most things, the situation is not quite as black and white as it first appears. Given the clear interdependence of local authorities and independent providers, an adversarial approach to the single issue of the cost of a care home place is not helpful. Faced with the dual pressures of diminishing public sector funding and increasing numbers of frail older people, we need to work together to develop new models of providing and paying for care. That has to mean much better joint commissioning, because only when partners in health sit down with their counterparts in councils and bring in expertise from the independent sector will we start to see real innovation, both in business models and in service development. The £70 million change fund, which I have referred to already, is a significant milestone on the road to securing high-quality, person-centred care for the future. Our long-term proposals will be set out in our reshaping delivery plan, which is to be published at the end of this year. We will not miss the opportunity to review current arrangements on funding and charging for care to ensure the development of long-term, fair and sustainable new models of care. In doing that, it would be wrong headed to focus on only one care sector and one care setting. Reshaping care requires us to take a far more fundamental look at the way in which care services are delivered across the board. That is what we have set out to do with the reshaping care process. A number of public sessions have been held across Scotland, and they have been very positive in bringing forward suggestions. I am totally committed to keeping up the momentum on this important change agenda, and I hope that that finds support from across the Parliament. I move amendment S3M-7422.1, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "recognises the need to shift the balance of care; notes that independent and local authority-run care homes in Scotland are regulated by the Care Commission in accordance with standards set by ministers, and further recognises the opportunity through the Reshaping Care programme public engagement process to examine existing models of provision and funding across all care  sectors and care settings to ensure that value for money is coupled with continuing high standards of care."

I, too, congratulate Helen Eadie on her motion, which has given Parliament the chance to discuss the important subject of arthritis and musculoskeletal conditions. As the motion makes clear, that covers a wide range of conditions that place a real burden on the people who live with them, as well as on their families and carers. Those conditions also account for a significant proportion of NHS activity in spite of the stoicism with which many people face them. It is for those reasons that arthritis is mentioned in our  long-term conditions action plan as an example of a common long-term condition. The action plan is about helping people to live well with their condition and recognising them as leading partners in their own care. Self-management is one of the key elements in that work. Arthritis has been at the forefront in developing innovative and new approaches to self-management, and we have been able to draw on those in setting up the long-term conditions self-management fund, which is administered on behalf of the Government by the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. Across the long-term conditions work, we very much value our partnership with the voluntary sector, and I echo the terms of the motion in acknowledging and appreciating the work of the various third sector organisations that it mentions. Please excuse my coughing, but I have been talking too much today. A fair amount is happening at the moment in relation to arthritis, which I hope to share. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network has revised its clinical guideline on the early management of rheumatoid arthritis, taking account of the new medications that have been developed. I hope that when it is published in December, the guideline will promote awareness of the benefits of treating the condition as soon as possible after onset. Implementation of the existing SIGN guideline has been assisted by the "Clinical Audit of Care in Rheumatoid Arthritis"—known as CARA—which NHS Quality Improvement Scotland published in December 2008. Its findings are being addressed through the web-based audit programme that is run by the Scottish Society for Rheumatology. The revised guideline will also pave the way for the needs assessment of rheumatoid arthritis that we have commissioned from the Scottish public health network, which is about giving more impact to the needs assessment that was published more than 10 years ago. The network considered whether it should continue to focus on rheumatoid arthritis. There is no doubt that other types of arthritis should not be neglected, so the needs assessment will emphasise that rheumatoid arthritis work should promote benefits for people with those other types of arthritis, too. All of that work could be drawn together effectively through the mechanism of managed clinical networks, which would give a strong voice to patients and the voluntary sector on the way in which services should be improved. Such networks promote multidisciplinary working with extended roles for nurses and AHPs, and they encourage the development of integrated care pathways across community and hospital care. They would use the SIGN guideline as their  evidence base, and the findings of CARA would help them to work with boards in the most effective application of resources. We have, therefore, been exploring with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde the possibility of that board hosting a rheumatology MCN, and I am pleased to say that the board is now in the process of setting up such a network with some pump-priming funding from the Government. I hope that that will act as a demonstrator that other boards can follow. Towards the end of last month, SIGN published a groundbreaking new guideline on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis that should bring about improved diagnosis and treatment in primary care. I also support the call in the motion for more research into these conditions, since stem cell therapy is still some way off. The chief scientist office is already supporting five research projects related to arthritis at a cost of £1.1 million, but it is always interested in well-constructed applications. I am aware that there have been no new advances in the treatment of osteoarthritis in the past 25 years. The increasing recognition of the role that genetics plays will, I hope, help to change that position. It is also good that the musculoskeletal service model that is referred to in the motion will, in its first phase, have a focus on osteoarthritis. We are developing the national MSK programme under the auspices of the delivery framework for adult rehabilitation. It focuses on early access to assessment and treatment by specialist practitioners based in primary care. They form part of a team that includes nurses, physiotherapists and podiatrists. People will be referred to the most suitable hospital service. Since the motion mentions that arthritis and MSK conditions account for 48 per cent of all work-related illnesses in Scotland, it is important to mention that taking account of people's work goals is an essential part of the model. Linking to employability services early in people's rehabilitation journey will form part of their care plan—that is the point that Richard Simpson made. That ties in well with our revision of the healthy working lives strategy. The model also integrates the work that our lead clinician for chronic pain has been taking forward in developing chronic pain pathways. Those are designed to direct people who are living with pain to the most appropriate service, whether that is provided by voluntary sector groups such as the Pain Association Scotland, in the community or in a specialist pain management clinic. The MSK service model is being evaluated in two NHS boards. We have appointed a national lead to support the roll-out of the model, and a national programme board is being set up to  oversee its implementation. The board has not yet been created, but I support what the motion says about the contribution that people living with MSK conditions would be able to make. I can, therefore, give assurance that the board will include patient representation. A number of points were made in the debate. I will write to Richard Simpson about the latest position with regard to Forth Valley NHS Board, because I understand the points that he makes. I hope that it will be clear from what I have said that the Government takes seriously the needs of the many people who are living with the conditions that have been mentioned tonight. I am confident that the work that is in hand will lead to earlier and more effective interventions that will markedly improve people's quality of life.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

I, too, thank members for their varied and useful contributions to what has been an interesting and consensual debate on an important topic that touches the lives of everybody in Scotland, including those who live in rural areas. Members have acknowledged the good work that is in progress, and the need for the pace of change to speed up and for the service to have greater cohesion. That was very much the flavour of the cabinet secretary's response to the committee's report. She laid out clearly who was going to do what to take forward particular elements of the report and its recommendations. Perhaps we need to get a little better at recognising best practice throughout Scotland and at encouraging its take-up when benefits have been demonstrated. We have heard about a few of those benefits, and I will refer to one or two of them in picking up on members' remarks. If I do not get round to dealing with all members' comments, I will attempt to do so by writing to them. Christine Grahame talked about several issues, including the increase in pressures on the Ambulance Service and the accident and emergency service, in particular since 2004. We are beginning to get a better understanding of that situation. I am not sure that it is all related to the changes in the GP contract. Some of it might be, but there are other pressures, such as the ageing population. The profile of people who use the Ambulance Service or A and E shows that there is still very much a balance towards older people, which we must address in a number of ways. So there are complexities. Richard Simpson made several good points. He talked about the use and contribution of BASICS-trained GPs. That was an important point, and one on which we absolutely agree. The other point that he made, which to a degree answers Mike Rumbles's concerns, is that, even with the level of protection that the health budget is receiving, the increases in the health budget are nowhere near the increases in previous years' budgets. At the same time, we still have the pressure of rising costs in the health service, whether in drugs budgets or other areas. Therefore, we need innovation and we need to consider efficiency and redesign.

I will come back to the member's point in a moment. In fact, go on—sorry.

I understand that. As I understand it, NHS Grampian is at an early stage of consultation and there are no proposals on the table. Therefore, there is an opportunity for communities to influence the decision making. We expect communities to be part of any service changes, and not only major ones. That is good practice, so we would expect it. Murdo Fraser talked about health boards taking note of the committee's report. I am sure that they will do so. The cabinet secretary laid out in her response to the report how that will happen—how it will be picked up and responded to directly, which is important. I am not sure about this, but Murdo Fraser seemed to indicate that there is a case for GPs to take back overall responsibility for 24-hour health care. Our opinion is that that is not the way forward and it certainly would not be welcomed by general practitioners; indeed, they are likely to reject it. Things have moved on since the days when GPs had that responsibility. Although the current system might not be perfect and there is still work to be done, Richard Simpson laid out some things that show the potential if we can just complete the integration of services. There is potential for something far better. Murdo Fraser also mentioned the future of the GMS contract and the fact that the UK Government has produced a white paper proposing changes to the way in which the NHS is run, including out-of-hours proposals. The Scottish Government has said on a number of occasions that we do not support GP commissioning, and we would not support it in the current case. One reason for that is that we believe that NHS boards are best placed to commission and pay for services, because they can take a wider perspective. Handing over even more resources to GPs to commission services might not be in the interests of patients or the public purse. The UK Government should think carefully before embarking down that road, because the law of unintended consequences might come out at the other end. We should be cautious. Murdo Fraser raised several issues about Kinloch Rannoch, as I expected him to. I recognise his interest in the issue over a long period. The point that I make to him, which has been made already and which I know that the cabinet secretary said a fair amount about in her  evidence to the committee, is that we expect boards to ensure that they meet the NHS QIS standards when they provide out-of-hours care and that they listen to local communities. However, that does not mean that they will always agree and accede to the demands of local communities. There is a balance to be struck. I encourage the continuation of the discussions of the reference group that involves NHS Tayside and local residents, which have been going on for quite some time. As I understand it, that process has resulted in some positive developments. The community might not have got everything that it wanted, but improvements to the service have emanated from the work of the reference group. Jamie Stone mentioned transport issues. I am sure that he will be aware that the Scottish Ambulance Service is undertaking a considerable programme of work on the patient transport system, which is important. One other thing that I want to mention—

Okay. I will write to the members whose points I have not responded to. Some other important points were made but, rather than take up any more time, I will deal with them in writing.

I welcome the opportunity to report on what the Scottish Government and NHS boards are doing to improve out-of-hours health care provision, including for people who live in rural areas. I also pay tribute to the work of the Health and Sport Committee in producing the report. It has been a busy time for the committee's members. I will repeat what the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said to the committee. First, the Scottish Government is committed to providing the highest-quality health care to the people of Scotland at whatever time of day and in whatever part of the country it is required. Secondly, we believe that the current arrangements for out-of-hours services are fit for the purpose of providing such care. Out-of-hours primary care should not be considered in isolation from all the NHS and other services with which it interacts. Therefore, I will touch on the wider issues, including integrating out-of-hours services with other unscheduled and scheduled care services; providing better information to the public about the range of services that are available and when they are available; and assuring the quality of the services that are provided in different NHS board areas. For clarity, I will set out what we are doing under the three headings in the Health and Sport Committee's report. The first is accessibility and availability. I certainly attach importance to NHS boards conducting regular reviews of out-of-hours services with the appropriate engagement of the local community. Earlier in the year, the Scottish Government issued new guidance that is designed to assist NHS boards with their engagement with patients, the public and other stakeholders when progressing potential service changes. I am happy to say that boards are making good progress with  their efforts and are developing strong partnerships with communities, many of which are influencing how local services, including those that are provided out of hours, are delivered. That is a positive thing and I encourage boards to continue that dialogue. Out-of-hours services contribute enormously to managing people in the community by avoiding unnecessary admissions and, thereby, improving the patient experience. That lies at the heart of the increasing number of anticipatory care initiatives throughout Scotland. The services are also about ensuring continuity of care for patients with chronic conditions, whether or not the patient's GP continues to provide 24-hour primary care services. We also know that good access to general practice is a key factor in out-of-hours demand. I am therefore pleased that the cabinet secretary will next week launch a toolkit that has been developed by the Royal College of General Practitioners to help GPs to take the practical steps that are necessary to ensure that there is consistent high-quality access for patients during in-hours periods. The Scottish Ambulance Service is making a significant contribution to managing people in the community with the continuing development of its see-and-treat initiatives. That is resulting in increasing numbers of people being treated by paramedics in their homes, which avoids unnecessary journeys to hospital. The potential benefits include optimising the use of telehealth. That is just one of the areas that are covered in the good practice guide that was issued to the NHS in August. We are aware that many people are uncertain about how and where to access the service that is best placed to support them. That is why we supported the pilot of the know who to turn to campaign in NHS Grampian, and it is why, earlier in the year, we made the marketing toolkit that supported that pilot available to all NHS boards, along with funding to help them to run similar campaigns in their areas. All NHS boards are adopting the toolkit or a variant of it. Supporting patients to get to the right treatment at first contact is a key objective of the work that the Scottish Ambulance Service and NHS 24 are undertaking on a new common triage tool. In recent years, NHS boards have been working with NHS Quality Improvement Scotland to assess the quality and effectiveness of their local out-of-hours primary care services against the set of NHS QIS standards that were published back in August 2004. That has assured us that NHS boards have developed safe and effective services, that they all have in place robust clinical governance arrangements, and that they all monitor and report on service performance. The  NHS QIS standards have been invaluable in supporting the development of out-of-hours primary care services in the past six years, but as we told the committee in evidence, we also believe that the time is right for NHS QIS to refresh the standards so that NHS boards may better examine their services and make improvements where appropriate. Since we gave that evidence, NHS QIS has started work with key stakeholders to develop and pilot new standards, and it aims to complete that work by this time next year. In the meantime, I stress that all NHS boards provide for real-time monitoring of how they are handling calls and delivering services against a timeframe that has been set by NHS 24; that they ensure on-going sound clinical governance around the clinical workforce that supports out-of-hours services; that they have robust processes in place for investigating and learning from adverse incidents; and that they have regular reporting arrangements, whereby their out-of-hours performance feeds into the clinical and corporate governance structures of the board. The third heading in the committee's report is sustainability and cost. Ensuring sustainability means different things in different places. What it certainly does not mean is turning the clock back. We believe that there is added value in, where geography allows it, co-location and, where possible, in integrated primary and secondary care services. That fosters closer working between professions and will help to sustain services and standards throughout the challenging times that lie ahead. In nine of the 11 mainland NHS boards, GPs work in support of hospital doctors in accident and emergency departments out of hours. There are a range of models that reflect local circumstances. In most, GPs work as an integral part of the hospital team, in which they undertake a generalist role. Their experience of working across the system with knowledge of the services that are available in the community is of benefit to the whole system. Those increasingly integrated models are in the best interests of improving and sustaining patient care and service delivery alongside delivering effective and efficient services. We should recognise just how far out-of-hours services have come since responsibility passed to NHS boards in 2004. It took time for boards and NHS 24 to put in place robust, responsive and effective services. I was very struck by what Christine Grahame said about NHS 24 in particular having had its challenges in the past. One of the strong things that came through the committee report is how far NHS 24 has travelled in making its systems and processes more robust. There is an element of truth in what the committee says in its report—Christine Grahame also raised  it in her speech—that we now need a rebuilding of reassurance among the public on the progress that has been made. We all in the chamber know that to be the case, but we need to ensure that everyone out there is also assured of it. We are looking at how to do that and how to communicate to the public the ways in which they can access the right bit of the service at the time when they require it. A lot is in place across Scotland. There is still more to do, but NHS 24 now has a range of initiatives that are designed to support patients in the community, to help to manage demand on an out-of-hours basis and to provide other unscheduled care services. We are not complacent. I look forward to the opportunity that the debate provides to explore how best to continue to drive up standards.

Responsibility for the overall provision of national health service dental services in the area rests with NHS Fife. The board is undertaking a range of measures to improve access to NHS dental services in Fife.

I very much agree with what the member said. Of course, the primary and community care premises modernisation programme, in which we gave priority to the development of dental services and NHS dental provision, has led to the really important developments that Tricia Marwick has mentioned. Those developments will help to sustain the momentum whereby we have seen huge increases in the number of people who are able to be registered with an NHS dentist. I am sure that everyone in the chamber will welcome that.

Never quote yourself.

Will the member give way?

Will Jackie Baillie give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I fear that an untruth may just have been told.

Having been party to those discussions, I feel that it is not right to mislead Parliament in this manner.

Given what Richard Simpson says, why did Labour feel that it was okay for boards to have in the 2005 act the powers that it seems set against now?

Football clubs and the relevant football authorities are responsible for managing how they run their clubs and the sport. We expect the footballing authorities and clubs to ensure that appropriate mechanisms are in place to allow their supporters' views to be represented. The Scottish Government fully recognises the valuable role that supporters play in football, which is why we have provided funding to Supporters Direct in Scotland, a group that ensures that ordinary supporters have their voices heard.

I am more than aware of the issues surrounding Dundee Football Club, some of which are complex financial issues. Bill Butler should be aware that Dee 4 Life has representation on the club's board. Given the complex financial issues, I am not sure that a greater role by supporters on the board would necessarily have made a big difference in this case. Nevertheless, a greater role for supporters on boards is something that we would wish to encourage. On the specific matters that Bill Butler raised, I am in contact with Dundee FC and with a number of fans who have been in touch with me. I will meet representatives of the club on Saturday. Bill Butler will appreciate that actions sometimes speak louder than words, and I hope that he might join a number of other politicians who will be attending the Dundee match, watching the team play Partick Thistle on Saturday—paying at the turnstile, of course, and importantly so in this case. Bill Butler is more than welcome to join us; I am sure that he would be made very welcome by the board. That is an open invitation to him, and to anybody else in the chamber, to join us on Saturday.

The process from here on in is that the first appeal will be made to the SFL. Beyond that, the appeal will be to the Scottish Football Association. Yesterday, I met the SFA to  discuss a number of matters. During the meeting, I raised the issue of Dundee FC to ensure that the SFA is aware of the issues that have been brought to my attention by fans and the club. As would be expected, given that the SFA is involved in the appeal process, it would not necessarily have been appropriate for the SFA to pass comment, but I can assure the member that it is well aware of the issues involved. As a local member, I will continue to do all that I can to support Dundee FC, which is, of course, a great institution for the city and one of Scotland's very important football clubs.

As part of our national sexual health strategy "Respect and Responsibility" and national outcomes 2008-11, national health service boards are required to ensure that young people have access to sexual health information, advice and services, including chlamydia testing and treatment, when that is appropriate. NHS boards are also required to comply with service standards set by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which support testing for chlamydia in the under 25s.

I congratulate NHS Dumfries and Galloway on the work that it has undertaken to encourage young people who might be at risk to come forward for testing and treatment. It is clear that the board sees the benefits of testing and treatment for improved sexual health outcomes for that group of young people. I am sure that it will be keen to continue the service and, perhaps, to customise and develop it to meet local circumstances. I will be happy to furnish the member with information about developments in the area.

The issue was identified in the sexual health strategy. Society has changed, and people quite often develop new relationships in their middle years. It is important that we realise that STIs are not the domain just of young people. Therefore, the strategy to do with the information that is given to the older age group is important, as are treatment and testing. The matter is being taken forward as part of our sexual health strategy, in recognition of the changing society in which we live.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of tackling skin cancer. Through improvements in cancer services, education and legislation, we are seeking to reduce incidence rates and improve outcomes for patients.

I am always happy to consider ideas that are raised. I will take forward Nanette Milne's point. I am sure that the member is aware of good things that we have been doing, such as the sunsmart campaign, which is run by Cancer Research UK and targets all age groups with the same key public health messages. We should remember that Scotland has been at the forefront of legislating to tackle sunbed use. Members of the Scottish Parliament came together to agree to an important step forward in ensuring that people are aware of the risks associated with sunbed use.  There is always more to do, but we should acknowledge the progress that has been made.

The Scottish Government holds no specific records relating to the incidence of cancer, stillbirth and birth deformities in respect of armed forces personnel and their families who  are based in Scotland. We understand that the Ministry of Defence, similarly, does not break down military statistics by geographical area of birth, upbringing or recruitment.

I am not sure that the Scottish Government would be best placed to do that, but we are certainly open to discussing the matter with the MOD. It might be best if I write to the member with more detail on that.

Between February 2007 and the end of 2009, the number of people with Type 1 diabetes using an insulin pump increased from around 200 to about 553. Data on the total cost to the NHS of insulin pump therapy are not held centrally. However NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has calculated  the cost of a pump at around £2,000 and the associated insulin and consumables at around £1,800 a year. The main resource element, of course, is the staff who are needed to deliver the education programmes that people with diabetes must complete before deciding whether to start insulin pump therapy.

The member has raised the issue previously and I acknowledge his long-standing interest in the matter. As he will be aware, we have been very proactive with boards, including asking for their plans, to ensure that we increase the number of people who can access an insulin pump. He will also be aware of our work on the national procurement insulin pump framework, which has been designed in such a way as to release savings that can be reinvested in diabetes services. Thus far, 156 pumps have been purchased through that mechanism with maximum potential savings of around £100,000. More needs to be done and I am very keen to see more action in that direction. It is a good way of ensuring that we maximise the money that goes directly to diabetes services.

As I am sure the member will be aware, the Scottish diabetes action plan, to which she referred and which was published in August, sets out a series of actions that are designed to support boards in making significant and sustained progress in improving pump provision. Progress should include the development of waiting time criteria for pumps and a national insulin pump study day, the aim of which is to ensure that staff are aware of requirements. There is a mixed picture, as we have discussed previously in the chamber. The member cited the figure for NHS Grampian. If we look at the figure for NHS Fife, which is 4.4 per cent, and that for NHS Tayside, which is 4.6 per  cent, we see that other boards are further along the path that we would like all boards to follow. The issue is important. Through the procurement framework, we have set incentives for boards to use the mechanism and, in turn, release savings from which they can benefit by making investment in their services. We are encouraging boards on a number of fronts down that road. I hope that that will bear fruit over time.

Responsibility for the overall provision of national health service dental services in the area rests with NHS Highland. The board is undertaking a range of measures to improve access to NHS dental services in the Highlands.

I am always in favour of constructive discussions, so I would be happy to do that. However, we should acknowledge the efforts that NHS Highland is making, such as its international recruitment initiative. Although it has had some setbacks with people leaving, which happens, it is trying again to recruit through that initiative. I should also say that between 1 September 2009 and August this year more than 14,000 new patients were registered with an NHS dentist in Highland. They were not previously registered anywhere in Highland, so real progress has been made. The £5.6 million over two years that has been allocated to the primary and community care premises modernisation programme is being used to provide new dental premises in Caithness. A four-surgery dental clinic is under construction in Thurso in the grounds of Dunbar hospital. The health board seeks to do more. Although there are long-standing challenges with dental  provision within the Highlands, we should also recognise some of the positive steps that NHS Highland is taking.

I will be happy to provide Rob Gibson with the detail of that. The University of Aberdeen dental school has clearly identified encouraging students to go out on vocational placements in the north of Scotland as important because it gives those students the opportunity to consider basing themselves in areas in the north of Scotland once they are qualified. I am confident that that will produce real benefits for those areas, but I am happy to write to him with more detail on that.

I can say with certainty that the employment of salaried dentists has been a tremendous success in the NHS. Through the recruitment of salaried dentists, we have tackled long waits the length and breadth of Scotland, so I am not sure whether the picture that Jackie Baillie seeks to paint has any basis in fact whatever.

I thank all members who took part in the debate. There were a number of positive and constructive speeches. It is clear that all parties acknowledge the impact that caring can have on carers and young carers and that they appreciate the need to improve and extend much-needed support. I will pick up on a number of the speeches that were made. If I do not pick up on them all, I will write to those members to whom I do not respond. First, I will say a bit about implementation, because a number of members raised that issue. Our intention is to establish an implementation and monitoring group, which will meet for the first time next month. It will comprise key partners from a range of organisations who will build on the work of the earlier steering groups. Our partners in implementation will include the national carer organisations, whose services and support make a significant difference to the lives of many of Scotland's unpaid carers. That will ensure that they have clear oversight of the progress that is made as the strategy is implemented. As I said at the outset, we produced the strategy jointly with COSLA, whose members recognise the key contribution that they can make to delivering many of its action points and outcomes, whether through teachers identifying and supporting young carers, schools adopting more young carer-friendly policies and practices, or social workers offering assessment and support to carers. COSLA's involvement in the implementation and monitoring group will be key. The NHS will also be represented on the group. When I met NHS board chairs last month, I  highlighted the important contribution that NHS boards can make to delivering improvements for unpaid carers and young carers. I referred earlier to the fact that the development of the strategy was a joint effort. Members can be assured that its implementation and the delivery of the improved outcomes that it seeks to achieve will also very much be a joint effort. I confirm to members that I am happy to report to Parliament on progress on both strategies. We can discuss further how often that should be, but I am happy to commit to that. A number of members mentioned the carer information strategy moneys. As I said at the outset, that is a priority for the spending review. I recognise the importance of the CIS moneys for supporting carers centres and a number of other important initiatives to support carers in local settings. However, we should recognise that local authorities also support carers centres, and it is important that we make progress on that jointly, because I would not want one lot of public money to replace other public money that has been lost in the system. Those discussions will have to take place locally, but I get a sense that carers centres are recognised for the work that they do. Jackie Baillie raised the specific issue of the self-directed support bill, which will be published in the very near future. I will correct what she said. The delay is not because of a tussle between the Scottish Government and COSLA over resources. I am sure that Jackie Baillie understands that the whole premise behind self-directed support is to use the existing resources in the system better. The test sites have shown that resources can be saved. As I have told Jackie Baillie before, the reason for the delay was that stakeholders had fundamental issues with the default position in the bill being self-directed support and unintended consequences of that. It is important that those issues are resolved should that remain one of the key planks of the bill. It was felt that more time was necessary to try to get agreement among stakeholders.

I do not want to breach the consensus that exists, but it is the SNP that has driven self-directed support. I am glad that Labour now supports us on that. There will be legislation as quickly as it can be taken forward. Nineteen of the 32 local authorities support the principle  behind the self-directed support bill, and I welcome that support. I turn to other issues that members have raised. Mary Scanlon raised the issue of the carers' rights charter, and rightly highlighted its importance for carers. Ross Finnie talked again about delivery and accountability. I think that I reiterated in an intervention in his speech that pooled budgets create an opportunity for us to move forward significantly on issues on which there is local agreement between councils and health boards. There is an opportunity to move forward on the changes that need to be made in the interaction between health and social care services. Many of those changes will directly benefit carers, which is why it is important that carers should be around the table when decisions are being made. They should not be an afterthought; rather, they should have a voice at the top table when local plans are being developed. Bob Doris made important points about kinship care and the challenges in moving forward on that. Mary Mulligan, Hugh O'Donnell, Cathy Peattie and Margaret Mitchell commented on resources. The coming pressures on Scottish budgets will not have escaped anyone. I wish that the situation were otherwise, but it is not. Those pressures will affect health board and council budgets, which will affect the pace of change that we can implement with strategies, whether that is the carers strategy or any other strategy. I wish that that were not so, but it is so. However, I hope that what I have said reassures carers that we are taking practical steps forward through pooled budgets with a significant but yet to be determined resource behind them; the continuation, I hope, of CIS moneys; the respite commitment; delivering through the voluntary sector; and self-directed support, on which I say to Jackie Baillie that we will deliver legislation to move forward. All of those things are important in providing carers with tangible benefits. Such benefits will come from the carers strategy. I hope that those who are listening in the public gallery have taken heart from the constructive comments that have been made throughout the chamber.

I take it from that that the member supports pooled budgets, the level of which we are negotiating at the moment. I take it that the member supports that direction of travel.

I have been quite up front in saying to carer organisations that in the current economic climate, funding such an entitlement is extremely challenging. We would not want resources to be diverted from one set of carers to another, and the economic challenges that we face mean that there is a real danger of that happening. However, we would like to see that commitment being met in the longer term; it is just that it is very challenging in the current economic climate.

We came into Government with a strong commitment to develop a new carers strategy for Scotland. The aim was to build on the considerable progress that had been made since the publication in 2005 of the landmark care 21 report, "The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland". I am pleased to open this debate on the new carers and young carers strategy for Scotland, which we produced jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and launched on 26 July. COSLA and the Scottish Government did not produce the strategy on our own. That would have been to do a huge disservice to the thousands of carers and young carers who selflessly care for family and friends. The strategy was very much informed by many people in the statutory and voluntary sectors and by carers and young carers—I welcome many of those people to the gallery. Their significant input has ensured that the strategy reflects the needs and interests of Scotland's unpaid carers and young carers, which is important, given the significant contribution of carers and young carers to their families, communities and society. As we know, unpaid carers in Scotland save the statutory services as much as £7.6 billion each year. The publication of the strategy is evidence of our commitment to address the adverse impact of caring that there can sometimes be, when carers' physical and mental health and wellbeing and financial situation are compromised. The approach builds on the £9 million that we invested in health boards to enable them to develop carer information strategies. The information strategies are having a positive impact at local level. There is a sense that the profile of carers has been raised, and support has been provided in many different ways. A significant part of the funding is going to carers centres and young carers projects, for essential work with carers. I stress that we regard the continuation of the funding—£5 million a year from April 2011—as a priority in the spending review. If we are successful, I will discuss with the national carers organisations and health boards the priority for use of those resources. Of course, local authorities will continue to have an important  role in providing core funding to local carers services. The strategy builds on the £4 million that we allocated to enable local authorities to make progress in delivering our concordat commitment to provide an additional 10,000 weeks of respite care by 2011. Figures that were published in September showed that overall respite provision increased by nearly 9,000 weeks between 2007-08 and 2009-10, against a target of 6,000 weeks. That is good news, which shows that our investment in respite is delivering real progress. The strategy also builds on the considerable resources that we allocated to the national carers organisations to fund carers training programmes, stabilise young carers projects, provide national young carers festivals and do much more. It complements investment from elsewhere, including the Big Lottery Fund, which has said that it will invest £50 million in a programme that will support people with dementia and their carers. We welcome that investment. Other investment, such as the £20 million investment in telecare, benefits carers, who tell us that such funding is important. The strategy provides clear direction and gives impetus to the progress that the Government wants to see during the next five years. However, because of the challenging economic situation, we have to acknowledge and accept that there will not be a change overnight. Change will be incremental. We should note that there is a strong economic argument for supporting carers, as set out robustly in the strategy: with timely and appropriate support, carers can continue to care for longer and in much better health, diverting significant demands away from health and social care services. In the current economic climate, it is even more important that health and social services, as well as the third sector, make the best use of existing resources. There is a clear spend-to-save argument for supporting carers through earlier, preventive interventions. Carers have a crucial role to play in our work around reshaping care for older people, and we are determined that they will not be further burdened by the shift from institutional care to care at home. Indeed, when local partnerships submit their local delivery plans under the reshaping care programme, they will have to demonstrate how the third sector—including carers organisations and carers themselves—will be involved. I am clear that carers should be around the table when the local plans are being developed. We are in discussion with COSLA about making significant resources available to be used in pooled budgets jointly across statutory bodies and involving the third sector. That presents a major opportunity to  transform services locally, which can better support carers. The strategy highlights the fact that many of the improvements that carers look for do not require significant additional investment. Carers tell us that it is often the small things that make a difference—for example, when a general practitioner gives time to the carer and is sensitive to the impact that caring can have. Young carers tell us that having a supportive teacher who gives them extra time for homework makes a difference. The carers and young carers strategy is one strategy, but with two significant parts. That approach recognises that adult and young carers have different needs and require different approaches to meet those needs and achieve improved outcomes. However, it also acknowledges that some issues are common to carers and young carers, particularly for young carers in their transition into adulthood. Both parts of the strategy have common features. For example, they both include many recent quotations from carers and young carers to show what it is like to be a carer or young carer and to tell both positive and negative stories. Those real-life situations will to help pave the way for good service development and show what to avoid. The Equal Opportunities Committee and many others welcomed that approach, and I put on record the committee's good work. Both parts of the strategy also have a strong evidence base for support to carers and young carers. They both have a strong equalities dimension, with a focus on hard-to-reach carers and young carers. They both show the importance of a pathway approach from carer and young carer identification, through assessment to different types of support at crucial times. They both recognise the diversity of carers and young carers and acknowledge that every caring situation is unique. There will be priorities for support to carers and young carers, whether that is older carers, the parent carer who cares for a disabled child or carers living in the most deprived areas with little income. Specifically on adult carers, "Caring Together: The Carers Strategy for Scotland 2010-2015" recognises carers as "equal partners in care" who make a significant contribution to the delivery of health and social care services. It identifies a suite of action points, the delivery of which will help to support and sustain unpaid carers and enable them to enjoy a quality of life outwith caring. The two parts of the strategy are both based on an outcomes approach and are set within a wider framework for action, such as our programme for reshaping care for older people. With young  carers, there are clear links to the getting it right for every child programme, which provides a catalyst for outcome-focused assessment and multi-agency working. It will benefit young carers and help to ensure that they are supported. Of course, there are also strong links to curriculum for excellence and to the more choices, more chances agenda. "Getting it Right for Young Carers: The Young Carers Strategy for Scotland: 2010-2015" recognises that young carers can benefit from providing care. However, it is essential that they are relieved of inappropriate caring roles and supported to be children and young people first. It highlights the crucial role that social workers and national health service staff have, as they can ensure that the cared-for person's care package never relies on a child or young person's contribution. Further, the strategy recognises the key contribution that teachers can make in supporting young carers in school and responding sensitively when their caring role impacts on their attendance, attainment or behaviour. We are giving the Princess Royal Trust for Carers £150,000 for a fourth young carers festival next year. We will be able to get feedback from 500 or so young carers on what impact they think the strategy has had one year on from publication. It is worth noting the very good support that there has been for the young carers festival from across the chamber. I know that that support is welcomed. In recognising the voluntary sector's hugely important role in supporting carers, I was pleased to be able to commit £1 million in new investment this year to support the implementation of the strategy, and subsequently to extend that funding to cover each of the five years of the strategy, making £5 million in total. In the current economic climate, that funding is meaningful and will deliver change for carers and young carers. We have awarded the funding to the national carers organisations to enable them to develop innovative, flexible and personalised short breaks for carers and young carers. With our approval, they propose to use it in two ways: to invite bids from stakeholder organisations with service development ideas that aim to increase the choice, availability and quality of short-break opportunities; and to help carers directly and quickly by giving them access to a fund that can help them to purchase a break of their choosing. The national carers organisations are working up the details and will publicise the scheme as soon as possible.

There will be a robust auditing process, as there always is with the third sector. The third sector is well placed to be able to deliver innovative thinking. That is what it is best at, and I am confident that it will do so in this case. To be effective, the strategy needs to be implemented at the local level by local authorities, health boards, the third sector and others. The aim is to achieve practical support on a consistent and uniform basis. I will talk further about implementation in my closing remarks. In conclusion, I am not complacent about the challenges that carers and young carers face daily nor about the scale of the task in implementation, but ministers will wish to know—I mean members; ministers already know—that the strategy has attracted international attention. The getting it right for young carers strategy is believed to be the first young carers strategy in Europe. It is good that Scotland has a first once again. We can and should learn from others as we face up to the challenges ahead, but it is nice to know that people are also learning from us. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication, in July 2010, of the carers and young carers strategy for Scotland for 2010 to 2015, Caring Together and Getting It Right For Young Carers; notes that this strategy has been produced jointly with COSLA and informed by a wide range of stakeholders; recognises the importance of providing effective and timely support to Scotland's estimated 657,000 unpaid carers in order to sustain them in their vital role in caring for relatives or friends affected by disability, illness or substance misuse, a role that benefits their families, local communities, Scottish society and the economy, and agrees that young carers should be relieved of inappropriate caring roles and supported to be children and young people first and foremost.

There have been some valuable contributions to the debate. Jackie Baillie's motion deals with specific concerns about the future of Leuchie house, but it also raises general issues about respite services for people  with long-term conditions such as multiple sclerosis. The motion rightly praises the quality of services that are provided at Leuchie house. I know from the correspondence that I have received how highly valued it is by those who use it. I am also aware of the dedication of the staff there. I hope that an alternative provider can be found, even at this late stage. Ross Finnie outlined in a very well-thought-out speech the importance of that potential solution. I can well understand the concerns of service users and carers, and of the staff of Leuchie house, about the proposed changes. Any type of change will always be difficult, but the decision is ultimately one for the MS Society. I hope that its decision-making process will take proper account of the views of service users and carers. I am aware that there are concerns about the process and that they will be raised at the society's forthcoming AGM, as its members are entitled to do. The background to the issue is the MS Society's review of its respite services, in which a range of options were considered. We know what the review's key findings were. I would not like the debate to be about whether we are taking sides for or against the MS Society; it should be about people with MS getting access to the respite and other services that are best for them and for their families and carers. The Government wants to work in partnership with the third sector, because the third sector is recognised as leading the way in service innovations, as Richard Simpson pointed out. The focus now is on flexibility of services and on finding ways, where possible, of delivering services to people in their homes or communities, to help people participate in society to the fullest extent possible.

I have had a discussion with the MS Society about its proposals. I will come on to the role of the Government. We need to ensure that services and support become even more flexible in future. We are championing self-directed support, because it gives people choice and control over the support that they receive. We know that people's lives can be transformed beyond recognition through personalised care or support because they get help that matches their circumstances and goals. Central to that approach is integrating within that overall package of care short breaks for a person with MS or their carers and families. For example, in the Borders, the council has provided a package  of care for a woman with progressive MS. She uses her direct payments to allow her children to engage in the activities that they enjoy. She can use her flexible-breaks funding to visit her family elsewhere in the country. Her general health and wellbeing have improved markedly because she gets that support. Our consultation on self-directed support has shown strong backing for action at national and local level to bring about a culture in which choice and control are the norm. Providers of services in the statutory and voluntary sectors are having to make hard choices. Tough decisions are being made at local level about how best to provide and fund short breaks in the light of resource and other pressures. The MS Society has acknowledged that, if Leuchie house closes, that will in the short term reduce the respite choices that are available to current services users. That is concerning. It is therefore important that the society ensures that alternative provision is arranged to meet service users' on-going care needs. I understand that the society has plans to contact all those who have stayed at Leuchie in the past two years to determine those needs and how the society can support them. We certainly expect that to happen. That process should involve social work departments, to create care plans for short breaks, and it should be about assisting those people and their carers to access more personalised services. As I said, this is a matter for the MS Society to decide. It is of course ultimately accountable to its members for the decisions it makes. This is not a matter in which the Government can intervene. Jackie Baillie said that she would not make a recommendation to the MS Society. I am sure that she would not expect any rule other than the rule that she applied to herself to apply to the Scottish Government.

I will come on to that. [Interruption.]

The advice that I would give the MS Society is to listen to its service users and carers. I will come on to the issue of writing to the society in a moment. It was unfortunate that Iain Gray chose to take the opportunity to attack the Scottish Government for not intervening. There has never been any occasion, under this Administration or previous  ones, when ministers have intervened to change a decision made by an independent voluntary sector organisation. In 2003, when CrossReach was closing care homes in a number of communities in Scotland, ministers rightly did not intervene because that was an independent decision by the voluntary sector. It would be wrong for any MSP to give service users the impression that the Government can wave a magic wand and change a situation when an independent voluntary organisation is making a decision.

I do not think that anyone is burying their head in the sand. I do not have the power to tell an independent voluntary organisation to do something different with its services. It would be wrong to raise service users' expectations that the situation is different; it has never been any different for previous ministers in previous Governments.  The issues that have been raised in this debate are important. Jackie Baillie asked me whether I would write to the MS Society. I am prepared to do so to ensure that it is aware of the strength of feeling and of the issues that have been raised in the debate. I will certainly write to the MS Society. I hope that Leuchie house does not close. If it does, there could be a knock-on effect on health and social care services. I will certainly commit to monitoring the situation. I would expect the MS Society to provide us with regular reports on progress to ensure that the care needs of current users of Leuchie house are being met. I would be happy to share that information with Parliament. I will ensure that, in advance of its AGM at the weekend, the MS Society gets the very clear views of parliamentarians that have been expressed this evening.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

The Scottish Government is committed to the provision of accessible health information that is clear, accurate, up to date and available in formats that meet the needs of all citizens. We are working with a wide range of partners, including NHS inform and health rights information Scotland, to ensure that people with a visual impairment have access to the health information that they need.

We will certainly look at the report in some detail to see what improvements require to be made. I add to what I said in my original answer that we have developed the translation, interpreting and communication support strategy, which is very much about equal access to health care and the provision of information for all groups, including people with a visual impairment. NHS Health Scotland is working with a range of partners to implement the strategy, to ensure that boards can achieve effective communication between services and service users who have communication support needs. The health service has done a lot to make improvements in this area. Is the situation perfect everywhere? No, it is not, but there is a recognition that sometimes more imagination needs to be used, along with a bit of common sense, when dealing with patients who have a variety of communication requirements.

The Scottish Government recognises the effect that deprivation has on life expectancy. Our commitment to tackling Scotland's health inequalities was set out in  "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities". The review of "Equally Well", which was published in June, confirmed the importance of early intervention in realising the task force's vision for addressing inequalities and of the need to ensure that resources are allocated accordingly.

Bill Wilson makes a valid point about using health and wellbeing as a measurement. Although GDP has an important role to play in measuring success, health and wellbeing are—as he notes—important. I mentioned the equally well initiative in my first answer, and we are, across Government, taking forward initiatives in a number of other important areas, such as the achieving our potential framework, which has been designed to have a lasting impact on poverty and deprivation. I make the point, however, that—as I am sure everyone is aware—the issues are long standing and will not be resolved overnight.

There is no doubt that the impact on health of alcohol misuse continues to be a real issue for Scotland, and in fact has doubled in the past 10 years. We cannot be complacent about that. I tell the member—although I am sure he is aware—that recent statistics have shown that women in Scotland are more likely than men in England to die from alcohol misuse. That shows the scale of the challenge. The Government cannot be criticised for presenting a set of radical proposals to begin to address the issue of alcohol misuse. It is just a pity that members on Richard Simpson's side of the  chamber have not seen fit to support many of those radical measures. Computed Tomography Scanner (Orkney)

We remain committed to improving the lives of children and young people with cleft palates and related conditions. Indeed, the long-established national managed clinical network in cleft lip and palate has a strong children's component. The provision of specialist paediatric surgery is key to successful treatment, as are the range of services and follow-up care that are available locally, such as specialist speech and language therapy services and orthodontic treatment.

I am aware of the letter to which the member refers. As the cabinet secretary's recent official reply to CLAPA confirms, we have been in touch with NHS Lothian and we are advised that another speech and language therapist has been identified to support the service. She has started working with the two current specialist SLTs before they leave next month. In addition, the unit is advertising for a temporary SLT to cover for the maternity leave of the lead specialist SLT. However, I acknowledge that the number of specialist cleft SLTs is limited so there can be no guarantee that the Edinburgh unit will attract suitably experienced applicants. It is unfortunate that both of the specialist cleft SLTs at the hospital are leaving at the same time, but I am assured that NHS Lothian is taking all reasonable steps to rectify the issue in order to minimise the impact on the service. Finally, we have asked NHS Lothian to keep the situation under close review and to report back to the Scottish Government if any problems emerge that might have an adverse impact on the service.

Serious health and safety concerns about the accommodation and environment at the athletes village in Delhi remain and must be addressed as a matter of urgency by the Indian authorities. This morning there was a meeting of the chefs de mission, which was attended by the Chief Minister of Delhi. She has taken over control of the situation and has guaranteed action to address the outstanding concerns. There appears to be growing confidence among the chefs de mission that things will now improve, but they will monitor the situation closely to ensure that there is delivery on the assurances that have been given. The Commonwealth Games Federation will conduct an on-site inspection of the athletes village on Friday morning. We hope that the outcome of that inspection will allow Commonwealth Games Scotland to reassure athletes that the village is suitable for habitation. Yesterday the First Minister chaired an emergency meeting of the Glasgow 2014 strategic group, at which Commonwealth Games Scotland gave all partners an update on the latest situation in Delhi. We will hold another meeting later today, to provide further updates. Our people on the ground have reported that the sporting venues for the games seem to be in reasonable order and that there are no security concerns additional to those that were previously anticipated. The Scottish Government and its partners remain committed to the 2010 Commonwealth games and the presence of a strong team in Delhi. However, the safety of our athletes is paramount. All of us support whole-heartedly Commonwealth Games Scotland's  decision to delay our athletes' departure for Delhi. My hope and expectation is that team Scotland will fly to Delhi in time to compete in the games.

Bill Butler is right to say that our athletes have spent many years preparing for this event and are keen to go, but they are guided by Commonwealth Games Scotland. They have been very professional, especially when the media have asked them questions about their participation. Not one Scottish athlete has said that they will not attend the Delhi games, as long as Commonwealth Games Scotland says that it is safe for them to do so. Bill Butler asked about representations. I have made representations to the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports in the Indian Government, asking for issues and concerns to be addressed as a matter of urgency. Yesterday afternoon, the First Minister spoke to the Indian consul general in Scotland, Mr Anil Anand, and again raised concerns and sought assurances. A lot of discussions are taking place behind the scenes to get momentum. Yesterday I had a conference call with my counterparts in England, Northern Ireland and Wales to discuss concerns and the current position and to co-ordinate our action behind the scenes to put pressure on the Indian authorities to take action. As I said in my initial answer, I expect that team Scotland will fly to Delhi in time to compete in the games. Whether it flies on Saturday will be a matter for Commonwealth Games Scotland. The Commonwealth Games Federation's site visit to the village tomorrow will be important in that decision-making process.

Yes. Of course, 70 per cent of the venues in Glasgow are already there, and good progress is being made on the national indoor sports arena and the velodrome, which are on schedule. A commitment has been made to ensure that the handover of the athletes village will happen six months out from the games in 2014. Glasgow will absolutely be in a state of readiness for the Commonwealth games in 2014.

Nanette Milne's question is important, but the Commonwealth games brand is 80 years old. The brand has seen its ups and downs during its 80 years but it is a strong brand that will continue for many years to come. I am sure that the brand will survive the Delhi difficulties. The games that we put on in Glasgow will be a tremendous sporting event and, I am sure, will do the brand a great deal of good.

I agree with Ross Finnie. It is important that such an impression of the Delhi organising committee is not given. At the end of the day, the brand and its protection are important. We want the Delhi organising committee to resolve the difficulties. One of the problems has been that for some months the Commonwealth Games Federation has been seeking assurances from the Delhi organising committee. Assurances were quite often given without necessarily reflecting the reality of the situation. I think that we all appreciate some of the cultural issues around the way in which decisions are perhaps made. The important thing for all of us is to concentrate on getting the real concerns fixed. If there are issues to do with the way in which things have been handled, they are for a later stage. At the end of the day it is about getting issues fixed so that the games can go ahead.

Jack McConnell made important points. It is important that we focus on the fact that the issues are organisational issues. I should say that countries from the north, south, east and west are expressing concern on behalf of their athletes—quite rightly—about the state of preparedness of the athletes village. We cannot get away from those real concerns. The political relationship with India is important. Through Scotland house, we will make a great deal of effort during the Delhi games to make connections and enhance our relationship with India at a political level. I am sure that there will be no lasting damage to that relationship beyond the games.

I am very confident indeed that the Scotland team will be in Delhi to participate and I am sure that it will do very well. I am sure that the Parliament wants to get behind the Scotland team. [Applause.]

I thank members for their useful contributions to what has been an interesting debate on an important topic. It is evident from what has been said that the clinical portal and telehealth offer significant scope for improving health services for patients, and I am heartened by the progress that has been made in Scotland in developing the clinical portal for a comparatively modest amount of money—£15 million has been set aside for it in 2010-11 and 2011-12. I turn to a number of the points that were made in the debate. Christine Grahame asked about an update on education for clinicians in e-health. I can tell her that a national working group has been established, which is chaired by an e-health clinical lead. It is working with the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, which hopes to get a report on the progress that the group is making by the end of the year. Dr Simpson raised a number of points, which I will take in no particular order. He called for a credible access audit to be available for patients. We recognise that patients being able to see audit logs electronically can help with the important issue of trust in the health service. That is certainly an aim, perhaps for the longer term, and it will form part of the wider consideration of the future of patient involvement in e-health. Yes, we want to get there, but it will take some time to reach that position. Dr Simpson also asked about encryption. The Scottish Government issued mandatory guidance about the encryption of mobile devices and allocated £1 million to support its implementation. He also asked about the viewing of patient data by Government departments, both devolved and reserved. The clinical portal is a clinical system for the NHS and its staff to support patient care. There are obviously some advantages in looking at access for a single shared assessment, for example with social work, so there are issues that would be of benefit to telecare. However, there is no plan to enable information to be shared with the Department for Work and Pensions or others, as that would not be at all appropriate.

Absolutely. I can give that reassurance. My point about telecare is that information sharing may be appropriate. There would obviously have to be safeguards and, in the example of telecare, permission by the patient and carers. We could imagine that, for dementia patients, important information could be shared in the crossover between social work and health, but there must be safeguards. I hope that I have given Christine Grahame the assurance that she was looking for. Mary Scanlon said that there is no timetable for taking telehealth forward. I hope that I outlined in my opening remarks that we are setting out a national implementation plan around the four programmes. We could attempt to do everything everywhere, but I suggest that that would not be the best way forward, which is why we have agreed the four programmes. They are going forward, and telestroke is scheduled for consideration for funding in November. There is a clear timeline. Ian McKee was right to warn us against pilotitis—I have probably warned against it myself over the years. That is why it is important that the four programmes go forward in a planned and systematic way rather than on the basis of pilots that we have seen in the past. I do not think that anyone would disagree that we need to act on a far more planned and national basis. Helen Eadie raised some important points. She rightly paid tribute to the important optometry initiative in Fife. The issue was discussed yesterday at the e-health programme board, which agreed to give it priority. Boards have been asked to come forward with improvement plans, agreed with optometrists in their area, and funding decisions will be made later in the year. I hope that Helen Eadie will agree that that is good progress, and I hope that she and other members will welcome the development. Michael Matheson raised a number of important issues. He and Richard Simpson rightly paid tribute to the very good dermatology service in Forth valley. I have seen it for myself, and can say that it is very good indeed. We need to be aware that, as Michael Matheson rightly highlighted, professional interests are not always aligned with those of patients. We have to ensure that the patient interest is always of paramount importance in taking these matters forward. Michael Matheson also asked about patient involvement in the clinical portal programme board. The board has two patient representatives, one of whom is the chair of the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. It was recently agreed with the board that the LTCAS would ensure that patient groups are involved in patient  portal development. I hope that that will address some of the concerns about the matter. A number of other important issues were raised. The vast majority of NHS sites have broadband access via the N3 contract with BT. The NHS is working hard to improve the situation within the parameters of the available infrastructure. Murdo Fraser probably got the balance about right. There is more for the United Kingdom Government to do and I am sure that there is more for the Scottish Government to do. We will take that work forward as we can. Murdo Fraser also talked about leadership. I hope that, in my opening and closing speeches, I have given a sense of getting on with the job and making progress, but we cannot do that by taking a scatter-gun approach. We cannot do everything at the same time everywhere, because that is not realistic and things are likely not to happen if we try to, so by agreeing the four programmes we have set out a sensible and systematic way of taking forward four important programmes in a planned way across the NHS. The Health and Sport Committee recommended that an annual report be provided to the Parliament on the direction of progress on telehealth. That is a very good way to proceed. I talked in some detail about the stroke programme. A lot of work is also happening in paediatrics, on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and on mental health. The debate has been useful, as it has been helpful to hear members' comments, which I am sure will be fed into the board so that it can reflect on them. I hope that I have been able to give a sense of real progress that will lead to real change for the benefit of patients throughout Scotland.

I welcome this debate on the important role of information technology in improving the safety, effectiveness and efficiency of care. I hope that I will be able to address many of Christine Grahame's points and questions. She described the report as worthy, but she also said that it is important. The Scottish Government is clear about the value of investing in e-health measures and set out its agenda in 2008 with the launch of the e-health strategy. That agenda is developing to support the implementation of the quality strategy. Our approach has been to build on previous successes in NHS Scotland, of which there have been many. For instance, a European Union review of the emergency care summary concluded last year that NHS Scotland's approach provides a lesson for all health services. Our strategy is to make incremental change to support the progressive convergence of systems, while avoiding overcentralised approaches. Many members will have seen in reviews of health IT programmes in England the criticism that those programmes are highly centralised. I am pleased that the Health and Sport Committee broadly supported NHS Scotland's approach: the Scottish Government recognised the risks in the centralised approach. The Health and Sport Committee took evidence on developments in the clinical portal and telehealth and published its welcome report in May. The report contained several recommendations and I will let members know what has been done to address them. Christine Grahame offered a good definition of a clinical portal. I would describe it as a window on a clinician's computer that allows them to view defined information about their patients in a virtual electronic patient record that is drawn from information that is held in different clinical IT systems. I do not know whether that definition is better, but it is different. Perhaps the definitions taken together provide clarity on what we are talking about. Our strategy seeks to avoid setting up a large national database of clinical information. Instead, the portal, or window, assembles relevant information for the clinician from different sources at the point when the information is needed. I have seen the British Medical Association's briefing for the debate: I am glad that we agree that that model is right. I am also glad that we agree that better access to such information will support improved care delivery and decision making, and that patients can be reassured that clinical staff  have the information that they need to provide safe, effective and efficient care. NHS boards fully support the development of the clinical portal. The fact that they are in different positions technically argues for a flexible and incremental approach to delivery. Boards have organised themselves into three regional groupings, two of which—the north and the west—include boards that already have portal investments. The south and east of Scotland boards commenced work on shared arrangements first and have developed a working portal prototype that was well received by clinicians. They are now developing the business case for procurement and an implementation plan. The west and north of Scotland boards have assessed the existing portal technologies in their areas and are working up proposals for sharing. The committee's view was that there should not be a lot of different clinical portals. The Scottish Government and senior leaders in NHS Scotland share that view. We will look for the optimum path that produces results quickly, most cost effectively and with the maximum local support for implementation. We expect that to lead to a maximum of four technical solutions, including the two existing developments in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and NHS Tayside, to which Christine Grahame referred. The clinical change leadership group is considering standardising the presentation of information to clinicians. Increasingly, NHS Scotland solutions will use the powerful new integration tool Ensemble. That will provide the nationally agreed engine that will support sharing across NHS Scotland and initiatives such as the portal. I say "engine" because it is very much under the bonnet: the clinician will not see it but it will help to enable what they see. The focus on the underlying integration of NHS Scotland IT systems will be a building block of future IT developments. It is important that if we need a reminder of how useful clinical portals are, we need only look at the growth in their usage. One example is the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde portal. Last summer, the portal was used to look up about 1,500 test results a week. In the first week of September this year, 180,000 documents were accessed and the portal had around 6,800 active users. That tells us that clinicians like it and, more important, that they are using it. The portal is not intended as an access point for all the information about a patient that the NHS holds. A survey of clinicians was undertaken in which they were asked to rank the pieces of information that are of most use to them when seeing a patient. The clinicians identified consistently 14 types of key clinical information. Those first types of available information in the  clinical portal include such things as current medication, test results and clinical letters. Information items from the top 14 that are harder to get or are not held electronically at the moment will be introduced incrementally so as not to hold up clinician access to information that can be made available quickly. That way of working is entirely consistent with the e-health strategy. Working incrementally, we are seeking to build on what is already available and take it forward in a pragmatic way that delivers value for money and is developed as close as possible to the front line. In recent years, all our major IT systems have been developed along those lines. For instance, the new patient management system is the product of NHS boards working closely together. That has produced strong board commitment to delivering the benefits of the investment. By working together, the solution was delivered more cost effectively than was predicted for a centrally led alternative approach. A key issue for the committee was the strength of safeguards in the system to protect patient confidentiality and ensure that information can be accessed only appropriately. On many occasions, I have said that the Scottish Government regards safeguarding patient records and confidentiality as being of great importance. That is true regardless of whether information is held on paper or computer. Confidentiality is important not only because of legal and professional duties, but because it sits at the heart of the relationship of trust with patients that is vital for effective care. The Scottish Government is developing an information assurance strategy in which we are building on successful existing work to improve information governance. It will bring together important issues about the availability of information and business continuity, and how we deal with confidentiality. It will retain a strong focus on awareness and staff behaviour: it is as much about pieces of paper and staff conversations as it is about accessing IT systems. We have also revised guidance on records management: "Records Management Code of Practice" was issued to NHS boards in August 2010, and we are consulting on final revisions to the code of confidentiality, which I anticipate being made available to boards at the end of the year. Of course, the e-health programme is also focused on improving IT systems. Plans to improve board capacity to audit and control access to IT systems on the basis of staff roles are well advanced. I referred earlier to the British Medical Association briefing. I believe that the BMA will be reassured that our actions in this area are exactly what it and other clinicians are calling for.  We are also addressing guidance information for patients. Health rights information Scotland has been commissioned to produce a leaflet and video clip for patients on e-health and its implications for the service that patients receive from the NHS, and on how their information is stored and shared safely. Related, extensive stakeholder consultation and user testing are under way. I turn to the other theme of the Health and Sport Committee report: telehealth. Good progress is being made on telehealth-related activity. The committee is well aware of the work that the Scottish centre for telehealth undertakes. The centre was established in 2006 to provide advice to NHS boards as they sought to realise the potential of telehealth products. It has carried out a number of pilots. That said, the inquiry heard of frustration at the lack of conversion of pilots into mainstream services. The Scottish Government shared those concerns and initiated a review, which was commissioned in January 2009 and reported in August 2009. A key recommendation of the review was to bring the Scottish centre for telehealth into NHS 24. That transition took place on 31 March this year. NHS 24, as Scotland's key telehealth provider, will use its expertise to provide a national focus for telehealth-related activity.

We have said that we will look at the evidence on how the number rolls out, what it looks like and some of the learning from that before giving further consideration to it. That will be interesting, because there may be information and lessons for us to take from it and we may want to consider the matter further. That is how we will proceed. One of the first actions that the review recommended was that a telehealth strategy be produced. That has been completed and focused on four programmes of work: stroke, paediatrics, mental health and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. All of those programmes aim to deliver cost-effective solutions that can be rolled out on a national basis. The work will be coordinated by NHS 24, under a governance structure that includes appropriate representation from boards. Projects will be fully costed and supported by robust business cases.

As I am beginning to outline, we have decided to move forward on a phased basis, focusing on the areas that I have identified. Rather than ask boards to do everything at the same time, we have broken down the strategy into four programmes of work that we can take forward on an organised basis. The first business case—for the telestroke programme—is scheduled to be considered for funding in November. Rather than try to do everything at the same time—which would not work—we are ensuring that the strategy happens on a planned basis and at a pace that achieves results. The telestroke programme will look to improve the treatment of stroke patients by developing a national network for increased access to urgent stroke thrombolysis-decision support, which will be delivered through a combination of videoconferencing and a facility for specialist consultants to access computed tomography scans from home. I firmly believe that the possibilities that are afforded by the clinical portal, telehealth-related developments and, indeed, e-health generally provide us with significant opportunities to improve patient care and access to it. There are also opportunities to make the NHS more efficient, which will become more important in the years ahead. I look forward to hearing what will be said this afternoon. All of us agree on the importance of telehealth and telecare. As I have said before, we have scratched the surface of its application. By prioritising the four areas that I have identified, we are proceeding in an organised way and taking a systematic approach to making the most of telehealth and telecare opportunities. That is important in the current financial climate, but it also provides a very good outcome for patients, especially older patients. Given the demographic challenges that we will face in the next few years, that will be even more important, if we are to keep health local to people and to keep people safe in their homes through the use of telehealth and telecare. There are tremendous opportunities not just for the health service but, importantly, for patients who receive services. Thank you, Presiding Officer, for giving me the opportunity to respond to the Health and Sport Committee's report. I look forward to participating in this afternoon's debate.

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate and on his excellent speech, every word of which I totally agree with. I also congratulate the Evening Times on its Glas-goals  campaign, which has the potential to motivate the paper's wide readership to adopt some realistic goals to help them lose weight, quit smoking or become active. The fact that the Evening Times has managed to capture the imagination of the community is quite an achievement, because it is sometimes hard for public health campaigns to capture people's imagination and make them want to take part. It strikes me that the Evening Times has managed to get people to want to play their part and to be almost competitive in achieving their goals. As Mary Scanlon said, other local authorities and communities might be able to learn lessons from Glasgow, and to come together and emulate what it is doing. We know that just giving people information about behaviour change is insufficient to improve health. Glas-goals is imaginative and cost effective in that it involves a partnership of the public bodies that Patrick Harvie alluded to, and it ensures high community awareness of key health improvement and social change messages, while helping people to make small, achievable changes in their lives that will make a big difference. One aspect of the campaign is the aim to achieve a healthy weight. Unfortunately, more than a quarter of all adults in Scotland are obese and almost two thirds are overweight. We know that those problems are particularly difficult in the greater Glasgow and Clyde area. Our response to that challenge has been to make a 20-year commitment, jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, to tackle overweight and obesity problems through the obesity route map. Problems such as obesity cannot be solved overnight; the aims are long term. The obesity route map contains around 80 actions covering all areas of government to ensure that it is achieved. It also includes the use of land that Patrick Harvie mentioned. I have certainly challenged health boards to look at their estates and the contribution that they can make, particularly in the run-up to the Commonwealth games. They need to show how they can make their estates more accessible to patients and staff, whether in hospital or out in the community, so that they can use them for a lunch time walk, for example. People need to get out and about and put that land to good use. Our eight healthy weight communities across Scotland, including one in the Priesthill and Househillwood area of south-west Glasgow, are examples of obesity plan actions. Those projects embrace a vast range of activities and initiatives, from breastfeeding support groups to walking clubs for young people and healthy local gala days. They are about finding out what can be achieved in a community if we do all the good things that we know about. That action is based on  the French model, which has been very successful, and some interesting evidence will come out of those healthy weight communities to inform our way forward. The smoking cessation aspect of Glas-goals is obviously very important. Members have already spoken about the importance of turning the smoking figures around if we are to tackle our poor health record. We have made great progress in shifting cultural attitudes to smoking. When people said that it would never happen in Scotland or in Glasgow, the smoking ban was brought in, and it has made a big difference. We can take particular pride in the national network of high-quality national health service smoking cessation services that can help people who are motivated by the campaign to sustain their smoking cessation. Those services are excellent examples of preventive and anticipatory approaches. However, although smoking rates in Glasgow are coming down because of the great efforts of a number of people, they are still the highest in Scotland and they cause a significant amount of preventable ill-health, so the Glas-goals focus on smoking cessation is welcome. Smoking prevention, cessation and wider tobacco control measures are important, and we need to maintain momentum towards what I hope will be a smoke-free country. The Glas-goals aim to encourage Glaswegians to walk or run a million miles is fantastic. I am impressed with the number of steps that Bill Butler has taken; no doubt we will get a weekly update on how he is getting on with that. His point is that we should all be doing a bit more. For my part, I did the cyclathon in Dundee at the weekend, and I have the bruises to show for it. It does not matter what the activity is; the point is that maintaining a consistent level of activity throughout life can make a big difference. The activity can be walking, running, dancing or even gardening; it does not matter. I was pleased to see that some of the Delhi handover ceremony events, for example, are dance-based events that are taking place the length and breadth of Scotland. That is an attractive proposition for girls. Patricia Ferguson mentioned the challenge that we face with teenage girls and young women. We need to be creative in what we offer to them. The goal of 2014 is a big opportunity for Glasgow and the rest of Scotland. The community sports hubs should make it easy for people to get access to clubs and other facilities. That is a practical part of the 2014 legacy. Glas-goals is, without doubt, acting as a powerful catalyst in giving a high public profile to other initiatives, such as healthy working lives, that impact on every sector of the population in the west of Scotland. Schools, workplaces, communities and individuals have signed up for  walking and running events, dance classes and swimming galas, and through the active nation website and the Evening Times online they have also committed to taking more physical exercise, which is all fantastic. Glas-goals is also making widely available information on how to get more support to change, such as how to join a walking group and where to get advice and support on weight loss or stopping smoking. That makes it easy for people, and that is important when someone is at the point of making those lifestyle changes. I have been pleased to see the focus on parenting support in the campaign. I am aware that the council and the health board have adopted the triple P positive parenting programme, part of which is a media and information campaign to ensure that parenting support is seen as being as normal as attending antenatal classes or school parents nights. The campaign's actions will also make an important contribution to tackling health inequalities, which is a major concern for Glasgow, in particular. I am also pleased that Glasgow is taking part in the equally well programme.  I again thank Bill Butler for bringing a timely debate to Parliament, and I thank the Evening Times for providing a bit of a beacon to other areas. Perhaps other newspapers may follow the lead that has been taken by the Evening Times . The last thank you goes to all the thousands of people who have seized the moment, have taken up the challenge and are playing their part in making Glas-goals into a reality. It is something very special that we can all support and take forward together.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

The Scottish Government has several physical activity and sport initiatives. Our two main campaigns—active nation and take life on—advocate a number of forms of activity and they are developing as planned. However, we are acutely aware of the need to use existing resources as effectively as possible. That is why we have focused on delivering a model of community sports hubs, which will use resources across different sectors better. I am also exploring further options to establish better co-ordination of funding across sectors to avoid duplication and better address gaps in provision.

I acknowledge Margo MacDonald's long-standing interest in and knowledge of these matters. I had the pleasure of launching this round of community sports hubs at Calderglen high school, which is a model of a high school acting as such a hub. Margo MacDonald is right. I am aware that the City of Edinburgh Council is examining how it can use its high  schools as community sports hubs, to ensure both that provision is as local as possible and that access is improved. I have asked sportscotland to work with councils at an early stage when they are looking at the future of their sports facilities, so that they can consider potential alternative models such as social enterprise and community ownership, which have been successful in other parts of Scotland. I encourage local authorities to consider those models as potential ways forward.

I have great pleasure in joining Elaine Smith in doing that. I agree with her that sport and physical activity are high on the agenda and are an important part of our campaign to improve the health of the nation. We have backed that up with action, through investment in community sports hubs, which are a way of not just bringing clubs together but looking at how we can make better use of the facilities that we have and add value and improvements to those facilities. I am happy to agree with Elaine Smith today.

I thank Gil Paterson for raising the important issue of cot death and for bringing the debate to the Parliament. I welcome the many speeches that we have heard, some of them very good, and I single out David Stewart's speech. It is difficult to share personal experiences in the Parliament, but he managed to do that in a speech that was moving as well as positive. He talked about some of the good, positive developments that there have been. On behalf of the Scottish Government, it is my pleasure to congratulate the Scottish Cot Death Trust on its landmark silver anniversary and to acknowledge with sincere thanks and appreciation the sterling work that its trustees and past and present staff have done over the past 25 years in  supporting families that have lost babies or young children to sudden unexplained death in infancy, or cot death, as it is more widely known. Any bereavement is traumatic, but the devastating impact on a family of the sudden and unexpected death of a baby or child is heartbreaking. That is why the support that the trust offers is appreciated so much and is so necessary. Despite the extensive research, we still do not fully understand why cot death occurs, so we cannot totally prevent it. However, we can reduce the risk of cot death tragedies happening. As several members have said, the number of cot deaths has reduced in recent years but, sadly, we still lose too many babies. Until 1991, around 90 babies a year died in Scotland; the number has gradually decreased to around 30 babies a year. Behind each of those sad statistics is a whole family devastated. Of course, much of the credit for the reduction can be directly attributed to the efforts of the trust, working with dedicated national health service staff. It is widely thought that the reduction is due to the advice that is given to parents to place babies on their backs to sleep. Several members have mentioned that. Research and education are key to the trust's work. Since 1985, around £3 million has been invested in studies throughout Scotland and internationally to try to identify the cause of cot death. The trust has used the findings from that research to educate parents, health professionals, the police and many more people on all aspects of cot death, how to reduce the risk of it happening, and increasing awareness of how to deal with families that face devastation. Supporting families has been and still is a fundamental aspect of the trust's work, and it continues to develop the range of services that it offers, such as the six plus one initiative, which is designed to build networks of trust among parents who have easy access to hard-to-reach groups. More recently, it has introduced home support visits, a befriending service and breathing monitors, and it has recruited nine professional counsellors throughout Scotland in the past year. Among other things, it is planning to introduce a new website with more current information and an online forum for bereaved families and parents, and an information roadshow to go across Scotland. The Scottish Government is working with the trust on the revision of its leaflet entitled "Reduce the Risk of Cot Death: An Easy Guide". The Scottish Government has convened an expert group that comprises clinicians, health managers, representatives from the United Nations Children's Fund, the baby-friendly initiative, the trust, of course, and Scottish Government officials to update and redesign the leaflet to maximise its  effectiveness in highlighting and conveying crucial information on how to reduce the risk of cot death in a clear and simple way. Perhaps some of the reflections in tonight's debate will help to inform that process. The leaflet is currently being pre-tested with parents to ensure that the messages that it contains are easy to understand. It will be issued to every new mother in Scotland following the delivery of her baby. It is vital that anyone who cares for a baby is properly informed of current preventive measures to take. In addition to publishing the new leaflet for the trust, the Scottish Government plans to publish a variety of posters that will highlight pertinent messages from the leaflet for distribution to various locations throughout Scotland, such as GP surgeries, hospitals and community clinics. That will further enhance awareness and therefore help to ensure that anyone who cares for a baby is properly informed of the measures that they can take to reduce the incidence of cot death. We continue to support the important work of the trust through the provision of grant funding. The trust will receive £7,000 per year for the next three years to help it to go forward and continue to provide its services. As well as working with the trust, we are working in partnership with NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, expert clinicians, NHS board managers, local authority social work departments and child protection teams, the police, various charities and the procurator fiscal's office to take forward the development of a toolkit for professionals that advises on sensitive and appropriate practice and support to the bereaved family in the event of a sudden unexplained death. It came through tonight that such practice does not always happen, which can be very painful in addition to the pain and shock that the family are already experiencing. That is an important piece of work. We are also working to restart the process of case reviews following a cot death and on the collection and evaluation of national data with a view to further reducing risk. We know that the risk of cot death is higher in cases where babies are born pre-term, with low birth weight or in families where there is socioeconomic deprivation or where there are complex needs. The refreshed framework for maternity services, which we hope to publish in January of next year, places a focus on addressing inequalities in access, experience and outcomes. The Scottish Government's maternity services action group is developing guidance to support NHS boards to improve the identification and management of those mothers and babies in areas of high deprivation who are most at risk of poorer health outcomes. I wish the Scottish Cot Death Trust continued success in the future in identifying the causes of  cot death, educating the public and professionals and, importantly, supporting families who are unfortunate enough to lose a child to cot death. I applaud the work undertaken by the Scottish Cot Death Trust. Continuing to reduce the number of cot deaths in Scotland is something to which we collectively aspire and the Scottish Government will continue to provide its support where and when it can.   Meeting closed at 17:41.

I welcome the debate and thank Sarah Boyack for bringing it to the chamber. It has been a good debate with some well-informed and interesting speeches. I echo the comments of Sarah Boyack, who has a very direct interest because Murrayfield is in her constituency, about the efforts that the SRU and the clubs have made to develop opportunities to introduce young people to rugby. The figures are very encouraging indeed. We are happy to be able to support such initiatives with funding, through sportscotland and through cashback, to help the SRU in its endeavours. As many members have said, it is hugely important that viewers are able to see a wide range of Scottish sport on television. Such coverage not only allows us to share in the euphoria—occasionally in the disappointments, to which Ross Finnie alluded—but offers the possibility that new viewers will be inspired to take up a sport after seeing it on television. For that reason, the Scottish Government is supportive of Sarah Boyack's motion. We want viewers in Scotland to be able to appreciate a wide range of sports—rugby, football, tennis, cycling or whatever—in which Scots compete at the highest level. It is clear from the debate that many members feel that more should be done to improve broadcasting coverage of sport in Scotland. I am happy to say that the Minister for Culture and External Affairs, Fiona Hyslop, like Mike Russell before her, has been raising such issues with broadcasters over a long period of time. I am also happy to confirm to Sarah Boyack that Fiona Hyslop has agreed that she will again write to the BBC and other broadcasters to ensure that they are aware of the issues that have been raised in this afternoon's debate. Rugby, which is the key subject of today's debate, is a good example of why many people would like to see more coverage of Scottish sport. I was delighted that Scotland was able to beat Argentina in the recent series there. The victory was made all the sweeter by the welcome fact that Scottish viewers were able to see both matches on terrestrial television. Other recent moments of success, such as the win against Ireland in this year's six nations championship or the victory against Australia in last year's autumn international, also gained from being available to viewers across the country. Even some of the less exhilarating moments in recent Scottish performances, such as those final 10 minutes in our defeat to Wales—if we can bear to remember it—earlier this year, have still made for compelling television.  I agree that exposure to high-quality rugby is good for viewers and good for the sport itself. Therefore, I am delighted that, as others have mentioned, BBC Alba has secured a deal that enables it to broadcast live Magners league matches. Such a move will further enhance the accessibility of Magners league games to viewers in Scotland. If BBC Alba is placed on Freeview, which everyone in the Parliament hopes will happen, accessibility will be improved even further.

I agree with that, but I hope that a position can be reached so that no such loss happens. I also believe that it would be good if those steps marked the beginning of an expansion of rugby coverage. Many people might welcome greater exposure for club rugby or the IRB sevens event, which is held in Murrayfield each year and is a fantastic event.

Absolutely. The rugby sevens world cup is an important event that allows Scotland to compete on the world stage. I very much support what Stewart Maxwell has said. Although the focus of this afternoon's debate has been on rugby—and quite rightly so—I should make the point that our national broadcasters should be able to cover a range of sports that are of interest to people in Scotland. That does not mean that all sports will receive prime-time coverage, but it does mean that committed fans or casual viewers who could end up being inspired should be able to watch a wider range of the sporting activity that goes on across Scotland. The Scottish Government has made that point to the BBC trust in its response to the trust's strategic review, and we will happily reiterate it to the BBC and other broadcasters, which we meet regularly.  However, it is worth noting that our major public service broadcasters are often reluctant to cover a sport in Scotland not always because of the financial cost but because it would involve opting out of the provision of other programmes that are available on UK network television. We know that broadcasters sometimes have genuinely difficult decisions to make about how they arrange schedules and how they spend their money, but one of the key difficulties with the coverage of Scottish sport is that existing public service broadcasting arrangements in Scotland are not well suited to meeting specifically Scottish needs. We do not hear concerns about that solely in relation to sport. In fact, the problem that the SRU has raised in relation to Scottish rugby is an issue that is raised by the people behind the Edinburgh festivals in relation to arts coverage, and we know from our research into public attitudes to broadcasting that the issue is much more of a concern for viewers in relation to Scottish history and drama programmes than it is in relation to Scottish sports coverage, so we are talking about a wider issue. Frankly, broadcasting in Scotland currently short-changes Scottish viewers, and it will continue to do so until a better choice of public service broadcasting is available to those viewers. The coverage of the Magners league is an example of how BBC Alba has contributed to improving viewers' choice. It is no coincidence that the only channel that is dedicated to Scottish viewers is the one that has recently made such a welcome commitment to showing Scottish rugby. A dedicated Scottish digital network of the kind that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission recommended, which the entire Parliament supported, could provide a further outlet for showing sport and help to meet the public service broadcasting deficit that so clearly exists in relation to other programmes. There has been a great degree of consensus that broadcasters in Scotland should do all that they can to meet the needs of their viewers. Our existing public service broadcasters should ensure that they cover a range of sports as part of the mix of broadcasting, the provision of which allows them to fulfil their obligations to viewers, but the best way of ensuring that Scottish sporting and cultural interests are reflected on our television screens is to improve public service broadcasting choice in Scotland. BBC Alba is already helping to do that; as the Parliament has recognised, a Scottish digital network could do even more.

NHS Highland has confirmed that it has no plans to change the maternity services that are delivered from Caithness general hospital in Wick.

There may well have been proposals to downgrade the maternity services that are delivered from Caithness general hospital in Wick, but there are no such proposals under this Scottish National Party Government. I hope that that gives the member the clear answer and reassurance that he asked for.

Yes. Rob Gibson highlights a challenge that many hospitals face in trying to recruit, particularly where they are trying to recruit specialists from a small pool of people who are in short supply. As I am sure he is aware, a lot of work is under way to make rural general hospitals more attractive to consultants. As part of the action that we are taking, we are ensuring that people are supported and linked to some of the bigger hospitals. That gives them experience and keeps their skills up to date. We believe that our action has led to health boards being better able to recruit consultants to hospitals, no matter whether the hospital is in Wick or another part of rural Scotland. We are not complacent about the issue; we need to keep it under constant review.

There are a number of measures in place in Scotland to tackle sight loss, including free national health service eye examinations for all, vision screening in children and diabetic retinopathy screening.

We have invested record sums—about £92.9 million last year—in general ophthalmic services. Scottish eye care is widely recognised as being among the best in the world. Demographic challenges throw up a range of issues for us to be aware of, and sight loss is one of them. We need and intend to keep our eye services as robust as they are at the moment. Just this week I had the pleasure of launching a new training tool for opticians on the front line, who may well work with patients with learning disabilities. There are huge levels of undetected sight loss and eye problems among people with learning disabilities that have not been identified over the years. The current awareness of the problem, and the moves to ensure that those who work on the front line have the necessary training in communication issues in particular, will meet a need that has not previously been met and will help to reduce some inequalities among that population.

The Scottish diabetic retinopathy screening programme is widely recognised as a world-class service, and it has robust processes in place to ensure that everyone who is eligible for it is offered regular screening. Nanette Milne raises some valid questions about how we ensure that sections of the population who might be less likely to come forward for screening are reached. We will continue to consider that point, possibly using different communication channels to raise awareness, among young people in particular, of the importance of coming forward at an early stage to get any concerns checked out. I will perhaps write to the member with some more detailed information.

I am certainly aware of NHS Fife's very successful work in that area. Officials have been considering a draft outline business case, which includes proposals for electronic referrals from optometrists to secondary care. The project team has been asked to undertake further work on the business case, and we will be looking at it in due course.

Responsibility for the overall provision of NHS dental services in the area rests with NHS Orkney. Progress has been made in adult and child registrations, with an additional 1,713 new patients being registered with an NHS dentist in Orkney between December 2008 and December 2009. Plans to increase capacity further are well advanced. In addition, Orkney NHS Board has advised that a dental review will be undertaken to consider demand, activity, waiting list management and how best to use current capacity. The review will report in early August, and a timescale for addressing the outstanding registration waiting list will be available following that review.

Further to my first answer, an outline business case for improved provision of dental facilities to increase capacity is in  development. In the meantime, as I alluded to, current capacity is being examined for efficiencies. NHS Orkney was allocated £1.35 million of primary and community care premises modernisation programme funding to be used for dental provision. However, it is acknowledged that there is still a core of patients who require to be registered. That is why the dental review will be undertaken. It will report in early August, and a timescale for acting on what needs to be done beyond what has already been done or is in the process of being done will be outlined as the review reports.

The Scottish Government has established the mutuality, equality and human rights board to provide a forum for key stakeholders to discuss issues relating to all strands of equality, including disability. In addition, the Scottish workforce and staff governance committee has had discussions on disability leave policies. Both those bodies include representation from trade unions and professional bodies.

I have every sympathy for Helen Eadie's position. No one wants sheltered workshops to be closed. A lot of work has been done in different localities across Scotland to support sheltered workshops, but that must be balanced against the procurement rules and the requirement for us, in these difficult financial times, to get the best value for money in the procurement policies that the public sector pursues. That is difficult to do, given the difficult financial situation that we are in. It is a case of supporting the sheltered workshops to make the best bids that they can for some of the contracts in question. I know that some local authorities have given sheltered workshops a lot of help to make the best bids that  they can, within the procurement rules. Many people across the public sector, in the Scottish Government as well as in local government, have been doing what they can, but that must be balanced against the need to get the best value in these difficult financial times. If Helen Eadie would like me to, I will write to her to give a bit more detail on what has been done.

In the important debate on funding, can I take it that—under the respect agenda—the Liberal Democrats support our negotiations with the UK Government about the return of the attendance allowance moneys?

This has been a stimulating and mainly consensual debate, with one or two notable exceptions—the usual suspects. It has served the purpose of giving the Parliament a further opportunity to have a continuing, long-term and comprehensive discussion. It does not end here; there will be other opportunities to continue the discussion and, to reassure Jackie Baillie, I tell her that we will return to Parliament with more detailed and specific proposals in an overall package of transformation for future discussion. I will address some of the points that have been made in the debate. Ross Finnie talked about clear national priorities and outcomes. We have gone a long way to achieving those through the clear eligibility framework, for the first time with minimum standards. That was required because different local authorities were interpreting the legislation in differing ways. Murdo Fraser talked about the single budget in commissioning. I gave a clear steer in my opening speech that all those things are being considered actively as we think about how to take forward the interface between health and social care. Christine Grahame and Sandra White made some forceful points about the attendance allowance. What is important here is not just the fact that it is not fair and we should get our money back—although that is obviously the case—but how we could then integrate and use that attendance allowance resource as part of the financial backdrop to how social care services are delivered. As we saw during the previous UK Government's debate on the future of social care and its interrelation with the benefits system, not having direct control over that is frustrating and a real impediment because, whatever action the UK Government takes and whatever changes it makes to the benefits system, or indeed the pensions system, that will impact directly on social care in Scotland. We need to ensure that the two parts of the system are joined up and that we take the opportunities to join them up in Scotland. We do not yet know the direction of travel of the new coalition Government in that arena but, under the respect agenda, we expect as a minimum that the needs of the Scottish population and Scotland's older people will be taken into account at an early stage. I am not sure what point Marlyn Glen was trying to make. We have good national and local statistics about the demographic changes. She seemed critical of the size of the consultation document, which is a bit like spinning on the head  of a pin. We are holding meetings on reshaping older people's care the length and breadth of Scotland. If we had laid out clearly that we had already made our decision about what we wanted to do, no doubt the criticism would have been, "What's the point of a consultation when you've already made your mind up?" We are having a good consultation and the number of people turning up at the meetings speaks for itself. There has been really good engagement with older people, which I am pleased about.

I have had numerous discussions with Dundee City Council and I do not share the member's perspective. The council knows well what the local demographic challenges are. We have engaged closely with Age Scotland, which has been one of the key voluntary sector bodies involved in the consultation. It signed up to the direction of travel, which I am sure remains the case. I hope that I have been able to reassure Mary Scanlon that we are looking at the whole system, but I will write to her about the notional capital issue. I welcome Richard Simpson's sudden conversion to supporting the return of the attendance allowance; it is just a pity that he did not support it in the past eight years of the policy's delivery when he had the opportunity to do that at UK Government level, but we welcome support from whichever part of the chamber it comes. We have made genuine progress on delayed discharge. We returned to the zero standard in April and there has been a huge improvement since the end of 2006, when 650-plus people were caught up in a hospital environment that they did not need to be in. I hope that Richard Simpson recognises the huge progress that we have made. Free personal care was born out of a strong sense of social justice aligned with cross-party support and consensus that we have seen again today. I am keen that we do not lose sight of the principles that are enshrined in the act and the great successes that we have achieved so far with that cross-party consensus. However, each and every member in the chamber has a responsibility to embrace the reshaping and modernising of care services locally and not to stand in the way of essential service redesign, whether that is establishing a reablement home care service or a shift in the balance of care from acute sector beds to community-based services. We cannot support the theory of the policy but not the practical effect in the community. On that basis, I hope that we can all stand together and ensure that we can  really and truly deliver for the older people of Scotland.

Will the member—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On getting the balance right, does Jackie Baillie accept the need for MSPs of all parties to support local changes that will shift the balance of resource, including the closure of some beds in acute hospitals to fund community services?

I welcome this debate on free personal and nursing care. It provides us with an important opportunity to reflect on the original policy aims and to consider how they fit in the current environment. Let me be clear from the outset: the Scottish Government remains absolutely committed to free personal and nursing care and has reiterated that commitment on a number of occasions. Only last week, the First Minister reaffirmed our commitment to this important policy in reply to a question by Murdo Fraser during First Minister's question time. The reason for our commitment is that the policy delivers real benefits and better outcomes to more than 50,000 older vulnerable people throughout Scotland. We remain committed to the policy despite the budget announcements by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. It was always going to be challenging to continue to deliver on the policy, and after Tuesday's budget it has become even more challenging, but it is a challenge to which the Scottish Government is determined to rise. As Ross Finnie said, the policy is one of the great achievements of the Scottish Parliament, but its proper administration and funding has been one of the great achievements of this Government, with £40 million investment to stabilise the policy and a clear framework and set of eligibility criteria having been established. As everyone, I am sure, is aware, the value of providing free personal and nursing care has been questioned in certain circles as a result of budgetary pressures. Lord Sutherland made it clear in his independent review in 2008 that the policy was sustainable at that time for the next five years. However, he also concluded that we need to adapt the policy to address demographic changes in the medium and longer terms, and that changes are necessary to ensure the sustainability of the policy. That is why the Scottish Government is actively working with local government, the national health service and the voluntary sector to agree what we need to do now to shape the future  of health and social care as part of the "Reshaping Care for Older People" programme, and thereby to ensure that the free personal and nursing care is sustainable into the future. At local level, much is happening across Scotland to reshape and modernise care services to make them more outcomes focused, more personalised and more responsive. Since April this year, we have undertaken a process of public engagement to consider how best to address the challenges of an ageing population and diminishing public funding. We are currently asking people across Scotland to consider the future care demands and needs of older people, and we will listen to what people have to say in that consultation. That engagement has been commissioned by the ministerial strategic group for health and community care, which I chair and whose members are NHS chairs and senior local authority councillors. I stressed during a debate on reshaping care for older people in October last year that "We, as parliamentarians, must work together to put down a marker of the Scottish Parliament's" continuing "will on how best to provide care for older people that is sustainable, deliverable, appropriate and fair."— [ Official Report , 28 October 2009; c 20544.]  We must have a care system that takes account of not just personal care but all social and health care. How we organise, integrate and deliver all social services and the health service is a substantive point for debate. It might well be that better integration could produce a more efficient service without jeopardising the care that is given to older people. We are looking at that, and on that basis I am happy to support the thrust of the Conservative amendment.

As I have said to Mary Scanlon on a number of occasions in the chamber, those are all things that we should consider as part of the agenda in reshaping older people's care. What is the role of the independent sector, whether in the provision of care homes or care at home? What is the role of local authority services in the same context? We must ensure that we have the right fit of services, with the right skills to provide the services that people need. Published expenditure figures for 2007-08 show that total spend on free personal and nursing care  was £358 million, which was less than 8 per cent of all health and social care spend on people over 65. As Ross Finnie said, it is important to put in context the spend on the free personal and nursing care policy. It is too simple to imagine that removing a popular and landmark policy such as free personal care would achieve major budgetary savings. Indeed, it might have the opposite effect by pushing up the number of people who seek to remain in hospital beds free of charge because they cannot immediately find the money to pay for their care-at-home packages. Furthermore, if Parliament is looking to achieve greater leeway in the budgets, I remind members that the review that was chaired by Lord Sutherland also recognised the long-standing imbalance between Scotland and the UK's finances going back to when the policy was introduced. That is, of course, the issue of the savings that were made by the United Kingdom Government by removing the payment of attendance allowance to Scottish self-funders in residential care, which is currently saving the UK taxpayer around £35 million a year. I hope that the Parliament will support a call for the UK coalition Government, under the respect agenda, to take a fresh look at that imbalance. In conclusion, let me reiterate that, as long-term advocates of the policy of free personal care, we remain committed to its principles and long-term success. It is a policy that gives help and peace of mind to thousands of people at a time in their lives when they need it most. I am happy to move the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-6633.1, to insert at end: ", and welcomes the wide-ranging Reshaping Care for Older People programme, which is developing innovative and practical ideas for change to meet the needs of Scotland's population that are sustainable, deliverable and fair."

We are developing the carers and young carers strategy in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and working closely with carers organisations, health boards and other organisations. Subject to agreement with COSLA, the strategy will set out our joint vision for Scotland's carers, the outcomes that we collectively wish to achieve and a wide range of action points that are intended to work towards those outcomes and that vision. No one can escape from the fact that we can expect real-terms reductions in public expenditure in the coming years. In the forthcoming spending review, we will give priority to the protection of front-line services, many of which are crucial to carers and young carers. In the light of the decisions in that spending review, we will work in partnership with COSLA to take forward the carers and young carers strategy.

I join Sarah Boyack in welcoming carers to the Parliament. I acknowledge the hard work and efforts of unpaid carers day in, day out. I meet them regularly. I pay tribute to the hard work of their representative  organisations, which have worked incredibly hard to develop the carers and young carers strategy, which will be published soon. We are in a difficult financial context. As I said, we will work hard with COSLA to ensure that front-line services, many of which carers rely on, are protected. The Government has invested additional money in supporting carers—£13 million during the current session of Parliament—to give real support to carers, more respite and better support through the health service. One thing that the City of Edinburgh Council has done well is the development of its home care reablement service, which has been a lifeline to many carers and much appreciated by all who use it. It has freed up 40 per cent of capacity to invest in supporting other people who require home care services. It is just a pity that Sarah Boyack's Labour colleagues on the council chose to oppose that positive move.

I agree. On behalf of carers organisations that wished us to do so, we made several representations to the previous United Kingdom Government on the carers allowance. Those representations were not only on the level of the allowance but on the unfairness in the rules about those who have reached 65. We will continue to make those representations to the new coalition Government on behalf of carers and carers organisations in Scotland.

We recognise and value the extremely important support that kinship carers give children in Scotland. A lot of work has been done to support kinship carers. However, I am sure that the member is aware that there have been some issues to do with benefits. We want to continue to have discussions on those issues with the new coalition Government.

We are aware of the announcement of £20 million from 2011 on, to which I assume the member refers. Of course, we will discuss those matters as part of the spending review, which is about to begin. As I said in my first answer to Sarah Boyack, carers' respite is a huge priority for the Government. Actions speak louder than words, so the fact that we have put in additional resources for carers' respite over this session of Parliament demonstrates that it is a priority. I assure Jeremy Purvis that carers' respite will be a major priority for the Government.

Children with life-threatening and life-limiting conditions are supported in various ways by local authorities and the national health service. Local authorities have a duty to provide a range of services for disabled children to help the child to lead as normal a life as possible. The Scottish Government published new guidance on the provision of equipment and adaptations in December 2009 to assist local authorities and their NHS partners in promoting a consistent approach to the assessment for, and provision of, equipment and adaptations. Under the getting it right for every child  approach, children with additional support needs should be assessed and a single integrated plan should be developed if required. A managed clinical network for children with exceptional health care needs has been set up to ensure that each child has access to a full range of specialist care. A sub-group of the network is looking at pathways of care, including home care.

I would certainly be happy to discuss that with Des McNulty. I understand that the director of social work was in contact with the family concerned about two weeks ago and that the visit is being followed up. I also understand that Des McNulty will meet the leader of West Dunbartonshire Council, Councillor Ronnie McColl, in just over a week's time. Councillor McColl has informed me that he will be happy to give him an update at that meeting.

The Scottish Government welcomes the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Our approach to implementing the convention in Scotland complements our existing work to promote disability equality and independent living for disabled people. We are working with disabled people, the Equality and Human Rights Commission and the Scottish Human Rights Commission to raise awareness of the convention among disabled people in Scotland and to ensure that the work that we are doing to uphold the human rights of disabled people in Scotland is adequately reflected in the United Kingdom's report to the UN. Disabled people and other interested parties will have an opportunity to comment on the UK's draft report early in 2011.

We recognise the importance of considering the implications of equality in the development of Scottish Government legislation and will continue to do so. The Scottish Parliament's procedures require Scottish Government bills to be accompanied by a policy memorandum that must include an assessment of any effects of the bill on equal opportunities.

As I have said in Parliament on a number of occasions, we will continue to work with local authorities to ensure that we get the best outcomes for services for people with  disabilities. That is why we are undertaking work on self-directed support through the strategy and the proposed bill. I hope that Johann Lamont will give her support to that.

We acknowledge Professor Watt's finding of an association between oral health and the risk of cardiovascular disease, and we await further research in the area. However, the best way of preventing gum disease is to have a regular effective toothbrushing habit from an early age. The childsmile programme will ensure that all children who attend nursery are offered daily toothbrushing, which paves the way to establishing long-term good oral health throughout adulthood. Only this week, a report on the national dental inspection programme showed that the Scottish Government has successfully met the target of 60 per cent of primary 7s having no obvious signs of tooth decay.

I thought that Helen Eadie might have brought herself to welcome the announcement that the target of 60 per cent of primary 7s having no obvious signs of tooth decay has been met. I am pleased to say that, in Fife, 67.2 per cent of primary 7 children are free of dental decay. That should lead Helen Eadie to believe that what we are doing with the childsmile programme is working and delivering, and will help to avoid some of the risks of cardiovascular disease that Professor Watt's findings show. I  hope that Helen Eadie can for once welcome some good news.

Tricia Marwick has shown the Government's determination to deliver improved dental health for the people of Fife. To add to what she has said about the success of new premises, Fife was allocated £6.11 million from the primary and community care premises modernisation programme, and the number of dentists who provide general dental services increased from 177 in 2007 to 198 in 2009. I know that Labour does not like to welcome good news, but perhaps for once it can get behind our dentists, who are doing a very good job in Fife and elsewhere.

Like previous debates on alcohol, this one has provoked a great deal of impassioned argument, which is welcome. There have been some very good speeches from around the chamber, and I will return to them shortly. The public expects us to show leadership and to implement policies that will have a real and lasting  effect and will make a dent in the £3.56 billion annual cost of alcohol misuse. Enough alcohol is sold in Scotland to enable every man and woman over 16 to exceed the sensible male weekly guidelines every week of the year. Many speakers have outlined the scale of the problem, but that is not enough; we also need to come up with solutions. We need to progress our alcohol agenda based on the best available evidence and expert opinion. Just last week, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence—the respected and independent assessor of effective interventions that is often quoted by Richard Simpson and others in the chamber—published a report for the UK Government that said that alcohol needs to be less affordable if we are to save thousands of lives each year. It specifically recommended minimum pricing as a targeted measure that was most likely to affect heavy drinkers, who typically buy cheaper alcohol. I want to put on record my thanks to the youth commission on alcohol, which has spent a huge amount of time considering all the evidence and the issues. I welcome its support for the key elements of the bill. I will now deal with some of the speeches that we heard during the debate. Murdo Fraser was confused in that, although he seemed to say that he understood and accepted the link between price and consumption, he went on to cite, minutes later, the Scotch Whisky Association's evidence against that link to back up his argument. He was not the only one who did that. A number of others in the chamber displayed a similar confusion about that link, even though all the evidence makes it clear that there is a link between price and consumption.

If the member believes that there is a link between price and consumption, he should not lead with evidence that undermines that argument, as that undermines his position. Murdo Fraser said that the evidence base is not there, but I am sure that his speech is the same one—almost word for word, if anyone cares to look back and check—that was used by the Tories when they opposed the ban on smoking in enclosed public spaces. Scotland was brave at that time and took the proposal forward, even though many people were saying, "Where's the evidence? No one else has done it."

Not just now. Murdo Fraser also said that we should listen to experts in the field, but that seems to apply only to people in the alcohol industry, not to health professionals. Why is that? If we must listen to experts in the field, surely we should also listen to experts on health. Murdo Fraser's choice of experts seems to be selective. Christine Grahame gave a good account of the tremendous amount of work that the Health and Sport Committee put into taking evidence from all sides of the debate and compiling a good report. Obviously, the report did not agree with everything in the bill, but it was a considered report, and we should pay tribute to the committee for it. Richard Simpson's speech was disappointing, and I mean that genuinely. He talked about the need to change culture. That is easy to say, but MSPs will be judged on their actions, not their words, and there was not one line in Richard Simpson's speech that said anything about what Labour would do to tackle the link between price and consumption. He said that we must change the culture around drinking, just as we changed the culture around tobacco and drink driving, and that it might take a generation to do that. However, the Government legislated on those issues, which is why we need to legislate on alcohol. Richard Simpson was unable to provide any alternatives to the Government's approach. The worst part of Richard Simpson's speech—I mean this sincerely—was his attack on respected academics, who are not here to defend themselves. I think that he will live to regret that because, as others have said, the modelling that has been used in this context has been used in relation to other policies that Labour has backed and will no doubt be used in relation to policies that Labour will back in future. He and other Labour members said something else that requires some explanation. One of the Opposition's key reasons for opposing minimum pricing is that it will put money into the pockets of supermarkets, but the same argument can be made in relation to legislation on quantity discounting, which Labour supports. Labour cannot have such an inconsistent position in its arguments if it hopes to have any credibility whatsoever on the issue.

No, on the second point; that is absolutely not the case. On the point about how we address the issue of quantity discounting and avoid the scenario that Jackie Baillie claims to be concerned about, the answer is that we should use the social responsibility levy, in the same way that we would use that measure to deal with any income that was raised by supermarkets in relation to minimum pricing—exactly the same mechanism, exactly the same solution. Ross Finnie gave a reasonable speech. He made the important point that the modelling that is used in the Sheffield study is commonly used in other policy development, particularly in public health policy. However, the Liberal Democrats are in some difficulty on one issue. Robert Brown tried to compare minimum unit pricing with prohibition, which was a rather silly point in what was otherwise a good speech. We must remember that, when the Liberal Democrats developed their manifesto for the general election and they included minimum unit pricing, all the matters were presumably considered, and the Liberal Democrats were obviously persuaded by the merits of minimum unit pricing. It is disappointing that they have been unable to follow that through in the Parliament. I hope that they will reflect on that. Michael Matheson made a good speech. He dealt well with the arguments about the impact on low-income households and the fact that so many of the organisations that represent families who live in poverty support minimum unit pricing. Richard Baker made a far more measured speech than he has perhaps made on other occasions, but he failed to make the case that removing caffeine from alcohol would be an effective measure to tackle a problem of this scale. I do not think that anyone on the Labour benches can seriously argue that a ban on caffeine in alcoholic drinks, which would affect such a small proportion of alcohol products, would have such an effect. The Food Standards Agency has made the point that there is no evidence whatsoever to back that up. We have never said that minimum unit pricing is a panacea. Richard Baker alluded to that. What we have said is that it is part of a package of measures. Ian McKee gave an excellent speech. His point was twofold. First, he said that, if everyone waited for someone else to act, nothing would be done. How true that is, particularly in public health policy. We have to be bold, to try things out, and to gather the evidence from that. The ban on smoking in enclosed public places did just that, and look at what has happened—countries throughout the world are emulating that policy. Ian McKee also said that low-cost alcohol is used as a loss leader  to get customers through the supermarket doors. That is a fundamental point in the debate. Like many members, Rhoda Grant seemed confused about whether there is a link between price and consumption. A number of people on the Labour benches seemed to question whether that link exists. That goes to the heart of Labour confusion on the issue. Labour members need to be clear about where they stand on it.

Some other good points were made. Malcolm Chisholm's speech was head and shoulders above many others. His position is not an easy one to adopt and he should get credit for it. Perhaps his experience as a health minister contributed to it. I am happy to support the motion in the name of Nicola Sturgeon.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member give way?

On the member's point about money going to supermarkets, I take it that, if it is clear that proposals on quantity discounting would also give money to supermarkets, the member will oppose them.

Given the importance given to modelling and evidence by Richard Simpson, will the member tell us what level of reduction in harm has been measured in relation to the proposal on caffeine? What impact, in measurement and modelling terms, would that policy have?

I am very confused by what Murdo Fraser is saying. At the beginning of your speech, you said that everyone accepts that there is a link between price and consumption; however, you seem to have just completely undermined that argument. Do you or do you not believe that there is a link between price and consumption?

That is not what was said earlier.

I have listened carefully to the debate and, leaving to one side some of the alarmist, scaremongering and misleading rhetoric, some excellent speeches have been made, which have focused on the fact that we can be truly proud of our health service and its staff. Only recently, we debated the outcomes of those efforts—the fact that waiting times are at a record low and that the performance of the NHS continues to improve. I was pleased to hear so many members focus on those outcomes, as they are what are most important to patients. I pay tribute to everyone who works in the health service in Scotland and reiterate the guarantees for the future that Nicola Sturgeon gave in her speech. This Government was quick to recognise the huge contribution that is made by all those who work in our NHS. In our first year in office, we published "Better Health, Better Care: Planning Tomorrow's Workforce Today", which established our direction of travel to ensure that NHS workforce planning is fully integrated with service and financial planning so that workforce changes fully reflect emerging models of care in the modern world and contribute to efficiency and best value for money. That is right and proper. It is important that the projections that have been debated today—which are in no way about arbitrary cuts or the downgrading of services, whatever the nay-sayers may say—are set against that backdrop. I want to respond to some of the comments that were made in the debate, because a number of them were important. I will start with Jackie Baillie. There is confusion at the heart of Labour's argument. On the one hand, in response to Murdo Fraser's intervention, Jackie Baillie said very clearly that she does not believe that the NHS is underfunded and yet, minutes later, she turned that on its head and claimed that, in some way, the NHS is underfunded. I will talk about the figures in a moment. If the latter is the case, at no point has Jackie Baillie or any Labour member in  this Parliament said where the extra money should come from—perhaps she will tell us now. She and all her Labour colleagues missed the opportunity to lodge amendments to this year's budget; I certainly did not notice Labour lodging any amendments to the budget to change the funding for the health service. If the major Opposition party in the Parliament thinks that more money should be made available to the health service, it has a responsibility to tell us where that money is coming from. If Jackie Baillie would like to tell us now, that would be most helpful.

The figures are very important. Jackie Baillie has just reiterated the 0.4 per cent figure.

Jackie Baillie talked about the SPICe figure earlier and she has just done so again. It is interesting to note that Labour has not put the SPICe figure into the public domain. I wonder why—could it be that the figures that Jackie Baillie is talking about are for the overall health and wellbeing budget rather than the NHS budget? The overall budget was of course reduced because of the capital acceleration of the housing budget, which Labour supported. We should also remember that we requested a further £350 million from Darling to spend on housing this year, and Iain Gray supported that, but Alistair Darling refused. SPICe has confirmed that, had the Labour Government given us that £350 million, and had we spent it all on housing as promised, the overall health and wellbeing budget would have increased by 3.2 per cent in real terms, which is 5.5 per cent in cash terms. I can only describe as sleekit the use of those figures by Jackie Baillie.

I move on to some of the more reasonable contributions that have been made during the debate. Murdo Fraser exposed very well the hypocrisy of Labour's position; Labour members do not like the truth. Ross Finnie made an important contribution, but we must be careful about the language that we use. No compulsory or voluntary redundancies are being proposed. Only two boards are looking at a  very small-scale voluntary severance scheme. It is important that we send out an accurate message to staff about that point. Anne McLaughlin made an excellent speech, reminding us all of the good outcomes that the NHS is delivering, despite the challenging financial environment. Rhoda Grant made clear her opposition to the current NRAC formula for health board funding, and confirmed that that is Labour's position on the matter. We are entitled to expect the Labour Party to clarify what formula it would support and which health boards would be the losers under its alternative formula. We will pursue an answer to that question. Nanette Milne reminded us of Labour's collective amnesia about what happened under its term of office when children's cancer services, neurological services, maternity services and accident and emergency were under threat of being centralised. Labour members have very short memories indeed, and Nanette Milne reminded us of that. Ian McKee made a considered speech and laid out facts to correct some of the fiction. He talked about how service redesign can release resource to be better invested. He mentioned keyhole surgery, day surgery and the shift of the balance of care towards primary care, which was one of the most important points in the debate. The fact that GPs and other staff who are working in primary care are seeing the shift from the acute sector is important. Everyone in here talks about supporting that shift, so I hope that when that happens, and resources are moved from acute to primary care, members do not stop supporting it. The previous Administration supported that policy.

I will finish on this point. Mike Rumbles made an important point, and I say to him that it is important that changes in staffing levels are not ad hoc. The redeployment of staff to the posts that need to be kept is important and it will be managed properly. It will not be ad hoc. I hope that I have reassured Mike Rumbles on that point.

I am happy to support the cabinet secretary's amendment.

I am not sure whether Marlyn Glen is referring to the Royal Victoria hospital. Does she acknowledge that the clinicians there have said that they support the move to Ninewells? They want to be assured that the quality of service there will be as good as that at the Royal Victoria. It is misleading to suggest that they oppose the ward move.

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

If Mike Rumbles, whose party is now a party of government, is saying that staff numbers should remain static and there should be no change to them, from where would he take the money to fund that? If he is not saying that, is he arguing for compulsory redundancies as an alternative to what we are suggesting? It has to be one or the other.

Will the member give way?

Will Rhoda Grant clarify that it is Labour's position to oppose the NRAC formula? If so, what health boards would it take money from to make the funding change that is being suggested? Clarity on that would be useful.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to members for their speeches in what has been an interesting and, I believe, worthwhile and consensual debate. In addition, I recognise the contribution that Mary Scanlon and Jackson Carlaw have made to previous health debates. As we have heard, patient waiting times are a topic that retains a high level of interest among members across the Parliament and one that demonstrates how vital health care services are to all of us in Scotland. I was interested to hear that there appears to be general cross-party support on a number of areas, such as building on the current waiting time standards by giving patients a clear indication of the maximum time that they will have to wait from referral to treatment. I take on board some of the comments that have been made about clinical judgment and want to respond, in particular, to the Liberal Democrat amendment. It has emerged from the debate that it is extremely important that we work with our clinical colleagues to ensure that any system has the relevant tolerance to allow it to recognise and support the targets. As I have said on a number of occasions, patients who have to be treated more quickly because of their clinical need should receive that treatment as soon as possible. That is not only common sense; it is the very essence of a clinically driven system, and we will always support and defend that principle. Ross Finnie's point about quality being paramount was well made. I hope that he has been reassured during the debate that that remains the case. I know from speaking to patients and their families across Scotland that access to swift and safe treatment remains a key issue for them, as it has been and will continue to be for the Government. The recently introduced Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, which a number of members mentioned, will provide a waiting time guarantee that will be easily understood by patients and their families. It will remove any possibility of a return to long waiting times following diagnosis and will  provide a firm and guaranteed end point for treatment. I hope that all members will support that step change in the patient experience. Christine Grahame and Ian McKee were among those who commented on the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. Christine Grahame pointed out that it includes the safeguard that clinical need will always take priority. The fact that that is in the bill is extremely important. The issue of long waiting times for categories of patients who are currently not covered by waiting time standards has been raised. For the avoidance of doubt, let me make it clear that the Government is committed to ensuring that all patients have swift and safe access to the full range of services that they need from the NHS. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, expanding the range of patients who will be covered by the 18-week whole-journey target is an issue that is already being addressed. The cabinet secretary also indicated—and other members echoed the point—that cancer waiting times have undergone a remarkable transformation, but more can be done, which is why the new cancer targets that are to be delivered at the end of 2011 have been extended to include patients who are identified through screening programmes. A number of issues have been raised around the treatment of mental health patients. We should remember that, for the first time, we have set a target that covers mental health services. As has been mentioned, by 2013 no one will wait longer than 26 weeks from referral to treatment for specialist child and adolescent mental health services. We want to go further than that but, as Richard Simpson rightly acknowledged, there are workforce challenges. It is not possible just to set a target, flick a switch and expect it to be met. Measures have to be put in place, not least of which is the need for specialist workforces to be developed and trained. The fact that we will develop a new psychological therapies target during 2010-11 is another important milestone. In her intervention on Richard Simpson, Nicola Sturgeon made the important point that rights in relation to waiting times for in-patient mental health treatment will not be excluded from the provisions of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. That is an important step forward. Karen Gillon made a number of important points about the subject. Of course we want to go further with adult mental health services, but we will be able to go only as fast as is possible and sustainable. That is an important point, which a number of members made. Jackie Baillie raised the issue of waiting times for infertility treatment. They have been a problem for a significant number of years, with a wide variation in waiting times across the country.  There was a time when a waiting time of three years was commonplace in a number of health board areas. That was totally unacceptable, and progress has been made. We want to do more, which is why we have funded Infertility Network Scotland to work with boards to address the inadequacy of access to the service. That will ensure a consistent approach across the country and offer patients direct influence on the future direction of the service. However, we want to go further. That is why we have set up an expert group on infertility, which last met on 28 April. A priority for the group is to consider an achievable, fair and acceptable waiting time target for infertility treatment. The group will report by the end of this year. The debate has focused on waiting time performance, but sustained delivery of this level of performance also depends on having a workforce to deliver the highest level of care to the people of Scotland. We have invested more money in the NHS than ever before, with increased spending on health in Scotland at record levels. A couple of members spoke about what the future holds in that regard. The cabinet secretary made the commitment that the Scottish Government will continue to protect the NHS in these difficult times. She said to Murdo Fraser—and I can reassure Frank McAveety on this point—that any consequentials from NHS funding south of the border will go to the NHS in Scotland. We have made that commitment and we will deliver on it. An example of how boards have been working together to build capacity was the announcement last week on bariatric surgery, looking at innovative ways of making services more accessible to people. Next month, the Golden Jubilee national hospital will start—[ Interruption .]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Next month, the Golden Jubilee national hospital will start treating patients from three NHS boards for gastric banding. If the service had not been created at the Golden Jubilee, those patients would have been sent to the independent health care sector. Jackie Baillie was right to praise Malcolm Chisholm's decision to bring the Golden Jubilee national hospital into the NHS because it has provided a range of innovative ways of ensuring that patients have swift access to good-quality treatment and it is a real resource for the NHS more generally. It is fair to say, as others have done—we recognise and appreciate that—that we have seen a remarkable transformation in the delivery of health services in Scotland under this  Government. Our priority has been to get the best quality of care possible for patients. Although we have made significant steps forward, there is always more that remains to be done, and the Government is committed to achieving even greater success in the health sector. We want a service that puts patients at the heart of everything that it does. Great progress has been made towards that goal, but there is always more to be done, and the Government is committed to ensuring that it is indeed done.

rose  —

We welcome the priority that the Scottish muscle network has given during the past year to the development of care standards for the management of Duchenne, which are based on European standards. The network has also developed a multidisciplinary care pathway for the management of Duchenne from the point of diagnosis onwards. That will incorporate the pathway that is being developed for the transition from child to adult services, which has an initial focus on Duchenne. A new transition clinic has been set up in Glasgow, along with young adult neuromuscular conditions clinics in Aberdeen and Dundee. The network has also produced an information leaflet on Duchenne. One of the network's main aims is to promote families' participation in large-scale clinical trials in the United Kingdom and internationally.

In addition to the information that I provided, I can tell Christopher Harvie that in children's services the getting it right for every child approach puts the child at the centre. The Scottish muscle network wants to explore the role of a key worker in managing the complex care needs of boys and young men who have Duchenne and will discuss the approach with the people who are responsible for the development of GIRFEC. The wheelchair assessment process now includes school and other educational settings,  which makes it easier to introduce powered wheelchairs for the people who need them. We are revising our guidance to education authorities on accessibility, which will provide practical examples of how schools can improve provision for disabled children in all aspects of school life.

I am very much aware of the benefits of hydrotherapy and I am aware that in many locations access to hydrotherapy services has been arranged. I want to consider the specifics of the situation in Lanarkshire and I will write to the member with more detail.

Services for people with Huntington's disease are primarily the responsibility of national health service boards. The clinical standards on neurological services produced by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland cover Huntington's disease. The Scottish Government encourages and supports boards to use those standards to improve further the quality  of services for everyone with Huntington's disease. We also welcome the valuable work of the Scottish Huntington's Association for people living with the condition and for their families and carers. In recognition of its role, we provide the organisation with funding to help to underpin its core work. We also assist specific projects, such as the current development of an application for mobile phones.

I, too, commend the work that was undertaken in the consultation with families. As the member recognises, the consultation report raises a number of important issues, which we will take forward in discussion. I am happy to write to the member with some detail on that as we take those matters forward.

We expect that the revised action plan will be published in the next few weeks. It will set out actions that will help to fulfil our ambition to provide world-class diabetes services in Scotland. The process of revising the   2006 diabetes action plan took longer than expected because of the efforts that were made to gather the views of people with diabetes.

I am sure that the member will wait for the publication of the action plan and we will then be able to furnish him with the detail. As  he knows, the availability of insulin pumps is a long-term problem. We have taken action to address the situation. I wrote to NHS board chairs to remind them of their responsibility, through their diabetes managed clinical network, to develop a local insulin strategy, including for the use of pumps, in line with the latest clinical guidance to which the member referred. That was followed up by a request that each board provide details of its planned expenditure over the next three to five years on intensive insulin therapy and the structured education associated with it. Boards have now done that. An agreed table containing the information will be published in the revised diabetes action plan. I hope that that gives the member a sense that we are making progress, that what has been a long-term issue is being addressed and that boards are working very hard indeed to ensure that they increase access to and the availability of intensive insulin therapy.

Mary Scanlon raises a very important point. We have come a long way with the work that optometrists and ophthalmologists do around not just diabetes but a range of other conditions. Any steps that both help to pick up and diagnose issues and move as much work as possible out of hospitals into the wider primary care community are of course to be welcomed. Discussions are continuing about how much more progress can be made to build on the already good progress that I am sure that Mary Scanlon and others in the chamber would recognise.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that people living with long-term conditions such as coeliac disease receive the care and support that they need. A range of gluten-free food products is offered on prescription and our commitment to abolishing prescription charges in April 2011 will benefit everyone who pays for those prescriptions.

The Advisory Committee on Borderline Substances, which is a United Kingdom-wide body that was set up to advise on the prescription of certain foodstuffs, including gluten-free foods, decides what can be prescribed. Its list is published in the British national formulary, to which we expect GPs to adhere. Obviously, the member is concerned about discrepancies in prescribing and the products that are available. If she has not done so already, I advise her to write to me with details of the case. I will look into whether we can do more to ensure that there is consistency in adhering to the guidelines, and will write to the member once I have done that.

Due to the success of care in the community, only a relatively small number of young adults with disabilities are in care homes. The national care standards require care providers to ensure that the support for young people in care homes is based on their individual care plan, taking into account their individual needs. It is the responsibility of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care to ensure through regular inspections of care homes that the requirements of the national care standards are met.

I will put in context the total number of young adults who are resident in care homes. According to the last published statistics in the 2007 care home census, which included age breakdowns, of the total number of 36,428 long-stay care home residents, 230 were adults aged from 18 to 24. Some of those young adults were placed in care homes for people with physical disabilities and others were placed in care homes with a specialism for people with learning disabilities. The numbers are quite small, but Robert Brown has made the point that it is important for those individuals that the right standards and packages of care are provided. I am happy to look into Robert Brown's suggestion. I meet the care commission regularly, and am happy to discuss such matters with it. However, I point out that we have an agenda on and an interest in pursuing self-directed support and making it easier for young adults with disabilities in particular to access the care packages that they want, whether they want to remain in their own home or build a care package with a range of services that is based in supported accommodation, and we want people to have more options. I hope that the member will support us in our endeavours to achieve that.

I, too, welcome Ian McKee's motion and congratulate him on securing the debate. It has been constructive and many important points have been made, not least Malcolm Chisholm's point about how important investment in the early years is—I whole-heartedly agree. I am pleased to say that, after an extremely successful recruitment process, which saw more than 60 community nurses apply, the first family nurse partnership team in Scotland has been established. All seven posts have been filled and the team is located in the Craigmillar area of Edinburgh. The team is now in the process of recruiting first-time pregnant teenagers, who must be under the age of 19. I acknowledge, of course, that there are many other vulnerable parents, but it is right, in a pilot, to focus, here on first-time pregnant teenagers from the Edinburgh community health partnership area. The programme is licensed by the pioneer of this work, Professor David Olds of the University of Colorado, and it has fidelity requirements to ensure that the potential gains, seen over a 25-year period in the USA, are realised. Ian McKee made the important point that the real benefits take some time to be fully realised, but there are also measurable benefits in the shorter to medium term. We hope in the Scottish model to emulate the success experienced in America, in particular by developing the self-confidence of our young parents to be the parents that they want to be and can be. The seven family health nurses have started their mandatory masters level education and training, which is an important part of the preparation process. The crux of the success of the programme is the intense strength-based and therapeutic relationship between nurse and client. To achieve that, nurses need to feel supported in their day-to-day work with families, and they will be supported by a psychologist.  The target level of recruitment to the programme is set at at least 75 per cent of all teenagers who meet the eligibility criteria and we are currently reaching 82 per cent of such teenagers. Those young people do not feel stigmatised, as the programme is being offered universally, on an entitlement basis, to all pregnant teenagers who are becoming parents for the first time. The programme is offered to all teenagers who meet the criteria, irrespective of where they live or their family circumstances. Early reports show us how important that is. Of the few who have declined the programme, half report feeling well supported by family and friends. We hope to recruit a total of 145 teenagers before the autumn and will support them and their families until their child reaches two years of age. The family nurse partnership team has worked closely with colleagues in universal services in Edinburgh, particularly in public health nursing, health visiting and maternity services and with other health and social care professionals, including general practitioners and those in social work services. They are creating effective referral pathways to ensure that they reach these mothers-to-be during the key window of opportunity that occurs during a first pregnancy. I have heard about numerous examples of good practice around information sharing, particularly between the FNP team and housing colleagues, which have allowed the right practitioner to intervene at the right time to maximise support for the young mother in advance of the arrival of a new baby. That exemplifies the principles of getting it right for every child, in which a joint approach with a clearly identified lead professional can make a real difference to a family. In Scotland in 2008, more than 3,000 young teenagers would have been eligible for the family nurse partnership programme, with 70 per cent of them being in the lowest deprivation quintiles. Offering the programme to all teenagers who meet the current eligibility criteria would see us supporting the most vulnerable of our future young parents and offering the best possible start to their children. As members have said, we need to proceed with caution and learn from the family nurse partnership implementation elsewhere, as well as in Edinburgh. The randomised control trial across 18 sites in England will shape the future of the programme in Europe and will provide us with evidence of the overall benefits, including cost benefits, as the programme is delivered in Scotland. Our evaluation, which is to report in three years, will focus on the transferability of the model into the Scottish context. Richard Simpson implied that somehow Scotland has been slow in introducing the family  nurse partnership. I point out that, in England, the implementation of the programme started in March 2007, but of course the discussions and planning went back to 2006 and before. I have not found evidence of movements at that time on the issue here in Scotland, although they might well have been planned—we do not know. However, when we came into Government in May 2007, we felt that the programme was worth while and that Scotland should trial the system. Areas of learning have already been identified that could be transferable to all disciplines that support families with children in the early years. Young people have described how they feel respected by the nurses and have said that, by considering their aspirations, hopes and desires, the programme helps them to see a positive future as parents. Although the approach of developing self-efficacy in young people is not new, it has potentially far-reaching benefits when working with that client group. The potential longer-term gains from the work—such as a decreased number of subsequent pregnancies, longer intervals between pregnancies, children with better school readiness, decreased involvement in crime and healthier mothers and children—will take longer to evaluate, but we know that those key issues, along with health behaviours, are linked to social deprivation and poverty. We must continue to address the early risk factors to improve outcomes. Angela Constance made the point that the programme is not a panacea and that we need to work on other issues. Jackson Carlaw expressed concerns about how the family nurse partnership relates to the wider pool of nurses and health visitors. We know from Professor David Hall's work that the average health visitor input into families such as those of first-time teenage parents is 10 times the input into other families in the case load. I have asked for the evaluation of the family nurse partnership in Scotland to include a review of how the programme impacts on the work of colleagues who support young parents, particularly in universal services. I hope that that reassures Jackson Carlaw that we are aware of the issues that he raises. It is early days in the testing of the new model, but the signs are promising. We are reassured by the family nurses in the team, GPs, colleagues in universal services and those whom I have spoken to at recent conferences that the approach makes sense. We now need to work towards measuring the effectiveness of the programme and sharing the learning with others on what we believe is an effective way of supporting young parents and their children to gain a better start in life.   Meeting closed at 17:43.

The Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities recently published "Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland: A Route Map Towards Healthy Weight". In addition, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland published the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 115, on the management of obesity, back in February. Earlier this week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced a new bariatric service at the Golden Jubilee national hospital with the first patients planned to be treated next month.

We are already supporting a number of initiatives through community food and health Scotland, from cooking classes to facilitated sessions on Scotland's first cooking bus. We also provide support for families through our website, www.takelifeon.co.uk, which has recently been relaunched and includes specific information that can be very useful for parents. I want also to mention the eight healthy weight community programmes in Scotland, which are about bringing all the community together. Families are an important part of that. I assure Gil Paterson that developing a partnership with  parents is a very important element of that programme.

The industry has already made progress on trans fats. Our focus has been to reduce the level of saturated fat, which is of course the major health problem in Scotland. I say to Richard Simpson that I am afraid that his failure to gain cross-party support for his proposed bill cannot be laid at the door of anyone other than perhaps himself.

I, too, thank Malcolm Chisholm for bringing the debate to the chamber this evening. As Scotland's population ages, treatments advance and screening programmes prove to be increasingly effective at detecting cancers earlier. As a result, many more people will find themselves  living longer with cancer. For that reason, we are beginning to see cancer being treated increasingly as a long-term condition. As we know, breast cancer is the most common cancer among women, with incidence rates up 9 per cent over the past decade. We have, of course, seen great improvements in breast cancer survival rates, whether in NHS Lothian or across Scotland more generally, with five-year survival now standing at over 84 per cent. With more people being treated for and surviving breast cancer, the number of people who are affected by lymphoedema is likely to increase. The Scottish Government recognises lymphoedema as a serious long-term condition. As members have said, lymphoedema is not always caused by cancer; nonetheless, it is serious long-term condition. As we have heard today, living with lymphoedema is very challenging for individuals, their families and carers because of the physical and emotional impacts of pain, disfigurement, limited mobility and disruption to normal daily life that it can cause. The Government is concerned that people who are living with lymphoedema that results from breast cancer treatment or any other cause should receive the care and support that they need. I recognise the importance of emotional and psychological support for people living with long-term conditions, especially conditions such as lymphoedema. We know that people living with long-term conditions are more likely to experience psychological problems, stress and depression, which makes recovery more difficult. For that reason, support is an essential aspect of self-management, to which a number of members have referred. That is why we are supporting the work that the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland is doing with our lead clinician for self-management to help NHS boards to adopt models that offer a range of emotional and psychological support to people who are living with long-term conditions. That is just one of the many commitments that we have made in the long-term conditions action plan, which forms an important part of the new health care quality strategy. A number of concerns have been expressed about variances in lymphoedema service provision. Margaret Mitchell outlined eloquently some of the challenges in that area. As I said, not everyone living with lymphoedema has the condition as a result of cancer. I emphasise that lymphoedema services should be made available to everyone who needs them, whatever the cause and wherever they live. We have some work to do to ensure that there is equity in that respect. A comprehensive picture of lymphoedema services would help to address the issue and contribute to the improvement of care. A working  group of the Scottish Medical and Scientific Advisory Committee is already scoping lymphoedema services in Scotland. I hope that that work will help to pave the way for wider work by the voluntary sector, lymphoedema practitioners and people who are living with lymphoedema to develop a best-practice model of care, for which a number of members have called this evening. I look forward to hearing about the group's findings and vision for the way forward. A number of members made the point that better data need to be gathered. The study of Edinburgh breast unit patients with lymphoedema that Queen Margaret University is undertaking and which is nearing completion may yield some insights into incidence. We will look at the study's findings once they are published. A lot of good work is being done and we need to pull all of it together. We are committed to working collaboratively not just with health care professionals but with the voluntary sector to find new ways of delivering services that can make a real impact and real improvement. One such innovation is the Breakthrough Breast Cancer service pledge for breast cancer. As other members have done, I pay tribute to that organisation for its work. The innovation involves NHS boards and breast units signing a pledge to improve services based on patient feedback, and will include support for women who require services to treat and manage lymphoedema. That partnership approach to service improvement, based on local patient experience, is exactly the kind of initiative that we want to encourage through the new quality strategy. I am pleased to note that Breakthrough Breast Cancer will receive £46,500 of Scottish Government funding over the next three years, through a section 16B grant programme, to support the roll-out of the service pledge across the NHS in Scotland. I am also pleased that two projects supporting self-management were successful in their applications to the self-management fund, for which the Scottish Government has given £4 million until 2011. One of those projects is the Haven Centre in Lanarkshire. I hope that that will help to support patients after their treatment. Breast Cancer Care has received funding to deliver a range of "moving forward" information sessions across Scotland to support people in adjusting to, and to facing living beyond breast-cancer treatment. Wearing my public health hat, I say that we want to do what we can to reduce the number of people who develop breast cancer and the number of people who are likely to be affected by lymphoedema, so our actions on prevention are vital.  A number of members mentioned some of the risks that we know can be reduced. Our programme of encouraging healthy lifestyle choices will, I believe, help to reduce the incidence of cancer and so, I hope, that of lymphoedema. I wish to highlight the work of the Scottish Government's living with cancer group, which is tasked with overseeing the implementation of the "Better Cancer Care" action plan. The group is holding a workshop at the end of May to discuss its vision for cancer care in Scotland in supporting people who are affected by the long-term consequences of a cancer diagnosis. Lymphoedema will be among the issues that the group will consider. I hope that people are reassured that there is a lot happening which will, if we bring it all together, start to ensure that the best practice that exists in many parts of Scotland, and which members have talked about, extends to the areas where there are still clearly challenges. That means ensuring equity of service. I again thank Malcolm Chisholm for focusing attention on an important issue. I have no doubt that this informative and productive debate is another step on the pathway towards achieving better awareness and understanding of the condition, both within the NHS and among the public in general. It has focused attention on the good things, and on areas where there are still challenges—and it can bring a sharper focus to what we can do about those challenges.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

I am grateful to all members for their participation in and contribution to the debate. We are implementing the health care quality strategy for the NHS in Scotland to support our NHS in delivering the best health care services to the people of Scotland, in a way that responds to what people have told us that they want and need. We are confident that, by doing that, we can make Scotland a world leader in health care quality. We are also confident that, through that shared approach, the NHS will not only be able to deliver the highest-quality health care, but be better placed to respond to the economic and social challenges that lie ahead. Our confidence in our ability in Scotland to achieve those aims for the NHS is built on a strong foundation. I say to Jackie Baillie that it is not good enough for the spokesperson for the major Opposition party in the Parliament to come to an important debate and offer absolutely nothing by way of  constructive proposals, constructive criticism or anything else. She gave a rant that was a single transferable speech. To be fair to her back benchers and, to some degree, to Richard Simpson, her speech stood in stark contrast to theirs.

I will let the member in later. Let me put some facts on the record. First, there will be no compulsory redundancies in the NHS. That is a real achievement, given the squeeze on the Scottish Government budget as a result of the £500 million of cuts from Westminster. Secondly, although there might be changes in how the community maternity unit in the Vale of Leven hospital operates, as Jackie Baillie said, at least the unit is still there. That would not have been the case under Labour, which was absolutely intent on closing it. Only the action of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing overturned the proposals to close the unit that were on the table. Let us have facts, not fiction. Another fact is that there are 10,000 more staff working in the NHS than there were before the SNP Government came to power in 2007. Those 10,000 extra staff are delivering improvement in the quality of patient care. I do not mind debating points in the Parliament, but debates must be based on fact and not scaremongering, which was the whole basis of Jackie Baillie's speech. The staff in the NHS and the patients who receive NHS services deserve better from the political leaders in the Parliament.

The Labour Party cannot have it both ways, either. The Labour Party cannot make cuts of £500 million in the Scottish Budget and then assert that somehow those cuts have no impact on how public services are delivered. We expect our health boards to leave no stone unturned in ensuring that in delivering the health service with their budget, including the extra £264 million that they have, they protect front-line services. I would have thought that all members would get behind health boards in doing that. I pick up Jackie Baillie on another point. In her litany of accusations, she criticised changes to hospital-based mental health services for the elderly. However, only a few weeks ago Jackie Baillie stood up at the Convention of Scottish  Local Authorities convention to back changes that shift resources from hospitals to communities. Is not that a case of a member saying one thing in the Parliament and something completely different outside the Parliament? That is not good enough. More constructive speeches were made. Mary Scanlon asked why it was necessary in the strategy document to restate the key aims of the NHS. I think that the cabinet secretary explained well why it was important to do so. Ross Finnie and Jamie Stone talked about managementspeak. In a spirit of consensus, we concede that there is some managementspeak in the document. That does not detract from the important substance of the document. Any Government document might contain similar language—Liberal Democrats might find that some of their UK Government documents contain managementspeak.

Christine Grahame, in her considered speech, referred to the useful evidence that was put on the record at the Health and Sport Committee. Duncan McNeil's speech was very constructive, in the main. However, in his intervention, he talked about reducing the IT budget for health. I remind him that Labour's proposal last year to cut the e-health budget would have really damaged the IT budget of the health service. He asked me specifically about the health service in his constituency and I asked him about a letter that is winging its way to him. He can read for himself the detail of that letter, but the last line says: "I understand that further discussions between representatives of the Ardgowan Hospice and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde regarding funding have now taken place and that a funding arrangement agreeable to both sides, has been reached." I hope that Duncan McNeil will welcome that in the spirit in which it is intended.

I advise Duncan McNeil that the service is continuing and that an arrangement has been reached that is agreeable to both sides. He does the people at Ardgowan hospice no service when they have reached an agreement with the health board that is to their satisfaction. I  suggest that, if it is good enough for them, it should be good enough for Duncan McNeil. Malcolm Chisholm made a constructive, if at times challenging, speech. He showed that he understands well the issues behind what is involved and could perhaps teach his front-bench colleagues a thing or two about how to get a point across in a more effective way. He showed that he had read the document—so, full marks to him. We will reflect on the issues that he raised when we read the Official Report of the debate. Anne McLaughlin talked about the patient advice and support service, which will be for every patient, recognising individual needs. Communication support and translation is a significant aspect of the proposed service. I hope that that answers her question. Jackson Carlaw made some important points in his summing-up speech, not the least of which was the important point that the £36 million of resources that the NHS in Scotland would have had to find—it would have had to come from somewhere, perhaps putting pressure on front-line budgets—will no longer have to be found following the rejection of Labour's national insurance hike. That was an important point to make. The strategy will not deliver change overnight, but it goes to the heart of what the NHS is all about. Staff in the NHS tell us that they chose to work in the NHS instead of working in other sectors because they wanted to deliver the best quality of care and treatment to patients. That is how the quality strategy came into being: it was driven by what the staff—and, equally important, the patients—were telling us that they wanted. We are absolutely committed to implementing the quality strategy and supporting everyone in Scotland to play their part in ensuring that our NHS delivers the health care that everyone wants and needs, now and into the future. We have demonstrated why we believe that NHS Scotland can become a world leader. I am confident that everyone here supports that aim, which has been embraced by the NHS in Scotland. I hope that everyone will work with us to pursue the ambitions that we have set out in the quality strategy for our NHS.

Has Duncan McNeil received my letter on the matter yet?

We need no convincing about the value of cardiac rehabilitation. The intervention is clinically effective. It transforms and saves lives. As a bonus, particularly in the current economic climate, it does not cost much in comparison with other interventions. Nanette Milne described cardiac rehab well. The approach epitomises the self-management that is at the heart of our work on long-term conditions in general, because it encourages people to take responsibility for their health while having access to professional support when they need it. It is about rebuilding people's confidence and helping them to get back on their feet and regain control over their lives. The debate is therefore timely. For the reasons that I have given, cardiac rehabilitation has featured strongly in our strategic work on heart disease for at least the past decade. It featured in the CHD and stroke strategy that was published in 2001 and in the first set of standards that were developed by the predecessor to NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. It is the subject of a guideline from the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network and it features in the new heart disease standards that NHS QIS will publish at the end of the month. The audit of cardiac rehabilitation services is an integral part of the NHS QIS heart disease improvement programme. It is no coincidence that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing launched our action plan on better heart disease and stroke care last June at a cardiac rehabilitation class in Glasgow. The action plan sets out three key actions for NHS boards in relation to cardiac rehab. The thinking in that part of the action plan was informed by the cardiac rehab campaign that the British Heart Foundation and Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland launched in 2008. Given the effectiveness of cardiac rehab, the campaigners want it to be  available to everyone who would benefit from it. The Scottish Government shares that aim. NHS Grampian offers a good example of the cardiac rehab services that boards can provide. Nanette Milne talked in some detail about why that is the case. The board offers a comprehensive service across six sites, and I am sure that the quality of the service has a great deal to do with the fact that NHS Grampian's CHD managed clinical network has a cardiac rehabilitation subgroup, which is chaired by the head of the Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association. The approach is also a good example of how the NHS can work in partnership with the voluntary sector, which is another key element of our work on long-term conditions. It is clear that more could be done. We know from the campaign that we need to get more people who have heart failure into cardiac rehabilitation. Data from ISD Scotland, which Mary Scanlon referred to, showed that in 2007 only 1 per cent of people who had heart failure were getting cardiac rehab. I am pleased that they are mentioned in the clinical standards, because the SIGN guideline is clear about the benefits that cardiac rehab can bring to that group of patients. Until recently, only people who had had a heart attack or a cardiac intervention had access to cardiac rehabilitation. In keeping with our anticipatory care approach, we want to extend the scope of cardiac rehab to other groups, such as those with unstable or new-onset angina. In keeping with the importance that we attach to tackling health inequalities, we want to ensure that groups who have been underrepresented—women, people from ethnic minorities and older people—are also included. There are also issues about people in remote and rural communities, which have a particular relevance for Grampian. We should be thinking about making more of telehealth care and exploring innovative methods to expand its use. To do that, we are funding a project in NHS Highland that is developing a menu-based telecardiac rehabilitation service for people in remote parts of the Highlands. That will allow them to take part in specialist sessions at all stages of their recovery and will enable the setting up of a more comprehensive community programme. That could help with the cardiac rehab campaign's aim of offering alternative models, such as home-based rehabilitation. Another example of good practice is the heart manual that has been developed in NHS Lothian. The action plan calls on boards to use it or an equivalent to ensure that people receive structured information and education to allow them to develop the skills to manage their own condition. The fourth edition, which I launched in 2008, relies  more on images to get its message across and to make it more user friendly, and that change has been welcomed. I know that NHS Grampian has been successful in making the manual available, and I hope that it can build on that approach to take forward the Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association's suggestion that there is a role for practice nurses in delivering cardiac rehab in community settings. I am also aware of the value that NHS Grampian's cardiac rehabilitation subgroup attaches to the importance of education, and I share its view that people can self-manage much better once they have had access to information and education that is couched in language that they understand. That may help with the problem that the subgroup identified of people disappearing at the end of phase 3 of the rehabilitation programme and not going on to phase 4, which deals with long-term maintenance of physical activity and lifestyle change. We are doing a lot of general work in those areas, but a very practical example of how we can encourage people to stick to the complete programme is the Braveheart project in Falkirk. It has created a role for older people who have themselves gone through cardiac rehab in mentoring others who are just starting the process. It has been shown to support people through phases 3 and 4 and to reduce readmissions to hospital. We would like all boards to adopt that approach.  I know that Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association has expressed concerns about resources to help boards take forward the improvements in cardiac rehabilitation services that we all want. The allocation of resources has to be a matter for boards, but I believe that the evidence base for the clinical and cost effectiveness of cardiac rehabilitation, the prominence that it is given in our action plan, the new standard that NHS QIS is publishing and the results that we expect from the next audit round—which will be interesting to members—will all help to strengthen the hand of those who seek extra resources to improve services. I will be happy to keep members up to date on the progress that is made in improving access to cardiac rehabilitation as we take the work forward, and I will look at ways of doing that on a regular basis.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

General practitioner practices may be required by a health board to dispense to all or some of the board's patients in areas where there is no community pharmacy. In the event that an application to open a community pharmacy in such an area is successful, the board will assess the need for that GP practice to continue dispensing to some or all of its patients. If a  practice subsequently loses its dispensing income, it will remain eligible for general medical services funding on the same basis as any other GP practice. However, we are reviewing the regulations and arrangements for pharmacy applications, and we published the consultation document "Applications to provide NHS Pharmaceutical Services: Review of the Control of Entry Arrangements" on 22 March 2010. That document has been made available to all members, and I would welcome any views that they wish to give.

It was always the intention that dispensing income would be for dispensing services. As the member will know, applications to open a pharmacy are matters for individual health boards. We introduced an amendment to the regulations last July to ensure that health boards consult the public, which previously did not have to happen. It is for boards to determine how best to fulfil that duty. The Government consultation that I mentioned seeks views on that specific issue and others that the member has raised. I again encourage him to make known his views in that consultation.

As I laid out in my answer to the initial question, health boards will consider applications to open community pharmacies. They will consider issues such as how the area is currently served. Helen Eadie rightly raises the issue that in some areas people want a community pharmacy to open, whereas in others people want to retain their dispensing GP. Through the consultation process that we are undertaking, we want to ensure that we get the right balance so that patients are best served. That might be through a community pharmacy and all the services that come with it, which we should remember are extensive. Where a community pharmacy is not operating, we want to ensure that patients are not disadvantaged— that is why we have dispensing GPs in the first place. Again, I encourage all members to contribute to the consultation.

Scottish Government officials recently met Aberdeen city alcohol and drugs partnership to support it in establishing an outcomes framework to undertake service redesign. That is part of the Scottish  Government's programme of work with alcohol and drugs partnerships to support local implementation of the ADP delivery framework that was published on 20 April 2009 and of the national drug and alcohol strategies "The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland's Drug Problem" and "Changing Scotland's Relationship with Alcohol: A Framework for Action". Scottish Government officials have also held meetings with NHS Grampian officials that the three local alcohol and drug partnerships attended. Those discussions were part of a series of visits to boards to monitor their performance in delivering alcohol brief interventions, drug and alcohol treatment waiting times targets and health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment targets.

The thrust of "The Road to Recovery" is very much that—helping addicts to recover. That requires a range of services to be offered. What will work and be of assistance to one person might not be what is required by another. In that context, methadone has its place. We all wish reliance on methadone to be reduced, but Richard Baker and all other members will recognise that it is a complex issue to which simple soundbites do not do justice. Many people in many families wrestle with the issue, and the Government is of course taking the matter forward, I hope in a consensual way with other parties in the Parliament.

Through the National Health Service (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 2009, the Scottish Government amended previous regulations to place a duty on health boards to take reasonable steps to consult the local community when applications are made to open a community pharmacy in a given area. It is a matter for health boards to consider who and how to consult. In addition, we are reviewing the regulations and arrangements for pharmacy applications. We published the consultation document, "Applications to provide NHS Pharmaceutical Services: Review of the Control of Entry Arrangements" on 22 March. The document has been made available to all members and makes specific reference to the issue that Iain Smith raised. I welcome members' contributions to the consultation.

I am aware of the issue that the member raises. He will shortly receive an answer to his letter on the matter. As things stand, members of the public cannot make direct representations to the national appeal panel. However, as part of the appeal process the panel will consider again the evidence that was presented to the pharmacy practices committee on the initial application, which can include representations from interested parties and/or the public and their representatives, such as a community council. Interested parties can be, for example, the area medical committee, which  represents all GPs in a given area. The national appeal panel can also consider new representations from the public if they are provided to the panel by one of the interested parties. As I said, I will reply in detail to Iain Smith's letter. I encourage him to raise the issue in the consultation process, so that we can give it due consideration.

Will the member give way?

I am a little confused because, on the one hand, the member seems to be criticising the Government for not listening and then, when we listen and lodge amendments on the basis of what members have said, we get criticised as well. Is not that just a bit bizarre?

The amendments in this group all relate to the membership, visitors and committees of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. Amendments 13 to 15 were lodged by the Government to address the concerns that were raised with us at stage 2 by service user and carer representatives about the appointment of commission members. Amendments 13 to 15 will require ministers to appoint at least one service user and a carer to the board. Amendments 16 to 18 make similar provision with regard to the appointment of commission visitors by the commission, which will be required to include at least one service user and one carer. Amendments 19 to 22 alter slightly the arrangements for the new advisory committees that the commission is to establish. We are simplifying those arrangements so that the commission will now establish "at least one" advisory committee, rather than two such committees. Amendment 98, which was lodged by Malcolm Chisholm, would remove ministers' power to remove members of the commission in the event that they are unfit or unable to discharge their functions, and replace it with an alternative power. It would mean that, unlike other NDPBs, the  commission could have members who were unfit or unable to discharge their functions and who ministers could not remove until and unless it could be established that they had otherwise breached the terms and conditions of their appointment. That cannot be good for the effective governance of the commission, and I therefore cannot support the amendment. I move amendment 13.

I say to Malcolm Chisholm that it is absolutely not our intention for the wording to put off anyone with any mental health or other condition from getting involved with the board of any organisation. Of course, that is the whole point—the wording in the bill is the same as that for every other NDPB. People with mental health conditions might well be involved with other NDPBs—I hope that they are. We are talking about consistency and ensuring that the requirements that apply to the board of the Mental Welfare Commission are the same as those that apply to every other NDPB. However, I give Malcolm Chisholm the assurance on the record that there is no intention to discriminate in any way on the ground of mental ill health. As with any other appointment to an NDPB, such issues sometimes arise, and they will be dealt with using the utmost discretion.  Amendment 13 agreed to.  Amendments 14 and 15 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to.  Amendment 98 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm].

Proposed new section 10Z10 provides that "HIS may establish ... the Scottish Health Council." Malcolm Chisholm is keen for the council to continue as a committee of HIS under primary legislation and to ensure that HIS cannot transfer the council's functions or carry them out in some other way without the Parliament's approval. I understand his concerns and agree with him about the importance of the functions of public engagement and user focus that the council carries out in relation to the NHS. We have listened to the concerns that were expressed at stage 2. Committee members were concerned that ministers would have complete discretion over the council's establishment and how long it could continue. Malcolm Chisholm's amendment 47 will, if agreed to, remove any flexibility in the way in which the functions of patient focus and user involvement are delivered; it will mean that the Scottish health council must be established under the new arrangements and could not be dissolved. In the committee, I offered to introduce an order-making power that would require parliamentary debate and approval of any proposed future changes to the council, in the event that change to how HIS carries out those functions seems necessary. Amendments 51 and 54 introduce that power. Any orders would be subject to the affirmative procedure and, therefore, would be debated by the Parliament. Those provisions are necessary to retain important flexibility. They address Mr Chisholm's concerns by ensuring the involvement of the Parliament in any future change to the Scottish health council. This package of amendments—Malcolm Chisholm's amendments 47 and 48, and the Scottish Government's amendments 51 and 54—strikes the balance that is necessary to reassure members while allowing adequate flexibility for future possible changes. In answer to his question about the chair of the Scottish health council, I confirm to Malcolm Chisholm that we can advertise for a person to be both a member of the HIS board and chair of the council so that it is clear from the outset that they will fill both posts. That is how the current chair of  the Scottish health council was appointed. I hope that, with that reassurance, Malcolm Chisholm will feel able to support the Scottish Government's amendments in addition to his own.

I forgive you, Presiding Officer.

All the amendments in group 11 relate to the functions of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. I do not support amendment 76, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which would have the effect of removing part of the Government amendment that was agreed to at stage 2 that amends section 5 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. Amendment 76 would restore section 5 of the 2003 act back to its original text. As amended at stage 2, section 5 of the 2003 act now reflects how the commission works in practice in monitoring the operation of the act and in promoting best practice. Under the bill as currently drafted, the commission's role will be to monitor the practical application of the principles of the 2003 act. Amendment 76 would widen section 5 back to its original form. That is not appropriate, given the commission's practices and the role that the new scrutiny bodies will have in scrutinising mental health services. As has already been said, amendment 76 is not wanted by the commission itself. However, I can give an assurance to Derek Brownlee and others that it is very much our intention that SCSWIS and HIS will have a direct role in scrutinising mental health services. Of course, collaboration and joint working with the Mental Welfare Commission on those issues will be very important indeed. I am happy to support amendment 49, which will remove the power that is currently to be given to the commission to charge for advice. As I have indicated previously, I have no wish to deter vulnerable individuals from seeking advice from the commission for fear that they will be charged. Therefore, I accept amendment 49, which is in the name of Malcolm Chisholm.  Amendments 12 and 23 are Government amendments that reflect two issues that the commission raised with us after stage 2 and which we agreed to consider. Amendment 12 will ensure that the commission retains a residual role, in addition to that of the commission visitors, of instigating formal investigations under section 11 of the 2003 act and of making recommendations following such investigations. Amendment 23 will insert a further control on the power of the commission's chief executive when exercising the commission's power to discharge patients and to recall guardianship orders. The chief executive will be required to consult the commission in every such case.

The amendments in group 8 are all minor and technical in nature. For the avoidance of doubt, amendment 50 will make it clear that "registration", in section 53A(1), is  intended to refer to registration under chapter 3 of part 4 of the bill. In line with normal practice, amendment 82 will make it clear that commencement orders may not include incidental, consequential or transitional provisions. Amendment 88 will make it clear that, if the Parliament does not renew the order-making powers in part 2, which are subject to a sunset clause, that will not affect the validity of orders that have been made under section 10 or section 13(1). Amendment 90 will remove an unnecessary repetition from section 103(3). Amendment 53 is a technical amendment, which will ensure that the definitions in paragraph 20 of schedule 8 relate to that schedule. I move amendment 50.  Amendment 50 agreed to.

The total provision of all forms of respite in Scotland in 2008-09, on a comparable basis with the 2007-08 data, stood at 174,030 weeks. That represents an increase of 1,150 weeks on 2007-08, when provision was 9,240 weeks more than that in 2006-07. I have discussed the figures with senior representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, who accept that more needs to be done to increase further the delivery of respite weeks. COSLA leaders have discussed the issue, and the convention will hold further discussions with individual local authorities to take the commitment forward.

Delayed discharge is at one of its lowest levels ever, but we must of course always work to do more. I assure Helen Eadie that we are doing that. As for the commitment, Helen Eadie will remember that the £4 million of additional resources that we provided for additional respite provision will not kick in until the next set of figures appears, which should happen around November. She is correct to say that COSLA said that it would deliver 2,000 weeks more than in 2007-08.  COSLA is aware of that and of the commitment to provide an additional 10,000 weeks. The commitment is national—it does not mean that each local authority must provide an increase in weeks. However, if some local authorities reduce their respite provision by more, other local authorities will have an awful lot more work to do to make up those weeks and deliver the additional 10,000 weeks. I point Helen Eadie in Glasgow City Council's direction and I urge every Labour member who represents Glasgow to have discussions with that council, because it has reduced the number of respite weeks it provides by more than 3,000 since 2006-07. That is a third of the total of 10,000 weeks that we want to deliver. If Glasgow City Council denies carers in its area the respite that they deserve, that makes the situation much harder for other local authorities.

I will write to Dave Thompson about the specifics of his questions. As for Highland's contribution to the 10,000 extra weeks of respite provision, the commitment that it has delivered has stayed more or less steady; as is obvious, we encourage the area to do more. The challenge in Highland is delivering innovative respite provision in a rural area with a dispersed population. Future respite provision there is being discussed and I am happy to write to Dave Thompson with more detail about that.

We should acknowledge that, overall, there has been an increase in respite provision.

It is true that there has been an increase: we now have 174,030 weeks of respite; in 2006-07, the figure was 163,640 weeks. By anybody's calculations, that is an increase. There was never an agreed breakdown of the 10,000 weeks that said that so many weeks had to be given to older carers and service users or to younger people. Having said that, I hope and expect that local authorities take account of the needs of all service user groups and their carers within the provision that they make for respite.

The concordat commitment to extra respite weeks is at a national level rather than at the level of individual councils. That said, I am disappointed at the extent to which significant reductions in provision in a few council areas have offset the good progress that has been made by others. If those authorities had just held their provision steady in 2008-09, the overall provision in Scotland would have increased by a further 6,500 weeks. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities accepts that more needs to be done to increase the delivery of respite weeks. In partnership with COSLA, the Government is developing a carers and young carers strategy. Within that strategy there will be a focus on short breaks, recognising the importance of respite for carers and the people they care for.

First, I recognise Cathy Peattie's long-standing interest in the issue. COSLA leaders have discussed the issue, and they understand that, although ring fencing no longer exists, the £4 million that was allocated—which applies not to the 2,000 weeks but to the next set of figures—was intended for respite provision. I urge members on all sides of the chamber to raise the issue with their local authorities. Glasgow City Council received the lion's share of the £4 million—£600,000—and yet, as I said, it has reduced respite care by 3,000 weeks, which is a third of the total that we want to achieve in extra weeks. That makes it tough for other local authorities to make up the difference. I urge Cathy  Peattie and other members to make representations to their own local authorities.

Respite care takes place in a number of settings, and I will certainly look into what has happened with the resources that have been freed up by the reduction in those beds. I know that Mary Scanlon has followed the discussions on the reshaping care for older people agenda, which is very much about moving resource from the acute sector into community provision to ensure that community-based services, whether in home-like settings or the person's own home, can be provided. I will certainly look into the issue that she raises in more detail.

Decisions in relation to applications to provide national health service pharmaceutical services are matters for the relevant NHS board. However, I am aware that NHS Orkney issued a news release on 12 March that indicated that the application to which the member refers has been rejected.

I am not aware of any new application at the moment, although that does not mean that there will not be any. Under the current legislation we cannot prevent applications altogether, whether it is for the same premises or for the same neighbourhood, simply on the basis that a previous application has been rejected. We are aware of the issue, however, which was raised by a number of stakeholders during discussions in the summer and autumn of last year. We will make some proposals in our consultation, which we will issue next week, and I will ensure that the member—and indeed all members—receive a copy of that consultation.

Responsibility for the overall provision of national health service dental services in the area rests with NHS Grampian. The board is undertaking a range of measures to improve access to NHS dental services in Aberdeen, including the opening of the Aberdeen dental school facility in January this year. The number of dentists has increased from 270, as at September 2007, to 304 as at September 2009.

Good progress has been made with the target for the registration of three to five-year-olds. The HEAT target has been exceeded in Aberdeen City, with 94.7 per cent of children aged three to five years registered with a dentist under NHS arrangements. In addition to the number of dentists, which I set out in my original answer, NHS Grampian recorded the largest ever increase in the number of independent dentists in 2008-09. Aberdeen City has shown the largest increase in the number of such dentists, with 65 of them in post. I am sure that Nicol Stephen is more than aware of NHS Grampian's dental plan, which has set a target of registering an additional 125,000 people by 2012. Between June 2007 and September 2009, an additional 61,500 people, of whom 13,000 were children, were registered with a dentist in Grampian. I hope that Nicol Stephen will applaud and welcome that progress. Of course there is more work to be done, and we are determined to ensure that that work progresses at the speed that it has already attained.

There are already a number of incentives, including golden hellos, and allowances for areas of deprivation and rurality. We can always consider how to use those allowances to get dentists to go to the areas that remain a challenge. Another measure that I introduced after taking over responsibility for dentistry was to extend the NHS commitment arrangements to include a partial commitment. Many dental practices that did not quite fulfil the criteria for NHS commitment were nevertheless doing a lot of NHS work, which I felt it was important to recognise. I can tell Brian Adam that about 14 or 15 practices within NHS Grampian have now taken up the offer of being a partially committed NHS dentist. I hope that the member will welcome that.

I can certainly find out whether that information exists—I am not sure whether it does—and write to the member about that. Dentistry in Scotland is currently a very attractive proposition to dentists, not just those who are trained in Scotland but those who are trained south of the border, who certainly seem to think that our arrangements for dentistry are far preferable to the contractual arrangements that exist down south. We are attracting a lot of dentists north of the border. I will be happy to provide Nanette Milne with the figures on that, if they exist.

Children and young people have been a priority group for suicide prevention work in Scotland since 2002. We have a number of measures in place to address the issue. We provide grant funding of £130,000 per year to ChildLine Scotland to support its on-going operation, through which trained volunteer counsellors comfort, advise and protect children and young people who may feel they have nowhere else to turn. We are also working closely with NHS boards and other partners to fully implement "The Mental Health of Children and Young People: A Framework for Promotion,  Prevention and Care" by 2015. That includes making a named mental health link worker available to every school to ensure that the mental health needs of pupils are identified at the earliest possible opportunity and that links are in place to child and adolescent mental health services.

On the member's last point, I can assure him that we are always looking at international evidence to see what we can learn from elsewhere. However, many people have been coming to Scotland to look at our choose life programme. For example, Northern Ireland has by and large based its service around the lessons that have been learned from developments here in Scotland. Training is made available to school staff—including teachers, guidance staff and librarians—and parents on suicide awareness and intervention. Training courses such as applied suicide intervention skills training and safeTALK are going very well. It is important that those who come into contact with children and young people on a day-to-day basis know what to do, are able to recognise the signs of concern and are sufficiently trained to feel confident about acting in a way that will be helpful to the young person.

Certainly, the feedback that I have received from travelling the length and breadth of Scotland is that very hard work is being done on the choose life agenda not just by local authorities but by NHS staff and others. Tackling the issue that Richard Simpson has highlighted is certainly a core component of what the choose life programme sets out to do through delivering awareness-raising sessions on self-harm and promoting mental health and wellbeing in schools. In addition, we have just invested in child and adolescent mental health services to ensure that  children who require additional support get the service that they need. Richard Simpson will acknowledge that that welcome investment was not made previously.

We are making substantial progress towards meeting the dental action plan target. Figures from "The Scottish Health Survey 2008" show that 88 per cent of adults in 2008 had all or some of their own natural teeth. The 2010 target for 65 per cent of adults aged 55 to 74 to have some of their own teeth has already been exceeded. In 2008, 81 per cent of men and 75 per cent of women had some natural teeth.

I am sure that the oral health of the children who have just left the public gallery is perfect because of the child smile investment that we have been making in schools the length and breadth of Scotland. The primary care modernisation fund amounts to £82 million over two years, and I can confirm that £58 million of that has been allocated to dentistry. I am pleased about that, as dentistry was a top priority for that investment. We are now seeing dental centres and facilities throughout Scotland that are fit for the 21st century, and we are extremely proud of that.

I have enjoyed the debate, and I thank all members for their speeches, during which I have been compared with Edwina Currie and a dinner monitor. I am heartbroken that Jackson Carlaw wants neither Nicola Sturgeon nor me by his bedside—how can we go on! I begin by reflecting on the consensual nature of the debate, which I believe is extremely important as we seek to make progress on tackling obesity. I will try as best I can to respond to some of the points that have been made. Richard Simpson talked about the child healthy weight intervention programme and the targets around that. More than most members, he will understand how difficult it is to get children and families signed up to the programme, because there is still a lot of stigma around the issue. Health boards are working extremely hard to find ways of getting families signed up without their feeling stigmatised. Richard Simpson asked about the healthy weight communities pilots, and I am pleased to tell him that the Scottish version of EPODE involves communities in eight areas: Dumfries and Galloway, Dundee, East Ayrshire, East Renfrewshire, Glasgow, North Ayrshire, North Lanarkshire and West Lothian. Some extremely interesting ideas are emerging on what happens when a project is community led and the people who live and work in a community all work together and face the same direction. It will be interesting to see what comes out of those pilots. Richard Simpson also asked about the counterweight programme. I am pleased to tell him that the roll-out of that programme has now concluded in NHS Tayside, NHS Lothian and NHS Lanarkshire, which were the first boards to adopt it. Seven other boards—NHS Dumfries and Galloway, NHS Highland, NHS Borders, NHS Forth Valley, NHS Western Isles, NHS Shetland and NHS Orkney—commenced working with the  programme in August 2008. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is not involved in it because it has its own programme, and we were happy for it to continue with that. Ross Finnie laid out the issue of individual responsibility quite well, and I agree with what he said. The point of the strategy is how we as a Government can make it easier for people to make the right choices. We know that we cannot make choices for people, but we can make it a bit easier for them to make healthy choices. Throughout the debate, members have laid out various measures that would allow that to happen, such as improved labelling and greater clarity on the calorie content of the meals that people eat. Mary Scanlon took us back to 1996, which it is clear is when the whole process started. In some ways, we know what needs to be done, but what makes the new route map slightly different from some of the reports and plans that have been developed in the past is that it relates to the whole of Government. It involves thinking about not just what the health or the education directorates can do, but what can be done in the field of transport and what local government can do through the licensing and planning decisions that it takes. It is a question of thinking across the whole of Government, and I am not sure that that has been done before.

Absolutely. Mary Scanlon makes an important point. Through the national food and drink policy, a lot of work has been done, particularly by Richard Lochhead, with the agriculture industry. If we can get more local produce into our schools and hospitals, there will be a sustainability gain and a health gain, so I very much support what Mary Scanlon says. Gil Paterson made some extremely important points about the link between obesity and deprivation. We are beginning to get a better understanding of the issue, but more research into that would undoubtedly be welcome. Cathy Jamieson made a highly constructive speech, in which she highlighted some of the challenges that we face. Her point about the need for safer walking and cycle routes is important, because if people do not feel safe when they go out and such routes are not well lit, we have a real problem. In that regard, the joined-up approach that is being adopted by the healthy weight communities is coming into its own. They are looking at how lighting can be used to tackle the  obesity problem. That can be done by making walking and cycle routes safer.

I am certainly happy to follow up that matter with the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change if the member thinks that that would be helpful. Nigel Don, as ever, made an incisive speech. He knows a lot about the issue. He talked about the dilemma and challenges around commercial interests and trying to ensure that commercial decisions can be cost effective; if they are not, they will not be made. Of course, statutory measures are the other side of the issue, but I believe that there is still a lot of mileage in working on voluntary measures with the industry. We will see who is proved right on that. Malcolm Chisholm made another thoughtful speech. Of course no single remedy exists. The links to alcohol are absolutely clear. The calorific intake of people who consume alcohol is in itself a real challenge. We have tried to get messages across to women in particular by making a point about the calorific content of a glass of wine, for example. Malcolm Chisholm's point was well made. I reassure him that, when the strategy is translated into an action plan with clear milestones, the community involvement in that will be clear. Mike Rumbles asked about the resources for the campaign that is mentioned on page 27 of the document. I reassure him that the resources will be taken from the existing budgets for 2010-11. They will be taken from the £4.9 million budget that we have allocated for tackling obesity in that year. Rhoda Grant made important comments about good ideas in her local area, and she mentioned the challenge of getting and keeping girls active. That is an important issue. I had the pleasure of meeting girls who are becoming leaders and taking classes themselves in the girls on the move project. The confidence that that has given them is remarkable. Other girls are perhaps more likely to take messages from them and their peers than from others. That is also an important point. Some members will be devastated that they were not at my meeting with Miss Scotland, Katharine Brown. She is a fantastic ambassador, and she has agreed to work with us and to do more work with young girls to get them fitter and more active. I look forward to working with her.  Jamie Stone made important points. On the role of the workplace, I reassure him that the Scottish centre for healthy working lives is doing a lot to support small and medium businesses to see the dividends for them as employers as a result of keeping their employees healthy at work. As ever, Jackson Carlaw made an entertaining speech. Not for the first time, a bit of cynicism came through in it—we would not expect anything else. He made the important point that we cannot abdicate individual responsibility. However, the Government has a role in making choices easier, and I am not sure that I would subscribe to where I think he was going—that is, that there should be a cut-off, and if a person chooses to live their life in an unhealthy way, they should not get access to NHS services. That is a step too far. I would certainly not advocate that approach. Frank McAveety was very consensual—indeed, I think that there is a new Frank. What can I say? I thank him for not comparing me with Edwina Currie, although he sort of did so. His taking of responsibility for the previous Administration's challenges around two hours of PE a week was refreshing. There is a challenge, but we must overcome it. He made a point about the financial circumstances that affect the public sector. Those circumstances are real, but they should not stop us progressing with the leadership and imagination that we need. That can achieve a lot. I thank members for their speeches in what has been a worthwhile debate.

I agree with that to some extent, but I have also changed my mind a bit. When I go round those schools that have achieved the target of providing two hours of PE each week, it is amazing how much of that comes down to the leadership of the headteacher and the teachers in the school, who have decided to work with what they have. With a bit of imagination, a lot can be achieved.

Mike Rumbles overstates the case by suggesting that the proposal risks undermining the report. I cannot be responsible for the elements that the press decide to seize on and highlight. Much work is already going on with the industry and retailers on portion control and on reducing portion sizes voluntarily. The only point that is made on page 18 is, as Mike Rumbles and others have said, about what happens at the end if all those voluntary measures do not work. That is the only reference to statutory controls and it does not mean that we will take that direction of travel. He slightly overstates the case.

How far does Mike Rumbles take that? Does he not think that a role exists for ensuring that consumers know what is in the food that they eat in restaurants, many of which want to provide that information? Is he saying that no assistance should be given to consumers who tell us that they want such information? Is that the wrong way to go?

Before I talk in depth about our long-term strategy to tackle obesity, I will put today's debate in context. In September 2008, following the publication of "Healthy Eating, Active Living", we had a debate that focused on our commitment to tackle obesity. During that debate I acknowledged that individual initiatives to tackle obesity would not, in themselves, solve our obesity problem. That was why we also made a "commitment to developing a longer-term strategy to tackle obesity."— [ Official Report , 4 September 2008; c 10534.]  On Monday we fulfilled that commitment by publishing, in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, "Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland: A Route Map Towards Healthy Weight". I thank COSLA for its support. In developing the route map, we undertook a detailed analysis of what the obesity epidemic means for Scotland, we considered the most up-to-date evidence and we based our thinking on the 2007 foresight programme report, "Tackling Obesities: Future Choices—Project Report". In common with most of the developed world, Scotland is experiencing the obesity epidemic. Currently more than a quarter of adults in Scotland are obese and almost two-thirds are overweight. The economic consequences of that are significant and we estimate that the total cost to Scottish society of obesity in 2007-08 was more than £457 million. Even if current health improvement efforts continue, we predict that by 2030 the adult obesity rate in Scotland could be more than 40 per cent. The cost of that to society could be as high as £3 billion. Much of that cost is, of course, avoidable. Obesity has been shown to be associated with at least as much ill health as are poverty, smoking and problem drinking. The consequences of obesity will reflect, perpetuate and potentially increase social inequalities in health in Scotland. We have set a significant challenge in the route map, which is for the majority of Scotland's population to be in a normal weight range throughout adult life. Our policies—national and local—need to be directed at supporting people to achieve and maintain healthy weight. We also need to recognise that isolated or partial activity in one or two policy areas is futile.  We recognise that although the society in which we live has transformed our lives for the better in many ways, it has also had unintended consequences for many people, including gradual and continuing weight gain. The route map has identified four main areas in which concerted action is likely to have the greatest effect: reducing demand for, and consumption of, excessive amounts of high-calorie foods and drinks; increasing opportunities for the uptake of walking, cycling and other physical activity; establishing lifelong healthy habits in children; and increasing the responsibility of organisations for the health and wellbeing of their employees. The actions that are set out in the route map are not predicated on additional resources; the route map is intended to underpin national Government and local government decision making on effective allocation of existing and future resources to prevention of obesity, which might require reprioritisation of investment to support the actions that are set out in the route map. Our next step is to set up a joint governmental leadership group—which will be chaired by the Deputy First Minister—to monitor progress on a regular basis. Initially the group will agree milestones that are key to understanding progress towards achieving the aim. Work on that will commence in the coming weeks, and the group's first meeting will take place after the summer. The route map is right to focus on prevention, rather than on treatment, but I reassure members that we are committed to ensuring that cost effective and appropriate weight-management services and treatments for obesity are provided for patients in Scotland. We have invested in order to help that to happen. Before I reflect on how policies that we are pursuing can contribute to preventing overweight and obesity, I briefly mention the launch of the route map at St Mark's primary school in East Renfrewshire, because what I saw there exemplified what we want to achieve elsewhere. The school is in a healthy weight community pathfinder site as well as a smarter choices, smarter places site. The smarter choices, smarter places initiative is designed to reduce car use by increasing active travel, and the healthy weight community programme draws on a variety of activities to do with healthy eating and physical activity. I was struck by how joined up all that is. The children enjoyed their nutritious breakfast as part of their routine morning start, which was followed by physical activity before lessons. I was introduced to the active schools lead, who has done a lot in relation to the lunch break and after school. The child healthy weight programme manager, who works with children who require extra input, was also there. I met volunteer walk  leaders, who are encouraging people in the community who have not been active, including parents, to be active. I met many other people who are working in the same direction on what can be done to turn the community around. An excellent example of policy that is delivering is evidenced by the next steps of "Recipe for Success: Scotland's National Food and Drink Policy", which was published last year. Our vision is to maximise the food and drink industry's contribution to our economy while ensuring that the industry also contributes to our health and wellbeing. By engaging with producers and retailers we aim to maximise their contribution to that agenda. Retailers—driven by consumer demand—recognise the importance of healthier products in the marketplace, and we will continue to work with retailers to push harder to make the health gains that are required. I want to record my appreciation of the work of small retailers and of how important they are for the local economies and communities that they serve. We want to work with them to help them to provide healthier choices for their customers. The route map is intended to build on "Recipe for Success" and the key proposition that there are gains to be made by bringing together the perspectives of health, sustainability and sustainable economic growth. The other side of the equation, when we are considering how to avoid obesity, is physical activity. The route map reflects on the fact that we already have an excellent physical activity strategy, which has recently been re-endorsed following a review. Again, across national Government and local government many activities are under way that will contribute to tackling obesity, including the provision and maintenance in every community of physical environments that promote healthy lifestyles. I have already said that we do not envisage additional resources being deployed to deliver the route map; rather, we need to ensure that, when we implement existing policies, they support delivery of the route map. An excellent example of that is our work to develop a legacy for the Commonwealth games in 2014. If we can harness the power of the games to make people more active, that will help to support the aim of the route map. Better balancing of our energy in and energy out is fundamental to successful delivery of the route map, and we have set out how we believe that can be achieved. However, the foresight programme has suggested that there are two groups within the population in which there would, if they were targeted, be the greatest impacts. I will touch on them briefly. The first is group is children in their early years. To give children the best start in life, early-life interventions need to begin before and  during pregnancy, continue through infancy in early-years settings such as nurseries and childminders, and carry on into school. The early years offer the best opportunity to put in place healthy behaviours around food and physical activity that will be sustained into adulthood. Central to that is the involvement of families, and every opportunity must be taken by all involved to shape and deliver services, using health professionals and the third sector in a way that best provides support.

Page 43 lays out where investment currently lies, including in public information campaigns, initiatives that are directly related to prevention of obesity, such as the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—targets, and those that are indirectly related, such as the £19 million that is being invested in maternal and infant nutrition. If the member has a look at that page, he will see where current investment is. I think I said that there may need to be reprioritisation at both national and local levels to ensure that, when we make a decision, we consider whether it will make society more or less likely to be obese. Those judgments are sometimes difficult. The second area that we will target is the creation of healthy working environments. We want to work with employers to look at what more can be done in the workplace. "Health Works", the recently launched update of the healthy working lives strategy, aims to ensure that health is not a barrier to work, and the Scottish centre for healthy working lives offers advice on what employers can do to promote health and wellbeing in their workplaces. I will touch on the amendments before I finish. I hope that this afternoon's debate will be positive and constructive: in that spirit, I am happy to accept the Liberal Democrat amendment. The thrust of the route map is that if we continue as we are, there is an inevitability in some of the statistics—which are frightening—and the Government has a role in changing that. However, no one would deny that the individual has an  important role, too. The role of the family is also crucial. On the Labour amendment, I am sure that we will hear a catalogue of accusations of what the Scottish National Party has or has not done in the past three years. That is part of parliamentary debate. I just ask Labour to reflect on the fact that the two hours of physical education that is referred to in the Labour amendment was also a target of the previous Administration, and was set in 2004. The Labour Administration had three years in which to try to deliver the target, and our Administration has had three years to try to deliver it. I therefore think that there should be an appreciation of some of the challenges around that, given that only 5 per cent of primary schools had achieved the two hours of PE by 2007. We are now up to 33 per cent of schools having achieved the target, although I acknowledge that more progress must be made. I hope that we can agree this afternoon that, no matter who is in power, the route map sets out a journey for the next 10, 15 or 20 years and that it is important that we stand together and work together as far as we can to deliver continuity around that. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to take action to prevent overweight and obesity as set out in the recent publication, Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland: A Route Map Towards Healthy Weight , to support a cross-government approach that will guide future work and to welcome the establishment of a joint governmental leadership group to ensure and oversee progress.

I am happy to be closing this debate about general practice week and the vital role that our GPs and practice staff play in providing patient care. I congratulate Richard Simpson on securing the debate. The Scottish Government is, of course, firmly committed to general practice. As has been said, GPs and their staff are the cornerstone of primary care, which accounts for 90 per cent of all NHS contacts with patients. They provide the dedicated professional service and continuity of care that we know patients value hugely. I pay particular tribute to GPs for the role that they have played over the past year in two specific areas: first, in helping—as Richard Simpson mentioned—to combat the threat of swine flu, and, secondly, in respect of the BMA's high-profile role in supporting our efforts to tackle Scotland's problem with alcohol. The Government has shown its commitment to GPs in particular by devoting record resources to primary medical services and by promoting legislation to enshrine their traditional role. I am sure that everyone is aware of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, which was passed by the Parliament just two weeks ago. Part 2 of that bill strengthens the way in which primary medical services will be provided in the future in support of our public health priorities. It is an endorsement of the model of general practice that we see in Scotland today—a model of which we can justifiably be proud. Malcolm Chisholm made the important point that that has been our direction of travel since before 2007, but general practice must keep moving, evolving and modernising. General practice is often cited as one of the areas of the health service that is most valued by the public: the relationship that patients have with their practice is based on trust and confidence. It is right to recognise the valuable contribution that general practice staff make to improving the health and wellbeing of the people of Scotland. Our knowledge of the current state of general practice in Scotland has been enhanced by the recent publication of the results of the national primary care workforce survey, which was developed to address gaps in information about the GP and practice nurse workforce. The figures show a profession that has reasons to look to the future with confidence. The latest survey shows that the number of GPs in Scotland has risen steadily since 2004 and, crucially, that the number of GP trainees has increased by 67 per cent. That shows that a career in general practice continues to be attractive. With women GPs outnumbering men GPs, as Ian McKee pointed out, it is also seen as a flexible career choice that can  especially suit those who have caring responsibilities. In addition, there is clear evidence that numbers of other practice staff, such as nurses, have risen in recent years, and I am encouraged by that trend. Earlier this week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced her commitment, through a new quality strategy, to the implementation of a shared approach to achieving world-leading quality in our NHS. It is an ambitious strategy with the key aim of involving everyone in Scotland in making a real difference to the quality of health care provision. In preparing for the new approach, we have listened carefully to what patients, carers and the people who are delivering health care services across the NHS have said they want. They want a compassionate health service and real partnership between clinicians, patients and others with clear communication. It has been said on a number of occasions that the patient-doctor relationship was very different 20, 30 or 40 years ago from how it is now. That is absolutely right and proper. People also want services to be provided in a clean and safe care environment, with continuity throughout their journey, and they want clinical excellence so that they can continue to have confidence in our NHS services. The quality strategy will achieve those things by building on the good foundations that we already have in place, with a shared vision of health care quality that is supported by the right measures. Along with many others, I welcome BMA Scotland's report "General Practice in Scotland: The Way Ahead", which was published on Tuesday. GPs are at the heart of health care in Scotland, providing dedicated professional service and continuity of care. Nicola Sturgeon and I are encouraged by the BMA's commitment in the report to work with us to address the challenges that all parts of the NHS face and, in particular, to improve the outcomes and quality of the primary care that is delivered to patients. That is at the core of the quality strategy that I just mentioned. There are also some specific recommendations in the report—for example, on out-of-hours standards and on local support for improving access—which we strongly support. Like many others in the chamber, we look forward to discussing the report with the BMA so that we can work together for the benefit of Scotland's patients. I add my personal thanks to all those who are involved in general practice for the part that they play in improving the health of Scotland's people, and I am grateful to Richard Simpson for highlighting that in this afternoon's debate.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

The Scottish Government welcomes the contribution that the Scottish sports alliance offers in helping us to achieve our ambition of creating an active nation. I have and  will continue to have regular discussions with the alliance to determine how best we can deliver our shared sporting outcomes for the people of Scotland. I was pleased to attend the SSA's reception in the Parliament on Tuesday night.

I remind Frank McAveety that the target was set in 2004—perhaps when he was the minister with responsibility for sport. By 2007—three years later—5 per cent of primary schools and 7 per cent of secondary schools had achieved the target. From there, we have managed to raise the levels significantly to 33 per cent of primary schools and 16 per cent of secondary schools. I agree with the alliance that more needs to be done—absolutely—and I have always said that. The alliance says that we should focus on delivering the commitment by 2014. I want to continue to discuss with Mike Russell, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and with the alliance how we ensure that we deliver two hours of PE, which is an important element—as are other elements—of sport and physical activity. We want to make more progress and certainly more progress than was made between 2004 and 2007.

Absolutely no direction came from the Scottish ministers for sportscotland not to attend that event. Sportscotland was active at the reception on Tuesday night. It is keen to work with the alliance and has supported the alliance in coming together. Sportscotland and we are the very people who have told members of the sporting community that they should come together with one voice to further the aims of sport. We are pleased that they have listened to that and done that. Sportscotland has supported what the alliance is doing and is in discussions with the alliance, which will continue as we progress important developments that will happen in the coming months and years.

The Scottish Government's position on the MMR vaccine is that it is an important part of the routine childhood immunisation programme. It is the safest way in which parents can protect their children against measles, mumps and rubella.

The issue is far too important for the member to degrade it in those terms. The recent ruling is a matter for the General Medical Council. Our role is to ensure that as many parents as possible protect their children in the safest way by ensuring that their children receive the MMR vaccine. I am happy to say that my daughter received the MMR vaccine. Perhaps other leading politicians should have said the same thing about their children. That could have done a lot to encourage others in the public to follow their lead.

Caring for people of all ages with mental health problems, including children and young people, is a priority for the Scottish Government. It is vital that all children and young people, including those with an eating disorder, have access to high-quality mental health services when they need them. When that need is urgent, that already happens immediately in most cases. To address delays in planned access to specialist child and adolescent mental health services, we have a new waiting time target that means that, by March 2013, no one will wait longer than 26 weeks from referral to treatment. That timetable is supported by our additional investment of £5.5 million more each year in CAMHS by 2011-12.

On the last point, we are still working around the access target for psychological therapies, and I am happy to keep Alison McInnes posted about that. I agree with Alison McInnes about early treatment and counselling. That is why we have made it clear to boards that they must make progress around child and adolescent mental health services. It is fair to say that some boards are further along the road than others, but I assure the member that this is a high priority for us and that we will continue to press boards to make the necessary progress.

I am sure that Mary Scanlon will welcome the 16 per cent increase in the number of school nurses that has been delivered since 2007. However, as I have also made clear, the evidence suggests that the best support for children in the school environment is multidisciplinary, and although the school nurse has a critical role, other roles are important, such as the mental health support role. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will agree with that. If that is what the evidence tells us, we should listen to the evidence, which is why we are testing a school-based health resource involving a number of disciplines, including mental health, in considering how best we can support the children concerned within the school environment. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will welcome that, and I am happy to keep her updated on progress on the test sites.

The guidance on national eligibility criteria and waiting times for the personal and nursing care of older people delivers on the recommendation arising from Lord Sutherland's  review of free personal and nursing care for older people. It is recognised that some councils might choose to apply the eligibility criteria framework that is set out in that guidance to other community care groups. However, that is a matter solely for individual councils, and it is not tied in any way to the agreement between the Scottish Government and council leaders on free personal and nursing care. The Scottish Government's guidance for measuring outcomes for people with learning disabilities to inform the planning and delivery of services is still under review. The guidance will be finalised and issued soon. We are currently consulting on a national strategy for self-directed support, which recognises the importance of providing preventive and low-level support that allows people to remain as independent as possible. During the implementation of the strategy we will work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to review and clarify, where necessary, the use of eligibility criteria for adults and older people with a view to considering how self-directed support for preventive measures and lower levels of need is delivered.

I recognise Sarah Boyack's concerns. Following the highlighting by the consultation process and the subsequent discussions with COSLA of the emergence of a number of issues, it was agreed that the guidance would apply only to free personal care clients, as would the six-week waiting time. I understand that there is a sense of urgency, but it is important that we get the guidance right. We will certainly work on that and on getting the guidance out as soon as possible. I will be happy to keep Sarah Boyack apprised of the timescale.

The Scottish Government published draft guidance on social care procurement for consultation in January 2010 and the consultation period ends on 5 April. We will consider all responses to the consultation, along with any other available evidence, in preparing the final guidance for publication.

The procurement of social care services is ultimately the responsibility of local authorities and it would not be appropriate for ministers to intervene in that. However, the setting of guidance is clearly important. I certainly expect that the guidance will take account of all the experiences of local authorities in the processes that they have undertaken. I am sure that we will look at Edinburgh and its experience along with the experience of many other local authorities. However, I am sure that Malcolm Chisholm agrees that what is important is getting the guidance right for service users, which the Government is determined to do.

The Scottish Government is making wide-ranging investment to improve access to health services across Scotland, particularly in those areas of multiple deprivation where we see significant health inequalities. We are investing £82 million from 2009 to 2011 in the primary and community care premises modernisation programme, which will significantly improve the quality of and access to a range of health services in the community. The new services that are being provided through the community pharmacy contract are improving access to national health service  services within local communities and are promoting collaborative working between community pharmacists and general practitioners to improve patient care further.

The evidence that we have considered carefully through the task force that produced the "Equally Well" report tells us that people who live in the most deprived communities are the least likely to access health services. I therefore suggest to John Scott that the approach in our keep well initiative, which involves proactively contacting people who are not using the health service, is the best way to deliver and to encourage people from deprived communities to use and access the health service. I am not convinced that the sort of walk-in centre that the member promotes would address health inequalities in the way that he suggests. We are always keen to develop new ideas in the health service to ensure that access is as wide as we can make it. However, the evidence shows that the keep well approach is the way in which to tackle health inequalities.

I am delighted to open the debate on the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, which will reform two areas of health legislation. It will update controls on the sale and display of tobacco and smoking-related products and it will amend and clarify the eligibility criteria for providers of primary medical services. This is important legislation, and I am grateful to all who have helped to shape it—the bill that we have considered today and which I hope that we will pass is better for their involvement. I hope that members will acknowledge that, although differences might remain, we have been willing to listen throughout the process and to give ground, where we thought it appropriate to do so. The changes that have been made to both parts of the bill, particularly at stage 2, are testament to that. I offer particular thanks for their thorough scrutiny of the bill to the Health and Sport Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. The stage 1 report and the valuable discussions that took place at stage 2 have undoubtedly strengthened the bill. I also thank the committee clerks, who have worked so hard to support the committees' work, our own officials in the bill team and the Government and parliamentary legal teams, whose endeavours on this short but complex bill have been invaluable. The cigarette as a product has, more than any other thing, blighted the health and shortened the lives of the people of Scotland. Too many young  people still take up smoking each year, and smoking prevention must remain a top priority if Scotland's health is to be improved and inequalities are to be reduced. The health risks that are associated with smoking are clear and irrefutable. It is evident from the contributions that we have heard, today and throughout the passage of the bill, that, although we might differ on the detail, we all agree about the need for the Parliament to show leadership in protecting young Scots from the devastating impact of tobacco. The discussions that have taken place during the passage of the bill, and the amendments that have been made, have undoubtedly made the process of making Scotland smoke free all the more possible. In particular, the introduction of new offences of proxy purchase and underage purchase at stage 2—which are substantive changes that we were happy to support—have served to create a greater balance of responsibility between tobacco retailers and underage purchasers or those who seek to circumvent the law by facilitating the purchase of tobacco for underage young people. Although I sense that many of the measures that the bill contains, including the tobacco retailer registration scheme and the new regime of fixed-penalty notices and banning orders, are broadly welcomed, I am conscious that differences of opinion remain, particularly in relation to the ban on displays and the sale of cigarettes from vending machines. The arguments for and against legislative action in those respects have already been fully aired, and no doubt will be again during this afternoon's debate. However, we remain convinced of the need for legislative action. I can only reiterate that the decision to legislate on those and other matters in the bill was not taken lightly. We will continue to work closely with business interests and other stakeholders throughout the implementation process. For example, there will be an opportunity to provide input on the development of the regulations and guidance that will underpin the legislation, and on the evaluation programme to assess the impact of the measures that will be put in place. There is no doubt in my mind that, as part of our wider tobacco control strategy, the proposed reforms of the law relating to the sale and display of tobacco will help to protect future generations from smoking-related harm. Moreover, if the bill is passed it will reinforce the Parliament's position as a world leader in tobacco control and in public health more generally—that is important. I turn briefly to part 2 of the bill, which the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will  cover more fully in her closing speech. The proposals for primary medical services will mean a significant step forward in achieving a mutual NHS in Scotland, and in protecting the health of the people of Scotland. We have listened carefully to the arguments and comments from stakeholders and members at each stage of the bill. As a result, the Government introduced further flexibility at stage 2, which will allow us to adapt to changes that may lie ahead, and which widens the scope of the provision on who is eligible to hold a primary medical services contract. However, we strongly believe that the core provisions that require contract holders to have a direct involvement in patient care are fundamental to ensuring that GP services in Scotland continue to be very much patient centred. I commend the bill to Parliament. It is an important step in the direction of a smoke-free Scotland, and I thank everyone who has been involved in it for their participation. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Before I discuss the amendments in detail, I say that our decision to opt for a complete ban on cigarette sales from vending machines was not taken lightly. I met Scottish vending machine operators in early September last year and I have listened to their concerns and the concerns of the 60 staff who are employed in the sector in Scotland. My officials have continued that dialogue since then. We do not take any job losses lightly.

We discussed that at length at the Health and Sport Committee and in correspondence, and we have explained the reasons. Despite our extensive attempts to contact the body that represents vending machine operators—the National Association of Cigarette Machine Operators—and to get a clear idea of the number of job losses that would be involved, we were unable to do so. Therefore, our initial figures came from Sinclair Collis, which is one of the bigger companies. Some time after that, when the bill was published, NACMO finally got in touch with us after we had left numerous telephone messages for the individuals concerned. My officials went a long way to try to get information from NACMO. The information that we finally received is that we are talking about 60 jobs. The situation did not arise through a lack of effort on our part, but we now acknowledge, as I did to the Health and Sport Committee, that 60 jobs are involved. We do not take the decision lightly but, as I have made clear throughout the progress of the bill, I have a fundamental problem with a dangerous and age-restricted product such as tobacco being sold from a self-service machine. We have concluded that a complete ban is the only way in which to be sure that under-18s do not access cigarettes from that source. I am pleased to note from the stage 1 report that the majority of Health and Sport Committee members agreed. The committee states that it is yet to be convinced that the system that Rhoda Grant promotes "could be made to work in practice across the range of situations in which a vending machine might be installed—for example, in crowded city-centre pubs where there are many distractions for bar staff." Rhoda Grant clearly believes that her amendment 1 is the best of both worlds, but I do not agree. The ban might have an impact on the companies that currently sell tobacco from vending machines, but the bill does not prevent them from selling other products from their machines; nor does it prevent pubs and hotels from using vending machines as a dispensing machine—a secure means of storing tobacco behind the counter. I am happy to delay commencement until October 2011, in line with the Department of Health's approach. I am sure that no one in the Parliament would want Scotland to lag behind England on a tobacco control measure. There are concerns about how tobacco will be sold from licensed premises after the ban. We will continue to work with trading standards officers, the licensed trade and vending machine operators to provide detailed guidance on how tobacco should be sold to address the access issues that Rhoda Grant raises.  The Scottish Parliament's leading position in the UK on public health would be under threat if amendment 1 were agreed to. I therefore ask Rhoda Grant to withdraw amendment 1 and not to move amendments 2 and 3.

I will speak to Government amendments 19, 20 and 24, which all relate to powers in the bill that allow courts to ban from selling tobacco retailers who continually break tobacco sales law. Amendments 19 and 20 increase from 12 to 24 months the maximum period for which a person can be banned from selling tobacco. The amendments are a result of my commitment at stage 2 to consider increasing the maximum period for which a sheriff can ban a person from selling tobacco for second and subsequent offences. Although I concluded that it was not appropriate to limit their powers by restricting sentencing in that way, there is a case for increasing the maximum period. Amendment 24 corrects a typographical error that was noted by parliamentary clerks. I also note the Government's support for Christine Grahame's amendments 33 to 35. Requiring retailers to display banning notices would bolster the registration scheme and could act as a further deterrent to breaking the law. I move amendment 19.

Amendment 18 relates to the changes that were made to the bill at stage 2 to create a new offence of proxy purchase. The offence makes it illegal for someone aged 18 or over knowingly to buy or to attempt to buy tobacco products or cigarette papers for someone who is under 18. At stage 2, Dr Simpson sought to amend the bill to provide for penalties for second or subsequent offences to be pitched at a higher maximum level. As a general rule, it is not policy to provide different maximum penalties for first and subsequent offences in Scottish statute. Such provisions were abolished or allowed to wither away by paragraph 4 of schedule 1 to the Criminal  Procedure (Consequential Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1995. The policy is, rather, that legislation sets out the maximum level of a penalty and the appropriate amount of the fine is left to the sheriff's discretion, taking into account the circumstances of the case. In practice, it is highly unlikely that a sheriff would impose the maximum penalty for a first offence unless there were special circumstances. We therefore need to determine whether the maximum level of fine that has been set is appropriate. I have given the matter a great deal of consideration, as I said at stage 2 that I would, and I am satisfied that there is a case for increasing the maximum penalty for the offence of proxy purchase to level 5. Amendments 21 to 23 apply the presumption as to contents of containers for the purpose of any trial for offences relating to the purchase or attempted purchase of tobacco by persons under 18 and the purchase or attempted purchase of tobacco for persons under 18. The presumption as to contents of containers already applies to offences relating to the sale and display of tobacco products. I move amendment 18.

No.

I am encouraged by the fact  that all parties agree that firm action is required to prevent children and young people from becoming smokers. The tobacco display ban has been one of the most contentious provisions in the bill. On the one hand, the Conservatives believe that there is not enough evidence to justify a tobacco display ban; on the other hand, members of the Labour Party believe that we have not gone far enough. We believe that the provisions in the bill and the draft regulations are proportionate. The Conservatives believe that it is simply not true to say that removing the final marketing tool of the tobacco industry will reduce the attractiveness of tobacco to children and young people. I believe that they are wrong on that. Very few countries have yet introduced a tobacco display ban, and those that have have done so only recently. As with the ban on smoking in public places, we are pioneers. From the work of Cancer Research UK and others, we know that the display of tobacco in the most prominent place in 11,000 shops in Scotland is having an impact on our most vulnerable. It is making a product that kills half of its long-term users more attractive to children and young people. Therefore, I contend that the evidence for banning displays exists. For me, the most compelling point is the need to remove the last advertising loophole. I reassure the chamber that the Government is committed to evaluating the impact of all the provisions in part 1. I understand that there are concerns about the impact of the policy on our small shops. I have worked closely with retailers and believe that the regulations that we have drafted will both protect children and young people from the harms of tobacco promotion and minimise the impact on small businesses. Our is a proportionate response. I agree with Richard Simpson that we should do all that we can to prevent the tobacco industry from attempting to circumvent the display ban that is detailed in the bill and the advertising ban that is set out in the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002. I understand the concerns about incidents that have occurred in Ireland in response to its display ban, which came into force in July 2009. However, the Scottish display ban will be the most robust in the United Kingdom and will be even more robust than the Irish display ban. Regulations will limit the display of tobacco to 120cm 2 , based on figures that have been provided by retailers showing that each row of a gantry in a small shop is around 15cm high and that the widest section for a tobacco product is 8cm. The loopholes that have occurred in Ireland will not, therefore, occur under the bill. Retailers were concerned that the display ban would impede their carrying out necessary everyday tasks such as stocktaking and cleaning. We have taken that in  good faith and have exempted the display of tobacco for those tasks. I appreciate the fact that Dr Simpson has tried to craft a future-proof amendment, which he hopes will predict any possible move that the tobacco industry may make to circumvent our wide-reaching tobacco display and advertising bans. However, amendment 29 falls short of achieving that, and there are major concerns about its practical application, as well as drafting concerns. Instead, we will draw up clear guidance on the implementation and enforcement of the bill. I assure the chamber that I will make it clear that the advertising of lighters over gantries and the use of lighting around gantries will not be acceptable. I am pleased that Richard Simpson has seen sense and, with amendment 29A, is seeking to remove the reference to lighters from amendment 29. If there is evidence of retailers ignoring the guidance, we will revisit the regulations and consider removing exemptions from the display ban. That could be very costly to retailers, as it could lead to tobacco having to be stored under the counter, which I know that retailers do not want. I urge the chamber to allow us to achieve what amendment 29 seeks through regulations and guidance rather than through the bill itself, which could have undesirable and unintended consequences. The unintended consequence of amendments 31 and 32, which deal with tobacco industry-funded campaigns such as no ID, no sale, would be to limit campaigns that inform customers and retailers of their rights and responsibilities around tobacco sales. On the retailer side, amendment 31 would ban displays that are aimed at staff, such as prompts by tills to remind staff to verify a customer's age; for customers, it would restrict campaigns that are essential to the successful implementation of many of the bill's provisions, including proxy purchase. The amendment would restrict such campaigns by retailers, Young Scot and cancer charities as well as the tobacco industry. In fact, any shop or charity that came up with an idea would have to approach the Government for approval first. Surely the creation of such bureaucracy would not make any sense. I am sure that no one wants that to happen. I therefore ask Mary Scanlon to withdraw amendment 4 and not to move amendments 5 to 10, 14, 47 and 16. I also ask Richard Simpson not to move amendments 29 to 32.

I welcome the contributions to this afternoon's important debate and thank Nanette Milne for raising the subject. The Scottish Government is committed to improving the wellbeing of children and young people in Scotland generally, as well as of those who have cancer. As has been said, cancer is a debilitating disease that affects every aspect of life. Some elements of it have not yet been conquered by medical science, but we can make a real difference in numerous areas, both clinical and non-clinical. The CLIC Sargent report highlights that in many respects the care and support that we offer to children with cancer is among the best in the world. We should be proud of that achievement, which is a great credit to all the hard-working and dedicated health professionals and volunteers who treat and support young cancer sufferers and their families. However, more can undoubtedly be done, which is why our commitment to children and young people's health is on-going. In March 2008, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced £32 million of funding to improve a wide spectrum of specialist health services for children and young people. Consultation and extensive service reviews led to the publication of a national delivery plan that set out how to use the money to maximum effect. Children's cancer emerged as a top priority. The cabinet secretary confirmed that both the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh and Yorkhill hospital in Glasgow would be supported to deliver the full range of cancer services while other hospitals would operate on a shared-care basis to ensure the best possible treatment for all cancer patients throughout the country. To date, more than £1.3 million of national delivery plan money has been invested regionally in children's cancer and a further £337,000 has been put towards national elements. That has enabled expansion and improvement, which has allowed a more holistic service to be offered to patients, which aids their recovery and rehabilitation.  In 2010-11, additional investment is expected to be in the region of £1.5 million. As well as expanding the clinical teams within regions, money will go towards a number of national projects, such as a study into the long-term effects of having survived cancer as a child and the development of a strategic nationwide approach to palliative care. Perhaps that will help address the first point that Richard Simpson made about some of the evidence that is coming to light about survivors in middle age. It is intended that that approach will facilitate care closer to or in the patient's home. We have also taken steps to establish a managed service network, which is fundamental to the delivery of shared care between specialist and local centres when that is safe and possible. That step should mark a significant shift in cancer service arrangements for children. In addition, the living with cancer group is currently working through the children and teenagers Scottish cancer network to identify ways to engage more closely with children and young people affected by cancer to give them the opportunity to share their experiences and become involved in how services should be delivered in the future. Health care professionals and representatives of voluntary organisations, including CLIC Sargent, are also involved in that work.

Yes. I can confirm that CLIC Sargent is involved in those discussions. On the role of the voluntary sector, we are extremely lucky in this country to have a strong and dedicated third sector that provides excellent support to children and young people with cancer and their families. I am sure that everyone here will want to commend the staff and volunteers of charities such as the Teenage Cancer Trust, the Youth Cancer Forum, which Aileen Campbell said is doing some fantastic work, Tak Tent, Maggie's centres and, of course, CLIC Sargent, as well as many other smaller organisations that provide a range of services for young people who are living with cancer. We continue to look at how we can support such groups. Education is an important issue in the CLIC Sargent report. As the report highlights, children  and young people affected by cancer are likely to have their education disrupted by prolonged or repeated period of hospitalisation. Arrangements have to be made to ensure that that group of children and young people receive the educational support that they require to meet their full potential. In Scotland, education authorities have a duty to ensure that arrangements are in place for pupils who are unable to attend a suitable educational establishment as a result of their ill health to receive education elsewhere, such as at home or in hospital. The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 plays an important role by placing duties on education authorities to identify, meet and, importantly, keep under review the additional support needs of all pupils for whom they are responsible. The act also gives parents or carers of children with additional support needs the right to have more of a say about a pupil's educational provision. Throughout children's services, getting it right for every child is the new approach that puts the child at the centre. It provides the foundation for all services for children and young people and requires services to take a co-ordinated approach. GIRFEC is the how—how we adapt and streamline systems and practices to improve the development of a common language and shared understanding between agencies as they work together to support children and young people.  Of course, families' views are central to the process. We have recently talked to parents throughout Scotland about their families' experiences. Among other things, parents commended approaches such as key working—that mirrors a central recommendation in the CLIC Sargent report. As a sponsor of Care Co-ordination Network UK, the Scottish Government already supports the ethos and practice of key working, and I was pleased to hear of the positive difference that key workers are already making in the lives of families with children and young people, including those with cancer. I hope that I have made clear the number of initiatives that demonstrate the Scottish Government's commitment to supporting children and young people with cancer. We take that commitment seriously and will continue to strive to ensure that the best possible care is provided to children and young people with cancer in Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

I understand that only NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has done so to date, although some other board areas offer hospital-based clinics for patients who have specialist  problems or requirements or for reasons of easy access for patients.

Of course patient safety is of paramount importance. We expect all boards to have in place robust procedures that are consistent with national guidelines and protocols. That includes the timely and effective exchange of relevant information between practitioners and with patients, including information on any new medication. I am grateful to Stewart Maxwell for bringing this case to our attention. I know that he has also written to Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, which is preparing a detailed response to him. I have also asked my officials to review the health board's response, so I assure Stewart Maxwell that any learning points will be shared with other boards where appropriate. I will be happy to get back to him with the detail of that.

We recognise the role that economic inequality plays in driving health inequality and we welcome the focus of Dr de Caestecker's report, "An Unequal Struggle for Health". The Scottish Government sees it as a priority to address the interlinked problems of poverty, health inequalities and children's early years. That is why the implementation of "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities" is being taken forward alongside that of "The Early Years Framework", which is the Government's strategy for ensuring that our children have the best possible start in  life, and that of our anti-poverty strategy, "Achieving Our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland".

John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, has already made clear our policy on public sector pay—that was discussed at length yesterday. In addition, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has made it clear that there will be a freeze in the budget for the distinction awards for the coming year. We take extremely seriously the concerns that the member raises. We are talking about highly complex problems. Dealing with inequality is extremely complex, but we feel that we have the solutions in the strategies that I mentioned. Implementing those solutions will not happen overnight but will take time. We certainly welcome the member's support for our work.

I thank all members who have taken part in the debate. There have been a number of positive and constructive speeches, although there have been some that were otherwise, too. Mary Scanlon mentioned some matters that I wish to refer to before I come to prescription charges. She spoke about the report on CAMHS and the supposed lack of support for its recommendations. Nothing could be further from the truth, and we have backed—not just with words but with action and resources—the report and the meeting of some of its recommendations. We have done that through more than £12.5 million of new resources over three years to make the changes happen. I wish to respond on the important issue of health visitors. A number of members rightly said that it is wrong to conflate the two issues of health visiting and the abolition of prescription charges. I will start with health visitors, however, and respond to some of the points that Mary Scanlon made. There is a universal health visiting service  at the moment, and the core programme provides that universal service. It is true that beyond the core programme it is for health visitors to use their clinical judgment to determine what additional services and support they will provide, but we need to ensure that people clearly understand that every new mother must have access to a health visitor. There is the 10 to 14 days post-natal visit, to ensure that mum and baby are doing well, there is the developmental check at six to eight weeks, and there is the immunisation schedule, thereafter. Outwith the core programme, a judgment is made about which families require support. The Parliament debated the equally well programme, to which—I recollect—every member and every party signed up. The message from equally well is that we need to ensure that our universal and core services have the right reach to the right families. That is not happening as it should, which is why the equally well programme came about. It is important that members take a more consistent approach and acknowledge that beyond the core programme, which provides support to every new mother and baby, extra support is needed for some families. I hope that we can agree and make progress on that together.

As I said, the core programme focuses on the first 18 months of life. There are issues to do with the support that we provide to families—particularly families in need—with children aged from nought to three. The family nurse partnership programme in Lothian is so important because it considers families' further requirements for support before the child gets into the formal system of nursery and school. We need to ensure that support is given to the families that need it. All members agreed with that when they supported the equally well programme. Jamie Stone asked several times why people who are better off should receive free prescriptions. The cabinet secretary made the point that 600,000 people on incomes that are less than £16,000 will benefit directly from the policy. Judgments have to be made. I presume that the Liberal Democrats made similar judgments when they decided to support universal free personal care and concessionary travel. Every case must be decided on its merits, but we strongly believe that when a person is suffering ill health it is their health and not their income that matters. That is why we are persuaded by the case for the abolition of prescription charges.  I am pleased that Jackie Baillie has at last acknowledged that health spending is at an all-time high, although her position is slightly at odds with her assertions that the health budget has been given a bad deal. Ross Finnie used the argument that Jamie Stone used. He also talked about distinction awards. We have announced that we will freeze the budget for distinction awards, which is more than Labour and the Liberal Democrats did during their eight years in power. Some people seem to have come late to the issue. Actions speak louder than words: we are taking action on the matter. Nanette Milne's speech was well considered, although I disagree profoundly with her conclusions and I think that the words, "We have not changed," might come back to haunt her. Christine Grahame reminded us of the principles behind the need for abolition by laying them out well. Cathy Jamieson was right when she said that, in the debate, a false link has been made between support for health visiting and the abolition of prescription charges. She also mentioned concern about consultants' bonuses and distinction awards, although she never expressed such concern when she was a minister and was able to do something about the matter. I would have thought that if her concern is heartfelt, the issue might have come to the previous Government's attention during its eight years in power. Her plea for the immediate abolition of prescription charges for cancer patients invites the same question: why is the issue of interest only now? Was not it the case that the arguments were being made to her and many of her ministerial colleagues by the charities that she mentioned in her speech? However, no action was taken during those eight years.

We are delivering on our manifesto in a way that is fair to everyone. Why does Cathy Jamieson hold up the approach in England as a panacea, when all health organisations in England are campaigning for the policy that we have in Scotland? It is absolutely clear—it always has been—that under the minor ailments scheme people get over-the-counter medicines and free prescriptions through their community pharmacies. They are already exempt. The system will continue after  abolition, because it is a good and efficient service.

I cannot because I am in my final minute. Jackie Baillie needs to sit down. We will not extend the minor ailments scheme to other groups, because we are not going to extend the provision of free over-the-counter medicine to other groups because that would not be good use of resources. That has always been the case. We have made the position clear, and if the Labour front benchers have not picked up on that, perhaps they should have been doing their job a little better. I am happy to support the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon.

It is clear that Richard Simpson believes strongly in the abolition of prescription charges for cancer patients. Why, in the eight years during which the Labour Party was in power, did no one in the Government, including the member, ever raise the issue, never mind introduce a proposal to achieve the abolition of such charges?

A number of Labour members have talked about the pressing need to abolish prescription charges for cancer patients immediately. Why, in eight years, did they not do that, given that they feel so strongly about it today?

I do not know what the member's message is to all those organisations that have launched a campaign for England to follow the lead of the Scottish Government to abolish charges for all the other chronic conditions. Will she back them rather than trying to create artificial divisions?

Is Cathy Jamieson really saying that people in England will be in a better position next year than people in Scotland, who will not have to pay for their prescriptions? That argument does not stand up to any scrutiny. When will Gordon Brown move on his pledge to abolish prescription charges for people with chronic conditions? People in England are waiting for an answer on that.

I, too, thank Jim Hume for bringing this issue before Parliament. The debate has been very constructive. Having chaired the NHS Dumfries and Galloway annual review meeting on 14 December, I am fully aware of the strength of local feeling about the board's clinical strategy proposals and how they may affect the configuration of local health care services. Before, during and after the annual review meeting, I took time to listen to the views of local people throughout the region about the proposals. I have heard some of those concerns again, in constructive tones, in members' speeches in the debate. I should, first, be clear about the protocol in such matters, to which Derek Brownlee referred. As  members will be aware, proposals for major service change in the NHS are subject to ministerial agreement. As the clinical strategy in Dumfries and Galloway is still subject to formal public consultation, I hope members will understand that it would be inappropriate for me to comment in any detail on the health board's service options. However, I can give members the assurance that I gave local people who gathered in Dumfries in December—that in coming to a final decision on the clinical strategy proposals, ministers will ultimately take into account all the available information, including of course issues of frameworks and policy contexts, and representations. This Government has a proud history of putting patients' interests first when it comes to major service change in the NHS: it introduced a presumption against the centralisation of NHS services and, last year, put an end to a decade of damaging uncertainty by safeguarding the future of the Vale of Leven hospital. We also recognised the concern of communities throughout Scotland about how NHS boards managed the process of service change and how they engaged with and consulted local stakeholders on proposed changes. The original service reviews failed to address the very real concerns of a significant proportion of local populations that the centralisation of services would not deliver clear benefits for patients. The Monklands and Ayr accident and emergency proposals are an example of that. There is little doubt that the original consultations in Ayrshire and Lanarkshire and the subsequent decisions that the boards and the previous Administration made compromised the trust, faith and confidence that local people had in their NHS. It was therefore a priority for this Government to rebuild confidence and embed trust in the NHS, not least in the major service change process. We recognise that boards have to respond to many pressures and changes, and must plan effectively to maintain high-quality services in the future, but they also bear the responsibility to engage meaningfully with local stakeholders at the earliest opportunity. Local people rightly expect major service change plans to be robust, evidence based, patient centred and consistent with clinical best practice and national policy. We understood that, in certain cases, to build confidence in the process, the plans should be critically assessed and that that work should be done by an independent panel of experts. That is why we introduced the process of independent scrutiny. Members will be aware that the cabinet secretary instructed that NHS Dumfries and Galloway's clinical strategy plans should be subject to independent scrutiny ahead of public  consultation to give local people confidence that the board's planning assumptions were appropriate. That panel, the fourth that has been convened since we took office, was chaired by Professor Frank Clark, who was supported by Professor Gordon Peterkin and Professor Jane Farmer. The panel reported in August last year. Time does not allow me to go into the detail of the ISP report, but members should be aware that the report is published in full on the independent scrutiny panel's website, as are the notes of the panel's meetings. NHS Dumfries and Galloway has assured ministers that it took full account of the ISP report in agreeing its proposals for public consultation. I also welcome the board's decision to extend the current public consultation period until the end of February. That seems the right thing to do, given the recent extreme weather conditions. For example, I am aware that a public meeting in Thornhill had to be cancelled on public safety grounds. The extension offers local communities further opportunity to register their views on those important proposals—which is quite right and proper—and I certainly encourage local people to do that. Following the conclusion of the public consultation process, the board will carefully consider all the evidence and representations and come to a view on the service options. The board will then submit its proposal to ministers for a final decision. In doing so, the board will be expected to demonstrate how it has taken account of the ISP's findings and of representations from local stakeholders that were made during the consultation. Ministers will receive a separate report from the Scottish health council on the adequacy of the public consultation process. Ministers will continue to receive representations from members of the public and their representatives. Indeed, as Jim Hume knows, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has already agreed to meet representatives of local groups to hear their views following the conclusion of the current consultation process. Obviously, that can take place only after the formal public consultation, not before it. The final decision in this and in every other case of major service change in the NHS will be made by ministers, who will carefully consider all the evidence, information and representations and endorse only those decisions that are consistent with national policy. Boards must make the case that the proposed change is in the best interests of patients and local people. Indeed, should ministers ultimately consider that a board has not done that or failed to undertake material work or provide robust evidence to inform its recommendations, it is open to ministers to refuse approval and to  instruct that that part of the public consultation—or, indeed, all of it—be carried out again. I hope that, within the limits of what I have been able to say tonight, I have been able to assure members and local people that we take such matters very seriously indeed. There is a process to follow and ministers are part of that process. I hope that tonight's debate has been of use to members.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

I welcome the speeches that have been made during what has been an important debate. Members from across the political parties have shown their knowledge of the issues and their commitment to taking the issue forward. Many have mentioned parenting, which is very much at the heart of the early years framework that I mentioned in my opening remarks. We will ensure that spending on CAMHS and implementing the CAMHS framework takes forward our work on parenting. In addition, we are looking closely at the role of nursing in the community to support new mothers, are ensuring that children's mental and emotional needs are identified and met in the school environment, and are considering the development of a core competency framework for the protection of children. I hope that all that reassures members that we are heading in the right direction. I want to respond to some of the points that have been made during the debate. A number of members questioned whether the 15 to 20 per cent increase in the specialist workforce was adequate. It is certainly an extremely good start and represents encouraging progress towards our gold standard, which would be to have 24 whole-time equivalent CAMHS staff per 100,000 population. While I am on the subject of the workforce, I should correct what Richard Simpson said about school nurse numbers. There has been a 20 per cent increase in the head count since 2007 and a 16 per cent increase in the number of whole-time equivalents. To pick up an issue that many members raised, we are focusing our attention on the need for a resource in schools to pick up issues at an early stage. We believe that the right way to take that forward is by having a team that includes staff with many skills, including mental health workers who have specific skills that they can bring to supporting the school environment. Our commitment to increasing health care capacity in that area is demonstrated by our provision of £7million over three years to do that. I  believe that starting by focusing on the areas of highest deprivation is the right way to proceed. Mary Scanlon analysed the extent of the problem, which we all acknowledge. What is important is that we put in place the right policies to ensure that those issues are addressed, and I believe that we have done that. I know that the critical issue of implementation has been raised, but I assure members that we will hold health boards to account. I suggest that the fact that we have set a HEAT target on that will focus the minds of senior managers in health boards more than anything else. We will use that to ensure that we drive forward the changes that require to be made in CAMHS. Jamie Stone mentioned rurality and asked whether the increase in the number of specialist staff that is required in rural health board areas would occur. Of course it will. We will carry out monitoring to ensure that boards create the necessary posts—that is important—and recruit staff into them. I assure Jamie Stone that we will keep a close eye on that.

I will come on to that in a minute, when I discuss the review of health visitors, in response to Jackson Carlaw. Ian McKee gave a well-informed speech, as always, in which he highlighted the complexities of appropriate disclosure, which is never a simple matter to deal with. I welcome Malcolm Chisholm's support for the family nurse partnership, the evidence from which will tell us a lot about the way forward, particularly in supporting vulnerable families who require a more consistent and intensive level of support than can be provided at the moment, in many cases. Michael Matheson made a strong point about how problems in the early years are responded to. He was right to highlight the fact that parental responsibility is crucial in that regard. On exactly who is driving, I return to the point that I made earlier. We will hold the health boards to account at the highest level for delivering on workforce growth and the HEAT targets, all of which are clear and tangible measurements that we can ensure are taken forward. Cathy Jamieson talked about out-of-area placements. I reassure members that out-of-area  placements would happen in a very small number of cases in which there may be complex or comorbidity issues and in which finding the right environment in Scotland would be difficult. Of course, we take such an approach with cross-border issues in complex cases, but I would certainly expect mainstream cases to be accommodated in Scotland.

I am sorry, but I will have to move on; I am a bit short of time. Hugh O'Donnell mentioned considering the counselling service that Lanarkshire NHS Board provides. I am happy to do that, but I think that the increased health care capacity in schools points the way forward, as schools can identify what the key issues are for them, and I would expect issues such as counselling to be taken on board in that process. I will get back to Hugh O'Donnell on the curriculum for excellence and teacher training issues, as I do not have the necessary information to hand. I do not recognise the picture that Jackson Carlaw painted with his comments on health visitors, but I do not want to sound complacent in any way. We recognise that there are genuine concerns out there, which is why the cabinet secretary announced before Christmas that we will meet GPs and other interested parties in Glasgow to talk to them directly about their concerns. Jackson Carlaw talked about the situation in Glasgow, where health visitor numbers have increased since 2007 as a follow-up to the review. Nevertheless, there are genuine concerns there, which we will meet to discuss. On the more general point of the community nursing review, as I said in my opening speech, I have always said that I am open-minded about the way forward for community nursing. However, things cannot stay set in aspic, particularly in light of the challenges that we and community nursing face and the recruitment difficulties that there are in getting young people to choose community nursing as a career option. We cannot stay as we are. Changes are required, but we have to take the workforce with us. I am happy to keep members informed about that. Other points have been made, but I am under pressure of time. I will therefore respond in writing to members whose points I have not managed to come back to.

Does the member recognise that this is the first time that any target has been set for child and adolescent mental health services? I do not want to sour the debate, but is it  not a bit rich for her to criticise the situation that we find ourselves in when it could have been addressed a lot earlier had a target been set some time ago?

Does the member acknowledge that the vast majority of children are referred much more quickly than that? The HEAT target is designed to ensure that there is a backstop so that no child has to wait for the lengths of time that the member mentioned. As I said in my speech, we want to go beyond 26 weeks, but that was regarded by clinicians as a good and achievable target to make the required progress.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Happy new year to all health colleagues. I thank the committee very much for bringing the important issue of child and adolescent mental health services to the attention of Parliament. The committee's interest in the subject accords with the Scottish Government's commitment to improving the mental health and wellbeing of children and young people. As Christine Grahame said, it is well recognised that a large part of the pattern for our future life is set during our earliest years—and even pre-birth. That is why we developed our early years  framework, at the heart of which is parenting. We must ensure that parents have access to appropriate support to help them to understand their responsibilities, and so that they can develop the skills that are needed to provide a nurturing and stimulating home environment. The focus of the framework is on developing a prevention and early intervention approach in the early years that moves away from dealing with crises only when they arise. The determining factors in securing good mental health are complex, but a good start in life even before a person is born must be a major factor. That is why good antenatal care is vital. For that reason, we are tackling antenatal inequalities and developing good care pathways for vulnerable families through building on the getting it right for every child approach. I want to mention in particular the family nurse partnership project that NHS Lothian is taking forward. That approach has proved to have benefits for the most vulnerable families in the United States over the past 25 years, and I look forward to the same outcomes in Scotland. However, we want to bring a greater focus to parenting skills and capacity, and to develop care pathways in order to ensure that parents with different types and levels of need are given the right kind of support. By creating a family-centred approach that builds capacity in communities, we can give families, parents and children the opportunity to find their own solutions using high-quality public services. I want to talk about health visitors, and to respond to the question that Christine Grahame asked. I cannot place enough value on the role of health visitors, who provide a central and unique role in children's services by identifying and supporting children and families who are at risk. They are the lynchpin in the team approach that is necessary to ensure that the most vulnerable people receive the necessary support when they need it. They have responsibilities, including screening and surveillance responsibilities, by which they can potentially identify mental health problems at the earliest stage. The recently established modernising community nursing board will work with NHS boards and stakeholders to ensure that a modern approach to community nursing care is taken. In addition, the impact of the introduction of the new community health nurse role on both staff and patients in the three pilot sites will be evaluated and included in the final report, which we expect to receive in the summer. The evaluation and report will provide useful evidence that will contribute to the new board's work and future decision making. I assure Christine Grahame that I am happy to keep the Health and Sport Committee apprised of that  development as we take forward decisions on the future of the community health nurse role.

A new chief executive letter is about to be issued that will make it clear that there must be flexibility around the guidance. The guidance is simply guidance; it is about a minimum level of intervention. We will issue that letter soon, and it will provide the necessary reassurance that health visitors have their professional expertise and skills to draw on in making judgments. I hope that it will clarify matters. I am pleased that the committee recognises the priority that we place on implementation of the mental health of children and young people's framework, which we are working towards full delivery of by 2015. Our aim is to ensure throughout Scotland equity of access to services that are designed to ensure that the right care and treatment are available at the right place and at the right time. We recognise that much more needs to be done, and we are continuing to work closely with NHS boards and their partners as they strive to implement the framework. The mental health delivery and services unit has just completed performance management reviews with each of the boards, and progress on the CAMHS agenda played a major part in the discussions. To respond to Christine Grahame's question, I would be happy to work with the Health and Sport Committee to consider how we can reassure it that progress is being made. The best test of that progress is how many additional staff have been recruited. We expect a 15 to 20 per cent growth in the workforce, based on the two funding announcements that we have made. I would be happy to report to regularly the Health and Sport Committee on progress on that. That is a good measure of the progress that is being made towards delivery of the framework by 2015. I hope that the committee will be satisfied with that. NHS boards have also been very much involved in establishing a waiting-time target for referral to treatment by specialist CAMHS, which will be effective from April 2010. By March 2013, no one will wait longer than 26 weeks, although some boards will achieve the target significantly earlier. It is important to remember that the target is directed at the longest waits, which do not represent the experience of all children. Of course,  I hope that we can go beyond the 26-week target and meet the national waiting times standard. To achieve that target, NHS boards will need not only to increase capacity by growing the workforce, but to improve the efficiency of the current workforce. Boards must ensure that appropriate data-gathering systems are in place to monitor their performance, and we will support them in doing that through a three-month pilot that will start in January. I have mentioned resources. We have started to address the shortfall in the specialist workforce by making available an additional £6.5 million to NHS boards over the next three years to enable them to increase the number of psychologists who are working in specialist CAMHS. We are also providing an additional £2 million on a recurring basis to accelerate the development of specialist child and adolescent mental health community services. That means that we will be spending an additional £5.5 million per year by 2011-12. We expect the workforce to be 15 to 20 per cent larger by 2012 on the basis of those funding announcements. It is, therefore, good news that recent CAMHS workforce statistics show an increase of 3 per cent—a small but positive step in the right direction. I am confident that those measures will build on what is already encouraging progress. I want to touch on some of the other issues in the report, if time allows.

The promotion of mental health among infants, children and young people is one of our six strategic priorities that are set out in "Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011". It is an important element, given what I have said about early intervention. We all share a responsibility to ensure the good mental health and wellbeing of Scotland's children and young people: schools, working in partnership with social work, NHS boards and the voluntary sector, also play an important role in securing that outcome. I could say a lot more, but time does not allow me to do so. I hope that I can pick up other issues in closing and in responding to members' issues. I reiterate my and the Scottish Government's commitment to improving the mental health and wellbeing of children and young people. That ambition is shared across the chamber. I hope that, by working together, we can make the improvements that are required.

Dementia is a national priority for this Government, with our target on early diagnosis and a range of other national activity supporting local service delivery. The dementia strategy, which will be published next year, will build on those achievements. As investment in dementia services is drawn by NHS Fife and Fife Council from overall resources provided by the Scottish Government, it is their responsibility to allocate funds on the basis of local needs and demographics. The Fife dementia strategy for 2010 to 2020 is designed to ensure that there are significant improvements in dementia care and to build capacity in that area in response to the predicted near doubling of the number of people in Fife with dementia by 2030.

I acknowledge the member's long-standing interest in this matter, but I point out that the issue of differential funding rates for local authority homes and the independent sector has also been long-standing, and indeed goes way back for a number of reasons, not least the fact  that wages and running costs in local authority homes are different from those in the independent sector. That said, we need to address a number of genuine issues that I have discussed with the independent sector on a number of occasions. Through the dementia strategy and the work on reshaping care for older people, which itself represents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to transform the delivery of services to older people, we will get to grips with some of the issues and perhaps redefine with the independent sector its role. In future, the sector might well have a more specialist role with regard to dementia and end-of-life care, but I assure the member that we are very much discussing the issues with the sector as we take that work forward.

As I said to Marilyn Livingstone, the differential rates are a long-standing issue, partly because of the differing costs of running local authority homes. We are where we are with this, but as we move forward with reshaping older people's services I believe that there will be a genuine need to redefine the role not only of local authority care homes but of the independent care home sector. Such issues are important and, as we consider the more specialist role that the independent care home sector might play in coping with people with dementia or who are in end-of-life care, we will need to put into the mix how that will be resourced and issues surrounding pay and staff training. However, I assure the member that we are talking through all of these issues as we take forward this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to get things right for older people.

The fruit and vegetable food standards that are set out in "Food in Hospitals: National Catering and Nutrition Specification for Food and Fluid Provision in Hospitals in Scotland" state that the menu must provide the opportunity for patients to choose at least five servings of fruit and vegetables throughout the day, including as wide a variety as possible. National health service boards have responsibility for implementing the specification and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is currently undertaking peer review visits to monitor progress on the standards, including standard 3, on the planning and delivery of food and fluid, which is the standard that includes the recommendations for fruit and vegetables. Initial findings from the review will be announced in April 2010.

We have not defined that fresh fruit and vegetables have to be served. There are good logistical reasons for that. Indeed, there is nutritional value in other forms of fruit and vegetables, so there has to be flexibility. On the issue of complaining, the member makes an important point. We have always encouraged patients to give their feedback, because only by their doing so can we make the necessary improvements. The patients rights bill may offer opportunities to strengthen the current position with regard to food and fluid. We have introduced nutrition champions in the NHS to help boards to deliver and to listen to what patients say about the quality of the food and fluid that they get. A lot of good work has been done, but of course more needs to be done. I am sure that we will take forward the members concerns through the patients rights bill.

I have put on record to the Secretary of State for Health my concerns about the limited detail set out in the English green paper exploring the options for the future funding of social care and support. Any reforms to the benefits system by the UK Government will need to give due consideration to the needs of older disabled people in Scotland.

We have generally been very concerned about the lack of thought given to the impact of such changes to the benefit system on social care delivery, not just in Scotland but in Wales. Of course, a different system operates in Northern Ireland. As I say, very little thought has been put into it, but the fact is that these changes could profoundly impact on social care services in Scotland, which is why we have been making extensive attempts to have this particular dialogue. Our officials have been discussing the issue with Department for Work and Pensions officials and, on behalf of the ministerial strategic group on health and community care, Councillor Ronnie McColl and I have issued a joint letter to the Secretary of State for Health, Andy Burnham, expressing our concerns and urging him to consider the views on and concerns about attendance allowance and other benefits that have been raised by the voluntary sector and the individuals in Scotland who will be most directly affected by the changes.

I will leave the business of trying to confuse vulnerable people to the Labour Party. That is not how this Government goes about its business. The issue of disability living allowance for those under 65 has been clarified, but I do not think that it is by any means clear that DLA for the over-65s and attendance allowance are off the table. Indeed, it is clear that one of the proposals is to combine those benefits in the care package. I thought that it would have been more in Jackie Baillie's interest to stand with us and say that any such changes must take full cognisance of the impact on social care in Scotland. I would very much doubt the Labour Party's commitment to do anything for vulnerable people in Scotland if it did otherwise.

Public authorities will continue to work in partnership and use the record resources that they are allocated for health and social care overall to plan and deliver high quality mental health services in Scotland and to meet all legislative and other obligations, including their duties under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

Michael Matheson raises some important questions there. Under our equally well strategy for addressing health inequalities, we are aware of the needs of those who have mental health problems. Specific testing is being done on mental health issues that will, I hope, show us how to redesign services. Also, through the choose life programme, we have put in support to prevent suicide, particularly among those who have mental health problems. Michael Matheson will also be aware of the recommendation of the national confidential inquiry into suicide and homicide by people with mental illness. We wrote to all health boards commending the recommendations for implementation, and we are keeping an overview of the implementation. I will keep the member informed. We are also developing a secure and confidential suicide register for Scotland to help us to provide extensive information on what lies behind some of those suicides, and to get a clearer picture of the information that might have helped to prevent them, and might prevent them in future. I am happy to keep the member updated on those developments.

A consultant neurologist from the Scottish paediatric epilepsy network runs regular clinics at St John's hospital, Livingston with a consultant paediatrician who has an interest in epilepsy. West Lothian also has well-defined referral pathways to specialist clinics at the royal hospital for sick children, including ready access to immediate investigation. Specialist children's epilepsy clinics are held in West Lothian as required, four to five times a year, by a consultant paediatric neurologist and a specialist epilepsy nurse. Specialist epilepsy services also link to the education services in West Lothian to minimise the impact of the condition on school life.

I know that Epilepsy West Lothian provides a range of important support services; I want to put that on the record. My first answer laid out the services that are currently provided through the clinics and the specialist backup from the royal hospital for sick children. However, I would be happy to write to Angela Constance with more detail about her allusion to the numbers of children who are affected and how they require a higher input than they are getting, if she would like to furnish me with more details.

The Scottish Government issued guidance on social care procurement in 2008. We intend to issue further guidance in the new year. The forthcoming guidance will take account of the duty on local authorities to offer eligible individuals in receipt of a social work service a direct payment.

I welcome the City of Edinburgh Council's decision to suspend the tender process, which it will now have independently evaluated. I have asked my officials to seek further detail on the nature of the review. As I said, we will publish new guidance in February. The guidance will underline the need for local authorities to consult and involve service users and their carers in the design of community care services and the planning process, where services are put out to tender. During the planning process, local authorities must consider the implications of direct payments and how they will ensure that all eligible individuals receive information about their right to receive such payments. I am sure that the member will continue to take an interest in the issue, as will I.

The Scottish Government fully supports grass-roots and youth football, as is clearly demonstrated by the investment of more than £4 million through sportscotland in 2008-09. That includes both Scottish Government and national lottery funding that is invested in grass-roots and youth football. The youth action plan is a 10-year commitment that will provide more than £31 million to support youth and grass-roots football throughout Scotland. The cashback for communities investment has created further opportunities for young people to develop their interests and skills in an enjoyable, fulfilling and supported way. In addition, sportscotland operates a number of funding programmes to which grass-roots clubs and community groups can apply for assistance.

I am aware that Fife Council recently completed its facilities strategy, which includes multisport developments for which the council is willing to provide some investment. Clearly, additional investment from other interested partners will be required. The council should be—and, I am sure, is—in discussions with sportscotland about the issue. I can write to the member to provide him with an update on those discussions and how they are being taken forward.

Although there are no current plans to review or update the administration of medicines in schools guidance, I understand that a short-life working group of the Scottish diabetes group is due to produce a report by the end of December that will include recommendations on how implementation of the guidance can be improved.

As I said in my initial answer, the focus must be on how implementation of the guidance can be improved. The guidance is fine. It dictates that, if a child has a long-term condition, a health care plan should be drawn up for the pupil, in collaboration with the school, education authority staff, the parents and the board, to ensure that there is the necessary communication and support around the individual child. I am happy to keep the member updated about the outcome of the short-life working group. If it shows us a way to achieve better and more consistent implementation of the guidance, I will be happy to take that forward.

Decisions on the most appropriate treatment for individual patients are taken by clinicians, who determine the most appropriate form of treatment, taking account of the needs and circumstances of each patient. Their aim is to ensure that the treatment package will provide the most effective support for the individual. The provision of services is for each local area to consider, taking account of local needs, circumstances and resources. It is for individual health boards, local authorities and alcohol and drug partnerships to ensure that appropriate health care services are provided to meet the needs of their resident populations.

I am happy to consider anything that will help. I only hope that Richard Simpson will do likewise, taking the concerns of the medical profession and his colleagues into account regarding their support for minimum pricing. We would all do better if we came to the table on that issue and worked together.

While it is an operational decision for the council of the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health to establish an administrative region in Scotland, the Scottish Government continues to work closely on a number of key issues with the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland as an acknowledged representative body for environmental health in Scotland.

As I said, the matter is an operational decision for the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health. It would not be appropriate for me to speculate on the motivation for opening such a branch in Scotland. As I said, the Scottish Government works closely with the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland as the acknowledged representative body for environmental health in Scotland on the delivery of important environmental health policies and parliamentary consultations. I do not expect that position to change.

The Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 requires local authorities to ensure that the direct payment is sufficient to enable the recipient to secure support of an appropriate standard. It is for councils to ensure that a person's needs are being met. A direct payment rate should be sufficient to purchase a service of an equivalent standard to a council-provided service. In line with our guidance, it is for local authorities to determine the direct payment rate. That ensures that local authorities can take into account local conditions and workforce considerations. I understand that the City of Edinburgh Council will discuss the rates of direct payments at its finance and resources committee meeting next week, on 3 December.

The City of Edinburgh Council's performance to date has been very positive. Currently, its number of direct payment recipients is above average and its spend is more than in any other part of Scotland. Its average value of packages is also among the highest. As I said, the City of Edinburgh Council will discuss the matter next week, but the council has decided in the meantime to carry on processing direct payments. I hope that, when the rates of payment are discussed next week, a resolution can be found that ensures that individuals can choose to access the appropriate support that they require. In addition, I have asked my officials to have a meeting with Glasgow City Council, which I understand is operating a waiting list for direct payments. I would certainly not approve of that.

I, too, would like to thank—[ Interruption. ]

I, too, thank Jack McConnell for securing this important debate. The motion highlights vividly the enormity of the worldwide HIV/AIDS epidemic and the issues that we face in Scotland. I welcome the opportunity to set out the work that the Scottish Government is doing in that regard. From the very good speeches that we have heard tonight, it is clear that the motion has struck a chord with a great many members, many of whom have direct experience of the issues that are involved, having visited some of the areas that are most affected by HIV and AIDS. In addition to our work throughout each year, it is extremely  important that we use world AIDS day to take time to recognise the importance of AIDS and to highlight the challenges that this epidemic brings throughout the world. As has been stated, more than 33 million people live with HIV across the world. In 2008, there were 412 new diagnoses of HIV in Scotland. Although that figure represents a 9 per cent decrease on the 452 cases that were reported in 2007, we cannot and will not be complacent. Although the extent of new diagnoses in some way reflects an increase in testing, and recent figures show a reduction in the numbers of undiagnosed cases, there is evidence of transmission occurring among certain at-risk populations in Scotland. Specifically, in Scotland, men who have sex with men and people from sub-Saharan Africa are more likely to be affected by HIV than anyone else. However—and it is a big however—as Jack McConnell and Karen Gillon pointed out, HIV does not discriminate. The stark figures not only set us a global challenge to work together internationally to reduce the spread of HIV but set the Scottish Government, health boards, local authorities and voluntary organisations a real challenge to reduce the transmission of HIV here in Scotland. Today, with that in mind, I launched an HIV action plan for Scotland. The plan, which contains specific actions for the Scottish Government, the territorial and special health boards and the voluntary sector to take, aims to reduce HIV transmission and levels of undiagnosed cases of HIV, to reduce stigma and discrimination and to ensure the effective co-ordination of prevention and of treatment and care. There is currently approximately £29 million each year within NHS boards' baselines for the treatment and care of HIV. In addition, the Scottish Government provides £9.5 million each year to prevent the spread of blood-borne viruses. As our epidemiology is constantly changing, we must ensure that our prevention efforts are targeted and evidence based to ensure that we have the best chance of reducing the transmission of HIV. Reviewing the evidence and providing guidance on effective HIV prevention are a key action for the plan, which will not only require NHS boards to use their funding effectively but require the Scottish Government and the health boards to work closely with their partners, including local authorities and the voluntary sector, to deliver the actions effectively. Throughout the development of the plan, the stigma and discrimination faced by people who are infected and affected by HIV were of utmost concern. In Scotland, the extent of that stigma and discrimination was recently highlighted by children  and young people during a needs assessment that was funded by the Elton John AIDS Foundation. That work, which was supported by Annie Lennox, gives us an understanding of the work that we must undertake in relation to HIV services for young people in Scotland. I of course welcome Annie Lennox's willingness to become the Scottish ambassador—or whatever we choose to call the post—for women and children who are affected by HIV, and I would be delighted to do what I can to make that happen. We have undertaken work in partnership with the International Planned Parenthood Federation to understand the extent of the stigma and discrimination faced by those who are living with HIV. The findings from the research, which will be released for world AIDS day, will be used to improve policies and practices in the UK and to enhance services to meet the needs of people who are living with HIV in 2009 and beyond. I recognise that changing the long-standing attitudes among so many in the Scottish population is a challenge and will not happen overnight, but it is a challenge that we should not shy away from. Through our national sexual health social marketing work, we must challenge the views that are held by some in Scotland by raising awareness in the general population and by providing education in schools, as Robin Harper requested. As part of our social marketing efforts, we shall undertake some targeted work that will be aimed at men who have sex with men, to raise awareness of the risk of HIV and to provide safer sex and testing messages. That campaign, which will be launched early next year, has used the learning from the very successful HIV comeback tour and equal campaigns, and will be delivered locally in a range of community settings to ensure effective targeting. I have already mentioned the importance of working closely with key stakeholders in Scotland to deliver change. The Scottish Government currently provides funding to Oxfam Scotland, which works with local communities in Malawi to assist the most vulnerable people affected by HIV. It is right and proper that the majority of the debate has been focused around that. I hope that Jack McConnell agrees that it was right and proper to increase the international development budget. Even in these tight financial times, it is crucial that we send a message that that work is important. I hope that no one in the chamber would doubt that increasing the work through the international development budget will directly impact on the work on HIV and AIDS, and I hope that every member who is speaking in tonight's debate can send out that message to others.  To date, the funding has improved access to HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment by reaching out to more than 2,000 people through community discussion forums on the rights of those living with HIV/AIDS. It has trained village rights committees on human rights and good governance as well as providing a range of training to build care capacity and support within the community in relation to HIV prevention, care and support. We also provide more than £350,000 of funding each year to enable a number of voluntary organisations in Scotland to provide not only general HIV prevention activities but specific work with African people and men who have sex with men.  I cannot overstate the value and importance of the work that is done in Scotland. I echo members' thanks to all those individuals and organisations, both statutory and voluntary, who dedicate their lives to raising awareness of HIV/AIDS and work not only to reduce transmission of the infection but, importantly, to provide treatment and support to those who need it most.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

That is very serious.

I congratulate Jamie Stone on securing an important debate. I think that all members want more people throughout Scotland to take part in sport more often and to be given opportunities to do so. Everything else flows from that: benefits to the individual, benefits to communities and, ultimately, success on the national and international stages. We are committed to working with our partners in delivering the reaching higher strategy, and we are committed to putting in place the appropriate infrastructure, which will encourage greater participation. On a positive note, athletics has been particularly successful. Athletics clubs have more than 8,500 members who regularly participate, and the sport hopes to increase club membership to 14,000 by 2014. If that is to happen, participation must increase throughout Scotland. If they are to be successful at any level, individuals must commit a substantial amount of time, energy and enthusiasm to their chosen sport. Although the direct cost of buying equipment for athletes is not always huge, for many other individuals a huge personal sacrifice in time and money is demanded. I value the support and dedication of volunteers, who are the unsung heroes. Coaches and parents spend a considerable amount of time providing support and ferrying athletes around Scotland so that they can train and compete. As many members said, people often travel long distances and—of course—rural athletes face particular challenges and must travel long distances because facilities are remote from them and because of the need to attend structured training sessions, particularly as they move up the rungs towards elite status. Attendance at competitions can involve long journeys and people sometimes incur overnight-stay costs. I assure members that we are doing all that we can do to support such people, but we must be pragmatic, and I appreciate that members have acknowledged that it is simply not possible to have an Olympic stadium in every town and village in Scotland.  Decisions on what facilities are developed are informed by local need and are taken, rightly, by local authorities. Of course, 90 per cent of all spending on Scottish sport comes through local authorities, who have a statutory responsibility to ensure that there is adequate provision. I want to put on the record where the investment goes. We recently announced investment of £5.5 million to improve facilities in Dundee and Fife. Of the investment that has been announced since May 2007, 25 per cent—some £4.6 million—has supported facility development in the north and the north-east. I know that Jamie Stone will immediately ask how much of that went to Caithness. Investment was made in facilities in Caithness Rugby Football Club and Invergordon Football Club, for example. Such investment stands us in good stead to build on that and increase participation levels, about which I will say a bit more. In one way or another, everybody has pointed to the need to make more of what we have and to add value. Sportscotland will work with every local authority to develop the strategy and the framework, about which Frank McAveety talked. All those discussions are well advanced. One of the biggest opportunities and possible solutions to many of the problems that Jamie Stone and others mentioned comes from the community sports hub model. The hubs are the key outcome of the legacy plan for 2014. They will help to improve use of, and access to, school and community facilities for physical activity and competitive sport. All rural communities have school and community facilities, although I acknowledge absolutely that some of them are not as we would want them to be and that clubs, coaches and volunteers are not coming together in each area. Everybody who is involved in sport in an area needs to be brought together to make the best use of what is available and to add value where possible. We are making available £23.5 million of legacy investment to ensure that we add value to facilities, and for recruitment of more volunteers and development of existing volunteers and coaches. A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity is available. I suggest that members, including Jamie Stone, should engage in that process. In talking to Highland Council, he should ensure that the council discusses with sportscotland where the community sports hubs will be located. I am sure that he will not be backward in coming forward to ensure that Caithness is considered for such a hub, because that is the solution that everyone has touched on. That is how the investment of £23.5 million will create a difference by being well spent. As all speakers have acknowledged, resources are finite, so the money that we spend must make  a difference. If the spend is in the right place, it will make a difference for the long term. Sportscotland's new decentralised structure will help: the six regional sports hubs will enable detailed discussions to take place and will ensure that sportscotland is on the ground. The Highland partnership has met regularly and sportscotland has recently appointed a partnership manager who will be permanently located in Inverness but will be responsible for, and must focus on, the whole Highlands and Islands area.

I assure Jamie Stone that I will keep an eye on that, because the legacy should have the opportunity to reach every community. The legacy will not be a success if it reaches only Inverness—it must reach communities throughout the Highlands and Islands. Communities must, however, rise to the challenge. Aileen Campbell's point was important in that respect. Perhaps we do not ask enough of parents who take their children along to local sports clubs: in other countries, for example in Scandinavia, parents do not just drop their children off at the local sports club, but are asked what they will do to support the club. There are therefore opportunities to engage more people, but in doing that we must ensure that the children have a good-quality experience, which means that volunteers and coaches have to be trained. Liz Smith made an important point in that regard, which is that there are sometimes difficult barriers for people. I am very keen to take advantage of the interest that I think there will be from communities across Scotland, but we must make it easy for them to get involved and we need to support them in doing that. I want to mention a couple of specifics in respect of financial support, because it is important to get them on the record. Highland Council provides support to its eight local sports councils by providing £100,000 each year, with nearly half of that being used to help with athletes' travel costs, entry fees for competitions and the food and accommodation costs of being away from home. I put on the record, too, the important Duncraig educational trust, which supports young talented people from the Highlands by providing up to £25,000 each year. It, too, can be used to support individuals who are engaged in national or international sporting events. We should pay tribute to the work of the Duncraig trust.  The awards for all programme offers grants of between £500 and £10,000, which local clubs can apply for. Amateur athletics clubs have taken advantage of that to provide for some of their running costs. There are no easy answers to the important points that were raised during the debate and I appreciate the challenges that rural athletes can face. However, we have opportunities with the legacy of the 2014 Commonwealth games to get to a better place. That does not mean that there are the resources for all-singing, all-dancing facilities. I am very pleased that no one is calling for that, because it would be unrealistic. However, there is an opportunity to bolt together the partnerships, as I think Frank McAveety said. There is a resource to ensure that every community gets something from the 2014 legacy that is better than what they have now. I assure Jamie Stone and other members that ensuring that we do that is a top priority for me.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

The Scottish Government and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland are leading on a range of initiatives to improve services for older people in the national health service, including those in long-term care wards. Earlier this week, I had the pleasure of opening the Elmview ward at Stratheden hospital in Cupar, which is a good example of the type of facility that can dramatically improve the standard of care in a long-term ward for people with dementia.

We certainly expect boards, through their capital programmes and investment in the hospital estate, to do what NHS Fife has done, which is to consider the reprovisioning of long-stay wards. Although the emphasis is on maintaining people in the community, when people require to stay in hospital, their ward essentially becomes their home. It is therefore important that a homely environment can be created, which is certainly what has been done with the facilities in Elmview ward. As we move forward with reshaping older people's services, we will have to consider the issue of long-stay wards as part of future provision. That will very much be part of the debate and discussion. I am happy to consider the toolkit, and I will write to the member with a response on that issue.

I would certainly be happy to visit that facility. It is always important to highlight good practice and facilities that others can learn from. Although we want to help people to live in the community for as long as possible, there will be people who, because of their profound needs, at some point may no longer be able to do that. It is therefore important that the long-stay wards that we provide are of a standard of which we would all be proud. I am keen to see the reprovisioning of such wards, as has been achieved at Elmview ward in Fife.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing wrote to the UK Secretary of State for Health, Andy Burnham, on 30 July requesting both an early and detailed explanation of the proposals set out in the green paper, "Shaping the Future of Care Together", and a commitment to give full consideration to the need to take into account the impact on Scottish Government responsibilities. Scottish Government officials subsequently met representatives of the Department of Health and the Department for Work and Pensions on 21 August. They met again on 6 November, joined by representatives from Her Majesty's Treasury, specifically to discuss the proposals in the green paper.

I recognise the concern to which the member refers. We were keen that discussions should take place because changing the benefits system in the way that is proposed has profound implications for our ability to deliver social care in Scotland. I assure the member that we are putting that point forcefully, to ensure that there is no negative fallout for local authorities or the social care system in Scotland. We will continue to do so.

In the past six months, we have announced that we are funding Infertility Network Scotland to work with national health service boards during the next three years to ensure fairer access to treatment and offer patients a direct influence on the future direction of infertility care. I recently wrote to the chairs of NHS boards asking for their assistance with that work. We are also in the final stages of setting up a national group to look at many long-standing issues surrounding infertility services across Scotland.

Helen Eadie is correct to say that the problem is historical. Under the previous Administration, waiting times of five to six years for infertility services were not uncommon. This Government has tried to get to grips with the issue of infertility services by ensuring that there is a move towards equity of access. I am sure that Helen Eadie has been raising these issues for many years; I do not recollect whether that is the case, but I am sure that she could provide evidence to prove me right. The problem has not just occurred. We are putting serious effort into sorting it out; that is why we have funded Infertility Network Scotland to work with those boards—there are now only four—that have not yet implemented the guidance. The network will also work with those boards to give priority to bringing down waiting times. I would have thought that Helen Eadie would welcome the fact that action is being taken in this area for the first time after many years of inaction.

We will be looking at a number of infertility services issues that require to be resolved. Some of those issues are quite complex and some are more straightforward, including those around guidance. Jackie Baillie called for national guidance, which has been around for quite some time; I am sure that she is now aware of that. We want to ensure that all boards are implementing that guidance; as I said, only a few boards have not done so. I have made that very clear. Indeed, I have issued another letter to chairs to ensure that they give priority to ensuring that the guidance is implemented. The focus of our work should be to ensure that every board makes the investment that is required in infertility services. We know that the boards that have invested in those services have addressed issues such as waiting times. I am sure that Jackie Baillie will welcome that.

Although the Scottish Government has introduced no incentives specifically for the Highlands and Islands, those areas are designated for the purposes of payment of golden hellos. The golden hello payable in a designated area is double that in other areas. A number of other grants and allowances, including a remote area allowance, have been introduced over the years to recruit and retain dentists in general dental services in Scotland.

NHS Highland has found it challenging to recruit to dental posts in Skye and Lochalsh, but has taken a number of steps to resolve the situation. It has invested in a modern two-surgery dental clinic in the new health centre in Kyle of Lochalsh, which opened in 2008. Capital is in place to build a four-surgery dental facility in Portree; the anticipated opening date for the new facility is December 2010. In the meantime, the existing two surgeries in Portree have been relocated to temporary accommodation that provides an improved working environment. I hope that those developments give the member some reassurance that a lot of action is being taken.

It is a serious problem. The issue of did not attends has been a challenge not only for dental services, but for the health service generally. Many initiatives have been undertaken to try to deal with the problem, such as texting and phoning to remind people about their appointments. We must do what works to reduce the number of did not attends, because Jamie Stone is right to identify that they represent hours lost and appointments lost to other people. I am happy to take the matter forward through further discussions with dental representatives to see whether we can do more jointly to address the did-not-attend situation in dentistry.

The Scottish Government recognises the valuable contribution that healthy living centres make to reducing health inequalities, and has established a transition fund to help lottery-funded centres achieve sustainable futures. We have so far provided over £900,000 to support healthy living centres in the NHS Greater Glasgow  and Clyde area. The health board in Glasgow is also working with healthy living centres and other community health initiatives to help them to sustain their good work for the future.

I certainly agree with that. The healthy living centres' most valuable work is to serve communities with the highest levels of deprivation, where, of course, many of them are located. Having visited some of the centres and having heard about some of their work, I know that innovative work is going on in those areas, which I encourage members to support.

I will certainly look into the circumstances that Jackson Carlaw describes, but I do not agree with his description—which I do not think is helpful—of the situation as "chaos". If he wants me to look into the specific issue about the Springburn health centre, I am happy to do so and I will get back to him about it.

Tackling non-diabetic hyperglycaemia requires the detection of people at risk. They can be offered either lifestyle advice or treatment. Our keep well programme is an example of that approach in action. Reversing obesity trends is probably the single most effective way of reducing the incidence of type 2 diabetes. In June 2008, we published "Healthy Eating, Active Living: An action plan to improve diet, increase physical activity and tackle obesity (2008-2011)", which aims to support people to make healthier choices in what they eat,  to build more physical activity into their everyday lives and to maintain or achieve a healthy weight.

I agree that healthy eating and physical activity are important steps that can be taken to prevent the onset of diabetes. David Stewart also asked about screening. He may already be aware that, at the request of the Scottish diabetes group, the Scottish public health network has conducted a type 2 diabetes needs assessment. The report on that is expected to include recommendations on screening for diabetes and non-diabetic hyperglycaemia, and will be published early next year, following a national stakeholder review in December.

We are doing a lot more than was previously done in recognition of what a big issue and challenge it will be for the health service if we do not get to grips with the matter and ensure that we have a series of interventions. Weight is, of course, included in the screening and health check in the keep well programme, and people are referred on appropriately. We have rolled out the counterweight programme within the NHS to ensure that people get the support that they require. However, more can always be done and I am happy to take forward any suggestions.

Work is in the planning stages for a proposal to survey international coding systems and to seek agreement from the clinical  community to change our coding and classification systems to take cognisance of improvements in placental pathology and improved coding systems in other countries.

I am certainly hopeful that the work that is under way will consider all such issues. I am happy to keep Charlie Gordon updated on progress.

The Scottish Government's commitment to tackling health inequalities was set out in "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities". We expect action to tackle health inequalities to be prioritised in single outcome agreements, alongside action on the Scottish Government's other major social policy frameworks—the early years framework   and   the achieving our potential framework.

We accept, despite the fact that we are providing state-of-the-art cancer treatment—of course, the prognoses and survival rates for cancer patients are much better than they were many years ago—that there is still a gap between the mortality rates of people in the most deprived areas and those in the least deprived areas. There are many reasons for that. For example, there are issues around the underlying health of people and late presentation. Certainly, it was recognised very much in "Better Cancer Care, An Action Plan" that we need to ensure that we can encourage people and get to them early enough, because we know that prognoses is so much better if we do. However, I am happy to write to Margaret Smith with more detail on the matter, if that would be helpful.

Yesterday's debate on reshaping the care of older people considered the challenge of providing appropriate and fair care now and for future generations. In doing that, we must focus on supporting people to feel safe and valued. We can and must do more to reduce instances of neglect of or harm to any of our citizens. Elder abuse is a matter of great concern to us all, so any discussion that raises awareness of the issue is welcome. We can debate whether the incidence of abuse of older people has risen or whether a greater focus on the quality of adult care and encouragement to raise concerns about it, along with features such as the recent one in The Herald , are providing more evidence of harm. Whatever the case may be, the point is that one case of abuse is one too many and we must deal with it robustly. Mistreatment of older people has been a hidden and often ignored problem in society. Whether it involves physical injury, neglect, sexual abuse or financial exploitation, we know that older people often have difficulty reporting abuse. Abuse can lead to a lack of self-esteem and a lack of confidence to report it. We must therefore continue to raise public and individual awareness of the issue. We must promote zero tolerance of harm to those who are most at risk in our society. I am seriously concerned about any instance of abuse that could have been prevented. Although it will be difficult to eradicate completely all cases of abuse of older people, I am convinced that our work on a number of fronts will reduce opportunities for harm and provide a more effective response when harm is suspected. Partly in response to earlier campaigns on elder abuse, the previous Administration introduced legislation to protect adults who are at risk. We are implementing the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007, which came into force only last October and which has a major role in identifying and responding to adults who are most at risk in society. The act sends a clear message that harm and neglect of those adults is not acceptable. The Herald has suggested that Scotland's older people are suffering record levels of abuse. The basis of the suggestion seems in part to be information about the use of the act—on the number of people who have been identified as  being at risk or who have been referred to adult protection committees. Of course, that information was not available before the act came into force a year ago, because it is about activity that was not co-ordinated or recorded in the way that the legislation now prescribes. Awareness of the abuse of older people is therefore growing through activity to address it and through the scrutiny and reporting of abuse. The act brings about new responses to suspected harm. It gives local authorities and their partners the power to gain access to premises to investigate complaints of abuse and it provides for various orders to protect individuals from harm, including removal and banning orders. The act involves close co-operation between local authorities and the police to address harm. The first biennial reports from the APCs, which will be produced in October next year, will provide good information on progress on implementation. The current informal evidence from local authorities shows many referrals to and from the police. To date, the act has been backed by funding of £24 million from the Scottish Government to allow local authorities to recruit and train more staff and to establish local adult protection units. Much has been happening at national level, too, to support implementation activity. Multi-agency and multi-disciplinary training took place during 2008. The feedback from the training and awareness events was particularly positive, with evidence that the materials are being used at local level. The quality of care, particularly in the private sector, was a major focus of The Herald investigation. We have supported the private care sector workforce initiative, in co-operation with the independent sector, to roll out training in the care sector. The aim is to ensure that adult protection training reaches staff, providers, service users, carers and families in the care home and care-at-home sectors. Members will be aware of the role and remit of adult protection committees. To support their development, we have put in place a new network of adult protection committees that covers every part of Scotland. I recently met the committee chairs to discuss the way forward. The committees provide new opportunities to share practice and learning and ultimately to help shift attitudes towards older people. All those implementation activities will contribute to reducing the abuse of older people. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007, when implemented, will deliver a system that offers further protection by excluding from working with vulnerable groups those who are not suitable to do so. For the first time in Scotland, the act will introduce a new list of those who are barred from working with protected adults. That is  an important step forward in adult protection and very much complements the measures in the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007.  The Herald highlighted the incidence of abuse in care homes, using evidence from the work of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. As members know, the care commission inspects all registered care services with a specified minimum frequency. Last year, the commission introduced a grading system, which allowed clearer interpretation of the quality of care services in Scotland, thus showing people what they should expect from a care service. With the aim of improving the quality of service, the commission works with care providers to encourage and support improvements. Providers are expected to act on any recommendations, but the commission has a wide range of powers—it can issue statutory improvement notices, impose conditions on a service and, as a last resort, cancel a service's registration, which means that the service will close. The care commission has reviewed how it inspects care-at-home services to ensure greater emphasis on the people who use them and their families. The commission has increased the use of lay assessors and is shadowing care-at-home staff to spend more time speaking directly to service users. In recognition of the concerns about the commissioning and procurement of social care, we are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and stakeholders to draft new guidance on the procurement of social services, with a view to publication in February 2010. Nutrition in hospitals is a major issue for some older people. We are taking forward a comprehensive programme to improve and enhance patient care. The measures include a key role for senior charge nurses with patients who are most at risk; protected meal times; better support from nursing staff for patients who need assistance to eat and drink; and clinical quality indicators for food, fluid and nutrition, which are currently being implemented across the national health service. We recognise the need to raise awareness and challenge attitudes among the public about adults who are at risk of harm. Our new multimedia awareness-raising campaign on the issue, which runs across television, radio, the internet and print media, encourages people to be alert to and to report abuse. We want the act against harm campaign to reach those who are at risk of harm and those who think that they know someone who might be being harmed. We want to ensure that those who are at risk know that they can take steps to prevent harm. The issue can be sensitive, given that abuse sometimes occurs within the  family. It is therefore crucial that we ensure that people can raise concerns in confidence. We have been running a campaign to raise awareness of the national care standards and the work of the care commission. The campaign, which was launched in June 2008, encourages those who use services and their families to find out more about the national care standards, so that service users get the right quality of care. The final phase of the campaign will focus on people who receive care in their homes and the carers who provide that service. We are committed to delivering the highest level of health and care services for everyone in Scotland, regardless of their circumstances or age. We are already driving forward a major nationwide campaign to stamp out age-related discrimination thorough the see the person, not the age campaign. As I said at the outset, we must focus on ensuring that services and support for older people lead to better outcomes and that older people are valued as individuals and feel safe wherever they live. Yesterday, I outlined our major programme of work on reshaping care for older people. Our dementia strategy will be key to driving forward our commitment to provide better care for people living with dementia and to improve services in all settings. Our carers strategy, which is under development, will look at improving support for carers who play a significant role. Poor communication between agencies has been a major contributory factor in tragic fatalities and the horrific abuse of vulnerable adults. Multi-agency inspection looks to improve that. Looking ahead, bringing together the functions of the care commission and the Social Work Inspection Agency into social care and social work improvement Scotland will bring a joint focus not just on child protection services but on all services for children and adults. That work will better help to address the findings of inquiries into critical service failures. I do not underestimate the strength of concern about the abuse of older people. Health and care professionals, family carers and volunteers have provided and continue to provide quality care and support to thousands of older people but, sadly, in too many cases that care falls short of what we expect and demand. As we focus on anticipatory and preventive care, we will aim to shift not only the balance of care but the balance of power between those who provide care and support and those who rely on it. Abuse of older people, wherever it takes place, is completely unacceptable. It is our collective  responsibility to address that. I am happy to take questions.

I am disappointed that Johann Lamont thinks that I struck a complacent tone in my statement. What I did was to lay out the comprehensive work that we are doing on numerous levels with numerous partners. I set out clearly that discussions about procurement with COSLA and other stakeholders are at an advanced level. The fact that COSLA will  produce new guidance on procurement in February suggests to me that those discussions, which began in response to concerns that were raised, have taken place over several weeks and months. We are now taking action with COSLA to address those concerns. I have met the care commission on several occasions. I laid out in my statement that in direct response to concerns raised in our discussions, the care commission has reviewed how it inspects care-at-home services. However, as we said yesterday, when care is delivered in someone's private home, we cannot be in their living room 24 hours a day, so we must think of ways to inspect and monitor care-at-home services as best we can. I assure the member that that is a priority for the care commission. The fact that the Minister for Community Safety is sitting beside me is an indication of his interest in the matter. I say to Johann Lamont that the forthcoming biennial reports on the implementation of the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007 will be scrutinised and monitored not only by me but by the justice ministers to ensure that the act works in practice, including in the area of prosecution that she mentioned. Informal feedback from local authorities is encouraging. Many cases are being referred not only by the police but to the police, a number of which have resulted in prosecution. That should tell Johann Lamont that a comprehensive array of work is on-going and should reassure her and other members who should support such action.

On nutrition in hospitals, it is not the case that NHS staff do not want to pay  attention to food, fluid and nutrition issues. The intention is to sharpen the focus on nutrition and to ensure that in busy acute wards time and effort are put into that. The importance of the senior charge nurse's role in protecting meal times cannot be overestimated. They should ensure that attention is given to that important area, particularly when it comes to building someone up after an operation or illness. Training on elder abuse will be on-going. We were keen to roll out quickly information that staff in all sectors required to be aware of the 2007 act and what it meant for them. That training programme will continue. Mary Scanlon asked whether the new agency, social care and social work improvement Scotland—or SCSWIS, as it has become known—will raise standards. As I set out in my statement, it will allow for far more cohesion through joint inspections of services for vulnerable adults, in the cases that we are talking about. The new agency will be able to examine in great detail where there have been communication failures, which are a problem. Through the merger, there will be opportunities to ensure that such systematic failures are fewer, but where they happen they will be properly investigated. We cannot force service users to know about national care standards, but we can ensure that those standards are promoted at every opportunity. We have done that through the campaign that I mentioned, and a lot of work has been done at local level to ensure that people, including carers, are given copies of the care standards so that they know about the care standards as far as possible. We will continue to do that where we can, because it is important that people know their rights and what they can expect.

Perhaps the issue that underlies Jamie Stone's question is the fear and  misunderstanding between the generations that has developed in recent years. Seeing a group of young people hanging about can sometimes cause older people fear and alarm, simply because it is a group of young people. I am not sure that that was the case 30, 40 or 50 years ago, but it is the case now. Perhaps young people also have a particular view about older people. We are doing a lot of work to try to break down those barriers and change attitudes through our intergenerational projects and our age discrimination campaigns, which challenge people's assumptions. My message around Hallowe'en, or at any other time, is that people should be respectful and realise that certain behaviour may cause fear and alarm, particularly among older people who live on their own. It is worth sending out that message from this chamber.

The stakeholders who are involved include the Scottish Government and COSLA. As I set out in my statement, we have also worked closely with the independent sector, the voluntary sector and other stakeholders to ensure that we get across the message that the act places a responsibility on not just service providers but the public at large to look out for cases of suspected abuse and to do something about them. In my days as a home care organiser, there was no mechanism to do something when we had suspicions. We now have that, and we need to ensure that everyone knows about it. We are working hard with all stakeholders to do so.

I know that Community Care Providers Scotland has raised that issue, which will be debated in the context of a possible stage 2 amendment to the Public Services Reform  (Scotland) Bill. We look forward to that further discussion. Jackie Baillie should remember that new guidance was produced in 2008 in recognition of the issue. However, we felt that more had to be done, given the concerns that were expressed. As I said yesterday, the procurement of social care services is about people, not tins of beans or paper clips. That is the message that we will continue to put across, with which COSLA agrees. Some local authorities have very good procurement practice, but we need to ensure that such practice exists everywhere.

The fact that we have been having these discussions and that a spotlight has been shone on some of the bad practice has been a bit of a wake-up call for local authorities. Local authorities the length and breadth of Scotland have made it clear that they do not intend to use reverse e-auctions to procure services in the future. The message is getting through to local authorities. We have to ensure that quality is the predominant consideration. We are in straitened financial times, and we know that budgets will be tight over the next few years, which is why it is even more important to get the quality right, because that can be cost-effective in the long run for not just service users but councils. We will continue our discussions, and I hope that Ross Finnie will be reassured by the guidance that is issued in February.

The act against harm campaign, which I hope that members throughout the chamber have seen, is powerful. It is not pleasant to watch, but it gets across the message that people in all walks of life need to be alert to elder abuse. That includes service providers, service users, carers and members of the public who might see something going on with their neighbour that they do not think is appropriate or about which they are concerned. We should send the message today that whatever concerns people have, it is better to report them so that they can be  checked out than to do nothing at all. Everyone in this chamber can promote that strong message.

The care commission's approach involves risk-based inspection. It wants to be able to spend the most time with the services that need the most time to improve. I am sure that everyone agrees with that approach. The care commission does a hugely important job. It was established by the Parliament to ensure that the level and quality of services are monitored and that action is taken where there are failings in the system. In 2008-09, the care commission issued 134 statutory notices to 84 care providers. I accept Malcolm Chisholm's point about the IT system. However, despite some of the issues that have arisen, the care commission is doing an important job and we should support it in its efforts.

They have reacted very well. I hope to be able to share more information with the Parliament about that in the new year. We have informal information from local authorities about how the act is being taken forward. My message is that there is huge co-operation between the police and the adult protection committees. A lot of action is happening throughout Scotland. We are conducting a survey with COSLA in advance of the first biennial report next October. I am happy to share the results of that with the Parliament once we have them.

The whole premise of the act encourages them to make such challenges. The  problem is making them feel confident enough to do so. That can be very difficult, especially when the abuse is happening within the family. That is why we need to ensure that people know who they can speak to and how, and that they can do so in confidence. That is the message that all of us can try to get across within our local communities.

I thank members for a stimulating and useful debate. We hoped to provide an opportunity for Parliament to initiate a long-term discussion on how best to respond to the challenges—demographic, financial and otherwise—that will affect our planning for caring for older people. I think that we have achieved that initial goal. We are also here as a first step towards the wider public engagement that I referred to in my opening remarks, which will take place next year, when we will invite discussion on proposals for change. It is important that we all play a part in that. I turn to some of the points that have been made, starting with Johann Lamont's comments on voluntary sector engagement. I reassure her that, over the summer, officials worked actively with the voluntary sector through meetings, events and other engagements. We have involved the sector in a wide range of activity on the agenda. The next stage will be the more formal and structured element. The voluntary sector is well aware of what we are doing, but the formal engagement will begin next year. I hope that that reassures Johann Lamont on that issue. I continue to discuss with the care commission the issue of home care and what has been done to respond to the concerns that were raised in "Panorama". However, I can tell Johann Lamont that the care commission has reviewed its inspection methodology. She will appreciate that knowing what is going on in an individual's home is not without its challenges. The care commission has tried to provide greater emphasis on direct engagement with service users and their families. For example, it has increased the use of lay assessors in inspections, and it has been shadowing care at home. When the commission visits people's homes, its staff spend a lot more time talking to service users. The area is challenging, but I am keen to see what else we can do to monitor what happens in people's homes.

Local authorities have always tendered for services. That has gone on for years.  The concern is how they do it. I have always said that procuring social care services is not like buying tins of beans—we are talking about people. I am sure that Dr Simpson is well aware that guidance on social care procurement was issued in August 2008. However, we recognise the need for further guidance, which is why we are working with carers, users, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and service providers, including the voluntary sector, to ensure that we have robust guidance on what is expected. Local authorities have made it clear that they do not believe that methods such as reverse e-auction are appropriate, and they have signalled their intent not to use such methods. That is to be welcomed. Johann Lamont talked about the important work that is being done jointly with the Minister for Housing and Communities on older people's housing. As other members said, housing is definitely part of the solution. We need to consider how to develop housing options that change with the person—it is almost about future proofing housing so that care services can be built around a person without them having to move to another house. I hope that I can assure Johann Lamont about the importance that we give to housing. Mary Scanlon raised a number of what were, as always, pertinent points. The area of psychology services for older people is one in which we need to improve. As we develop and expand psychological services, we need to ensure that older people have as much access to those services as other sections of society. I am keeping a close eye on that issue. Ross Finnie rightly reminded us of the big issue of pensioner poverty in relation to pension arrangements, and the real challenges that face funding bodies such as the Lloyds TSB Foundation. Those challenges are a concern to us all. I will pass over Ian McKee's Saga comments. However, he made an important point about the balance of risk and independence. Enabling and supporting people to live in their own homes will sometimes come with a risk but the issue is whether that risk is appropriate and proportionate.

We are well aware of the issue of match funding and the concerns that it has  caused. We are discussing our response to that as a Government. Duncan McNeil made some pertinent points, for example on the issue of e-auction, which I have dealt with. He said that the focus should be on supporting people, such as the 69,000 people who receive care at home. That is very much what the whole debate is about. Malcolm Chisholm raised a number of local issues, about which I am happy to write to him in detail if he would find that helpful. He said that the issue of checks on people is complex. We recognise the issues and we are working with others to try to resolve them. The implementation of the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 next year will help with the robustness of the system, particularly in relation to vulnerable adults. We are alive to those issues and challenges.

Okay. Robert Brown and Des McNulty also made important points, which I am afraid that I do not have time to cover. I am certainly happy to respond to them in writing. I genuinely hope that in future we can engage on a cross-party basis, in the way that we have done today, as we take forward this issue, which is one of the most important.

I do not want to make a big issue of the matter, but does Ross Finnie acknowledge where we are with delayed discharge, which is the preferred term? We have a small number of delayed discharges—one is too many for me; I want none—but we are a million miles away from the days when hundreds of people were in beds but who should not have been. The latest figure is 55: it was 627 in 2006-07. Does he acknowledge that we have made progress? There is a way to go, but we are a long way from where we were.

I am pleased to open today's subject debate on the reshaping of care services for older people in Scotland. Ensuring the provision of good support for older members of society is a marker of a strong and just democracy, and it is fitting that the Parliament should come together to consider the challenges that that responsibility brings. Before exploring what some of those challenges are, I say that I am grateful to colleagues for agreeing to a subject debate at this stage in our thinking. How we go about ensuring that older people have access to appropriate services is a matter of enormous strategic importance to this nation as a whole—indeed, to all of us as individuals, too. It is a challenge whose implications will span many generations and many Administrations of whatever political colour. We, as parliamentarians, must work together to put down a marker of the Scottish Parliament's will on how best to provide care for older people that is sustainable, deliverable, appropriate and fair. I feel certain that we would all agree to the basic premise of that commitment. All members have had access to some background material on the subject from the Scottish Parliament information centre to inform the debate. Let me set the scene with a few statistics that I am sure leap out at other members as much as they leapt out at me. Between 2006 and 2016, the number of people in Scotland who are aged over 65 is projected to rise by 21 per cent, and by 2031 the number is projected to rise by 62 per cent. The rise in the number of people aged over 75 during those periods is projected to be 21 per cent and 81 per cent, respectively. We estimate that, in 2007-08, slightly over 40 per cent of total expenditure by the national health service and social work services in Scotland was on older people. Of that expenditure, we estimate that nearly two thirds took place in institutional settings. Indeed, unplanned admissions to hospital accounted for almost one third of the total. Taken together, all of that means that the way in which we currently deliver services for older people is simply not sustainable in the longer term. Often, though, those services provide vital support to people. Day in and day out, our health and care professionals provide services that make a positive impact on the quality of life of thousands of older people. We must also acknowledge and  support the important contribution of the voluntary sector and of the many unpaid carers who support people across the country. Nonetheless, we also know that there are many instances in which we could be doing things differently and, often, with a better outcome.

During the work on the reshaping of older people's services, we are very much taking into account the needs of older people wherever they live. I accept that there are particular pressures around sustaining services in rural areas. On a positive note, I point out that the enhanced care service that is being worked on in the Borders, I think, is interesting and provides a model that other areas of the country could learn from. I am happy to share details of that service with the member. We have to ask ourselves whether our current patterns of service delivery for older people are delivering what people need or want. We must also ask whether we can use the money that is already in the system to better effect. The answer that I and most other people would give to that question is yes. We need to start thinking in terms of a different fundamental philosophy about care of older people, one that begins and ends with the principle of supporting people, whenever possible, to look after themselves, rather than disempowering people by doing things for them, which can sometimes happen. Many unplanned admissions to acute hospitals could be avoided through, for example, greater support for self-care, more programmes of anticipatory care and easier access to health and social care services in the community at any time of the day or night. Let us be clear that this is not Government looking for alternatives to increasing investment in older people's services. We already know that simply spending more does not guarantee better results. The multi-agency inspection report on older people's services showed that the significant levels of variation in elderly spend per capita had no obvious relationship to outcomes.

Within this debate, we will no doubt hear of individual instances in which things are not as good as we would want them to be. However, the debate must be about how we can plot and plan services that can deliver a better deal for people in Scotland no matter where they live. We need to think about how, in doing that, we can overcome issues such as the one that Mary Scanlon has raised. However, we must concern ourselves with the bigger picture and with the direction of travel. As a matter of priority, we need to design services that support moves away from overdependence on institutional forms of care. We also need to get to grips with the cost—in terms of results for people and value for the public pound—of the variation in clinical and care practitioner decision making. Many of those working in health and social services would say that they could improve outcomes if only resources could follow the patient or service user to where they could be used most effectively. I am, therefore, pleased to note the work that is now under way in four test sites to implement an integrated resource framework that will enable partners to realign existing health and adult social care resources to support shifts in the balance of care. We can use the evidence from those test sites to consider better ways of managing resources across our health and social care systems, which we have been talking about in Parliament for as long as I have been here. However, those challenges raise questions for us all that go well beyond how much money we spend on individual health or social care services, or what those services look like. A few key observations should guide us. First, older people get much of their care and support from someone who is close to them. Secondly, it is more likely to be a person's social support networks rather than their health alone that affects where they receive care. Thirdly, many specialist services run counter to our policy goal of optimising independence because they fail to recognise the value of self-care. We need a shift in our thinking so that older people are never viewed as a problem or a liability but are recognised as our biggest asset and as contributing far more than they consume. We need to ensure that unpaid carers are supported effectively and that our systems do not work against the vital contribution that they make. We must, of course, do everything that we can to enable greater protection for those adults who are most at risk of harm, primarily through the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007.  The 2007 act puts in place modern and strengthened measures to enable greater protection for adults in Scotland who are most at risk of harm. It sends a clear message that the harm or neglect of such adults is simply not acceptable. Members will be aware, as I am, of the recent press coverage of elder abuse. Elder and other forms of harm should never be tolerated by society. Adult protection is a sensitive issue and we should continue to address it sensitively, while endeavouring to strike an appropriate balance between protecting people and enabling them to live fulfilling lives. I will make a formal statement to Parliament tomorrow morning on elder abuse, in which I will cover the issue in more detail.

Rhona Brankin raises a very important issue. When the "Remember, I'm still me" report was published, I met the Mental Welfare Commission, the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and officials to consider how we can act quickly on some of the very serious issues that were raised in the report, such as the issue of sedation. I assure the member that work is continuing on the issue to ensure the appropriate use of any medication that is required, and that we are acting on her concerns. The Scottish Government is actively working with local government and the NHS to agree on what we need to do now to shape the future of health and social care. At a local level, much is happening throughout Scotland to reshape and modernise care services to make them more outcome-focused, more personalised and more responsive. In 2010, we will embark on a process of public engagement to consider how best to address those challenges. That engagement exercise has been commissioned by the ministerial strategic group for health and community care, which I chair and which has NHS chairs and senior local authority councillors among its members. It will begin in early 2010 when the first stages of analytical and preparatory work are complete.

We are involving the voluntary sector, and we have discussed with it how we should take that work forward. However, it was important for us to be clear about the general direction of travel, because it would be dishonest for us to go out with a blank sheet of paper and  say to people, "What do you think?" We need to be able to put down some ideas to gauge and guide that discussion, and that is the stage that we have reached. We have by no means ruled anything out, but we need to give some direction to the discussion, and we have been undertaking work on that. I will give members an indication of the priorities that have emerged early on from that preparatory work, on which the discussion will centre. I do not think that any of the themes will come as a surprise, but the fact that they are familiar in no way diminishes the challenges ahead. In broad terms, we will focus on better integration across services and the workforce in health and social care; more anticipatory and preventive care; more supported self-care and better personalised care; better crisis care; more complex care at home; the use of care homes to provide more specialised care; better care pathways, particularly in and out of hospital; and last but by no means least, serious consideration of how best to promote and encourage healthy living so that our older population is as healthy as possible. We need to keep it in mind that the work is not just an exercise in improving services for today's older population and that we must also keep an eye on the horizon. Today's younger people, whom we must support to be tomorrow's healthy, independent generation of older people, will have very different expectations and desires. I will be looking for engagement to take place as much locally as nationally. I am pleased that the members of the ministerial strategic group have agreed to be key players in taking the discussion forward locally. The points and ideas that members raise in today's debate will also form an important part of the process and will be included in our deliberations. We are, of course, also working with the United Kingdom Government in the light of its green paper "Shaping the future of care together". Given that any changes to the benefits system, particularly attendance allowance, will have profound implications for the way in which social care is delivered in Scotland, that dialogue is important. I am clear, however, that here in Scotland we need a free and open debate about the implications of an ageing demographic as well as discussion of specific ideas for change. We cannot develop individual proposals until we have all agreed, at the least, that marginal changes to current services will not be enough to bring about the required conditions for system-wide innovation. I look forward to a lively and stimulating debate. We need to grasp the challenges and I hope that we can agree today on a common purpose and  direction of travel. I am happy to engage with parliamentarians either formally or informally as we take the work forward, and I hope that members will also get involved in local discussions. The issue is probably one of the most important areas that we can take forward at present and I hope that we can reach a political consensus as we do so.

I thank Irene Oldfather for bringing a further debate on dementia to Parliament. To spare her blushes I will not add any more fulsome praise, other than to say that I think that the praise that she has been given during the debate is all deserved. I also thank the cross-party group on Alzheimer's for its on-going support, commitment and attention to the issue. Dementia is an illness that has a devastating impact on the lives of so many people in Scotland. We have heard personal testimonies to that from members throughout the chamber. It is therefore right that Parliament continues to pay close attention to the subject.  Listening to what has been said both today and in the debate on 9 September, I know that we all have a common goal, which is to ensure that people with dementia and their carers and families feel confident that they have the very highest quality of care. We are all able to offer examples of where the quality of care and therefore the quality of life are certainly far from the best. We all have to ensure that such examples become a thing of the past—Irene Oldfather talked about consigning them to the dustbin of history. It will not be easy and it will not happen overnight, but I am proud that the Scottish Government and our partners are together beginning to address this problem head on through the development of a dementia strategy to build on the progress that we have already made. I agree that we cannot make things better for people with dementia without recognising their right to be treated as individuals. For that reason, I welcome the focus in the charter on promoting the rights of people with dementia and the standards that should always be applied day in, day out as part of good practice across all care settings, including in the person's home. I therefore very much support the motion's focus on envisaging the charter as an instrument to enable cultural change in dementia care and as a powerful tool to empower those with dementia. We already have legislation and standards in place in Scotland that can address many of the issues that are raised in the charter. For example, our mental health legislation has led the way in ensuring that at its heart are dignity and respect; participation; the least restrictive alternatives; maximum benefit to the individual; non-discrimination and equality; fairness; and autonomy. Of course, those principles mirror equality and human rights legislation and they are also reflected in our patients' rights bill, which is in development. We all know how important it is that people are treated as individuals, to ensure that their health care is designed to respond to individual needs, and that patients participate in their own health care. In introducing a patients' rights bill, we will be able to provide a clear framework and guidance to support that. The focus of much of the charter is, quite rightly, on the quality of service. Our work on the dementia strategy is exploring how we might use standards more effectively to promote quality and improvement and how we can use the new scrutiny arrangements of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill and the arrangements that will be brought forward under the patients' rights bill to secure better outcomes for those with dementia.

I was certainly very interested in the figures that Mary Scanlon talked about and I will have more of a look at them. I can tell her that Dr Jennifer Borthwick, to whom she referred, is involved in the development of the dementia strategy. I hope that, through her involvement, those issues will come to the fore. We are also looking at how to improve the knowledge and understanding that those providing services have about people with dementia and at how we use that information to maintain the dignity and humanity of care and treatment. We are also examining how we can embed the personalisation agenda in our work on dementia, not least in thinking about the behaviours and cultures of health and care staff in responding to dementia. We have heard examples of that tonight. We will be considering the arrangements for the protection of rights for those with dementia and the application of the Millan principles. We will be considering how to promote physical and social activity for those with dementia—which is a very important issue that has been raised—both in care homes and in other care settings, including the home. It has already been said that some people do not see anyone from a Friday right through to a Monday, which cannot be right. We need to see what more we can do to reduce the social isolation of people who remain in their own home. As part of the strategy, we launched a consultation paper last week, and a copy was passed to the cross-party group on Alzheimer's. I look forward to receiving its comments on the strategy. We want the strategy to continue to be a shared endeavour and, most important, to have input from the real experts. That is why we have someone with dementia and a carer in each of the work streams. Those people are telling us what we are not getting right and I greatly value their contribution. The transformation of care services will not be easy and cannot be done overnight. Improving how a whole system works and changing it to meet the needs and interests of the individual service user will be a huge endeavour. However, we said at the outset that dementia is a national priority in Scotland. That commitment must be measured against the improvement in the quality  of care that people with dementia experience, and that care must ensure that it addresses the rights and dignity of the person with dementia. I recognise the launch of the charter as an indication of the cross-party group's level of commitment to this agenda. I welcome the focus on individual rights and the standards of care that people routinely receive—and should expect—as part of their experience of the care system. I expect the work on the dementia strategy to consider all the issues that are raised in the charter. I look forward to the outcome of its considerations as part of the wider work. In taking that forward, I am happy to say that I will come to the next meeting of the cross-party group to discuss matters further, including how we can ensure that there is synergy and that the issues that are raised in the charter come through the dementia strategy as it is developed.  I thank members very much. This has been a really good debate to take part in.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

Alcohol awareness week is a key initiative from the Scottish Government's alcohol industry partnership, which brings together Government, industry, health professionals and the voluntary sector to promote joined-up messages about responsible drinking. We work together to promote those messages through a wide range of channels, including press articles, events and advertising.

Yes, I am very much aware of the Swedish evidence, which is very interesting. It follows on from the in-depth report from the University of Sheffield, which showed the benefits of minimum pricing for saving lives and reducing crime, as well as the economic benefits that can flow from rebalancing our relationship with alcohol. I hope that members across the Parliament will reflect on all the evidence and that we can reach a consensus on the way forward.

All those things can be considered under the alcohol bill that the Scottish Government is introducing before the end of the year. As I have always said, and as the Government has said, there is no one single solution; we need a package of measures. However, in that package of measures there must be something that goes to the heart of reducing alcohol misuse in Scotland. The evidence tells us that that something is minimum pricing, given the clear links between price and consumption. I hope that the member and his party will reflect on that.

I know that Beechwood does a lot of very important work, and it will of course continue to provide rehabilitation services under the contract with the council. As I understand it, the reformed partnership—the Highland drug and alcohol action team—is actively reviewing its service provision, including for drunk and incapable people. I encourage the member to continue to hold discussions with those various partners, as I know he has been doing actively. We need to ensure that a range of services are provided to meet the requirements of the whole of the Highland area. I am happy to keep in contact with the member in that regard.

If anything, the figures in the University of Sheffield report are an underestimation of the extent of alcohol misuse in Scotland. I do not think that any member will challenge the evidence that we have a major problem—I certainly hope not. The question is what we do about that major problem. Not just the Sheffield report but all the international evidence demonstrates a clear link  between price and consumption. The question is whether the Parliament will be bold enough to take the critical action that is required to tackle the biggest public health challenge that faces our nation. The Scottish Parliament has a good track record of being bold—we were on smoking. Minimum pricing is the bold measure that needs to be taken to address alcohol misuse, and I hope that members on the Labour benches will join us in supporting that measure. I know that Richard Simpson is sympathetic to proposals on minimum pricing, and I look forward to continuing to discuss the issue with him.

Information on numbers of patients and waiting times for physiotherapy treatment is not routinely collected on a national basis. The Scottish Government is committed to reducing waiting times for all patients within NHS Scotland. Physiotherapists are involved in delivering patient care and treatment, which has helped to cut waiting times for patients across Scotland, as has the introduction of self-referral, which means that patients can now bypass their general practitioner and refer themselves directly to a community clinic, thereby improving access to treatment and speeding up recovery.

I say to Mary Scanlon that the fact that waiting times in general are coming down shows, and should show her, that physiotherapy is an important part of the patient journey. Waiting times in general could have come down only if the waiting times for physiotherapy had also come down. I ask Mary Scanlon to reflect on that. We are aware that waiting times for physiotherapy vary in different parts of the country, but work is on-going in NHS boards to standardise processes, resources and practice. We are currently funding a two-year project to capture allied health professions data on workforce and workload activity, including data on physiotherapists, which will establish a national data set that includes physiotherapy and will address that data gap. We are working very hard through the chief health professions officer and the allied health professions directors to support new ways of working and service redesign that will improve patient care and waiting times.

Finally, I say to Mary Scanlon—[ Interruption. ] I hope that Labour members will also agree that physiotherapy is important. There has been a 4 per cent increase in physiotherapists—the number is up. I thought that the member would welcome that.

I welcome the debate and thank Rhona Brankin for bringing it to the chamber. I thank the member and others for their kind comments about Margaret Ewing. We remember her at this time. Breast cancer awareness month gives us a real opportunity to highlight the actions that the Scottish Government and others are taking to raise awareness of breast cancer and improve cancer care across Scotland. As many members said, breast cancer is the most common cancer among women. Its incidence continues to rise—it is up 9 per cent over the last decade. In part, this is due to increased detection through the breast screening programme, but it may also be because of a higher prevalence of known risk factors and Scotland's ageing population. I will come on to say something on the known risk factors. On a positive note, breast cancer survival rates are improving, with five-year survival now standing at more than 84 per cent. That said, it remains important that we empower women with the knowledge to mitigate the risks of breast cancer while continuing to support innovation in treatment. I turn to Mary Scanlon's comments on survival rates. We have to be cautious when comparing the figures for Scotland with those of other  countries. As she will appreciate, the statistics that we gather, including on cancer survival rates, are accurate and good. I cast no aspersions on the statistics gathering of other countries, but making comparisons between countries as she did can be akin to comparing apples and pears. That is not to say that those statistics are not of relevance, but they should come with a bit of a health warning. Mary Scanlon also raised the issue of waiting times. Obviously, much progress has been made around the 62-day target—performance was over 98 per cent in the last four reported quarters—but, as she rightly said, more work has to be done on the 31-day target. That said, performance in the last quarter was 87.6 per cent. More has to be done, but it is important to recognise that we are going in the right direction. As Rhona Brankin said, men, too, need to be aware of the signs to look out for. There are around 20 new cases of male breast cancer in Scotland each year. The figure for men is significantly lower than for women, but it is equally important to ensure that men recognise the symptoms and that they are not overlooked in discussions about this disease.

As Richard Simpson said, the SIGN guidelines for breast cancer recommend the immediate offer of breast reconstruction to all appropriate patients, but we are aware of the variability in the situation. That is being addressed as part of the capacity-building work in implementing the new cancer access targets—indeed, it is very much an element of that work. I am happy to keep Mary Scanlon briefed on the matter as we take it forward. Breast cancer awareness month is an opportunity for people to talk about breast cancer, to share their experiences and concerns, to find out about services on offer, to learn what steps to take to protect against the disease and, importantly, to learn how to recognise symptoms. I am pleased to state the Government's support for the initiative, and I encourage everyone here today to ensure that we make the most of the awareness month. It is now nearly a year since the launch of "Better Cancer Care", our cancer action plan. In that year we have already made significant progress against many of the tough commitments that we set, but there is still more to do. Prevention is an important issue. We have noted that breast cancer incidence is increasing, but a  breast cancer diagnosis is, of course, not always inevitable; there is mounting evidence to suggest that women can help protect themselves in all sorts of ways. "Better Cancer Care" outlines lifestyle choices that can help reduce people's risk of cancer. It is not only about raising awareness of the known risk factors; it is now about targeting the risk factors for many cancers—including breast cancer—such as alcohol, diet, physical activity and smoking. Having said that, I recognise Margo MacDonald's point that there are complexities around causal links, whether it be hormonal links or the environmental issues that she mentioned. I will talk about research shortly, but I want to mention the increasing awareness of the links between breast cancer and alcohol. The risk of breast cancer increases as a result of drinking as little as one to two units of alcohol per day. More than one in 10 breast cancer deaths are estimated to be attributable to alcohol consumption, which is a very high figure. That is one reason why we have launched a three-year alcohol health behaviour change campaign, which this year is focusing on women and is trying to get the message across about the links to breast cancer. We are also aware that more needs to be done on raising awareness of cancer symptoms and preventive measures. The Scottish cancer task force, established to oversee the commitments made in "Better Cancer Care", has consulted the three regional cancer networks in Scotland and the Scottish cancer coalition, which includes representatives from Breakthrough Breast Cancer—I pay tribute to the important work that it carries out—Breast Cancer Care and the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign, to see how we can work in partnership with the voluntary sector to improve awareness raising of preventive measures in the future. I hope that that, in part, answers Angela Constance's question on the issue. Although prevention is the first step to reducing the incidence of breast cancer, screening for early signs of the disease is equally important. As part of our breast screening programme, we are now screening more women and detecting more cancers earlier than ever before, which will save even more lives. In response to Rhona Brankin's question about automatic call-up, we obviously take our advice from the United Kingdom screening advisory group, which considers the best evidence, but we will ask the Scottish national advisory group to consider the announcements made down south and what they mean for Scotland. The Scottish national advisory group is also undertaking a scoping exercise about lymphoedema services in Scotland, and I am happy to keep members informed about that.  Supported by £11 million of additional funding, two-view mammography is being rolled out nationally, and NHS boards are preparing to treat the additional breast cancer patients that will be diagnosed as a result of the programme. That partly answers Richard Simpson's point about accurate diagnosis. I am sure that everyone in the chamber agrees that women with breast cancer deserve the highest standard of care. That is why we have committed to ensure that patients have access to the most up-to-date treatments and technology, no matter where they live in Scotland. We have invested £4.1 million to support vital cancer research projects, some of which have a specific focus on breast cancer. There are currently 15 multicentre clinical trials on breast cancer, including the post-operative radiotherapy in minimum-risk elderly trial—PRIME II—which aims to assess clinically the role of post-operative breast radiotherapy. In Scotland, the PRIME II study is located in Edinburgh and supported by £145,000 of funding from the chief scientist office. I will speak now about living with cancer. The increase in the five-year survival rate is excellent news, but it means that more and more women are living with, and beyond, a breast cancer diagnosis, which presents new challenges for patients, carers and families. We are working with health care providers in both the statutory and voluntary sectors to find ways of empowering and supporting patients, giving them the confidence and tools to maintain the level of independence that they desire. In August, we hosted the big cancer conversation, an event for patients to tell us about issues that they are facing or have faced as a result of a cancer diagnosis. The outcomes from the event are being used to develop the work plan of the living with cancer group, which aims to address patients' physical, emotional, practical and financial needs post treatment. At the launch of "Better Cancer Care", we announced the Scottish Government's investment of £500,000 to extend Macmillan Cancer Support's work, including its network of benefits advice services and its trialling an employability programme to support people with cancer in returning to work when appropriate. Better treatment options, early detection and a successful breast cancer screening programme are reflected in Scotland's improving breast cancer survival rates. I am pleased to note that we are already exceeding our target to reduce overall cancer mortality by 20 per cent by 2010, and we are confident that the steps that we are taking will help us to aim even higher.  Despite the early successes, we are by no means complacent. We are working to raise awareness of the small changes that can be made in everyday life to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer. We very much recognise that there is work to do to target some harder-to-reach communities—and we are working on that. Of course, we would not be taking any of that action had it not been for the effort and contributions from patients, carers, voluntary groups, professional organisations and—importantly—NHS staff. I am very grateful for all their contributions, both in breast cancer awareness month and during the rest of the year.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

I thank Rhoda Grant for bringing an important motion to Parliament. I, too, congratulate Mr Thomas Bradley from Renfrewshire, who has been nominated for a Sunday Mail "Great Scot" unsung hero award. As Rhoda Grant said, he has donated blood 600 times in 40 years and is currently Scotland's top active donor. I think that he sets a wonderful example. The core business of the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service is to meet the transfusion needs of patients in Scotland. In order to ensure an adequate supply of blood to the NHS, it is essential that voluntary donations be kept at a level that will allow that. People lead busy lives, so  it is a constant challenge to the service to consider ways in which to transform the donation experience in order to make it more accessible and satisfying. The SNBTS strategy is to build into the blood donor base sufficient resilience to reverse the downward trend in blood donation, which Rhoda Grant identified, and to cope with the introduction of increasingly more donor exclusion criteria for safety reasons, to which Richard Simpson alluded. Some of the actions that are being undertaken in that regard include reaching out to new donors by a combination of very good publicity campaigns and marketing, using traditional and new media; adopting new computer systems that allows the SNBTS to interact better with existing donors; reviewing the locations of existing static donor centres to ensure that they are readily accessible and visible for donors; transforming the donation process by giving donors more choice about where, when and how they can donate blood, which is an issue that members have raised during the debate; considering whether additional fixed or semi-permanent donation centres across Scotland would be beneficial; significantly improving the donation experience by, for example, streamlining the donation process to minimise queuing and making better use of modern technology, such as e-mailing donors before sessions, and data handling during sessions to speed up the process; and exploring the potential to increase the opportunity to donate in the workplace. On the workplace, I note Rhoda Grant's wish that consideration be given by employers to giving staff paid time off to donate blood. I appreciate that her suggestion is well intentioned, but I think that we must be very cautious. We must be careful that we do not undermine the concept of voluntary donation as the main source of the safest blood supply. The World Health Organization identifies the need for blood donation to be based on the altruistic principle of voluntary unpaid donation, and describes that as "the cornerstone of blood safety." It is generally accepted that the definition of payment should be extended to any other incentive to give blood. The concerns that Nanette Milne outlined about giving staff paid time off are well founded. It is for that reason that any tokens of appreciation to blood donors by the SNBTS are of nominal value. The SNBTS has a proud history of voluntary donation, which will be celebrated during the service's 70 th anniversary in 2010. Evidence suggests that that is the best and safest method of blood collection. That is certainly our and the SNBTS's view. In June 2008, the service launched a new integrated marketing and communications strategy. Many members will have seen the  powerful advertisements on television or heard them on radio. I think that the radio ones are sometimes the most effective—they put across a very powerful message. Recent figures from the SNBTS indicate that the strategy's impact has been very effective—it has led to an increase of 70,000 new donors and the return of over 40,000 lapsed donors. In the Highlands, more than 4,000 new donors have been recruited, with more than 3,000 returning donors. Last year in the Highland Council region, 23,714 donors attended to give blood, which was an increase of 4 per cent on the previous year. The SNBTS is working closely with employers to encourage them to allow the SNBTS to undertake collections at or near the workplace. A number of employers are willing to shuttle staff to and from sessions at mobile centres near their location. Indeed, only recently, the mobile unit visited St Andrew's house, as it does regularly, and 63 donations were collected. The SNBTS is working with management in the private and public sector to investigate opportunities to form partnerships and to develop new blood donating opportunities within the workplace. Although early gains are likely, the service is aware of the need for a long-term approach to donation. It recognises that, during these difficult economic times, it will need to minimise any financial impact on employers who allow the service to visit company premises. The SNBTS and I ask for employers' continued support and endorsement of blood donation. The SNBTS is considering moving some donation centres from hospitals to city centres. The success of the Glasgow centre relocation in increasing donations shows the importance of footfall and the effect of a more convenient location. I am aware that some donor sessions in remote, rural and island communities have been discontinued over the years as attendance numbers fell below viable levels. The SNBTS is actively working with those communities to assess the possibility of organising or reintroducing such sessions in the future. The SNBTS has done a lot of work through its energy challenge in Aberdeen, which encouraged more than 400 organisations in the energy sector to support their staff in giving blood. I am sure that similar initiatives might be adopted in other sectors. The service is also exploring options to work more flexibly with smaller donor staff teams to make collection from smaller workforces viable. As members will be aware, the safety of the blood supply is of primary concern, so it is sometimes necessary to defer donors. That can lead to frustrations, especially when donors have waited patiently in a queue. The service is exploring options such as using e-mail or the web  to provide donors with information about reasons for deferral prior to donation, so that they can self-defer, which will save their own time and reduce queuing time for others. The service is also looking at how donors might be sent their donor session records to complete at home, in order to reduce queuing. Donors might also be allowed to book in via text messaging. All those developments will be important. We should also not forget the excellent work that has been undertaken to reduce the demand for blood through SNBTS-led education initiatives, such as the effective use of blood group, the better blood transfusion programme and the blood express project, which have reduced the demand from 45 per 1,000 of the population to 38 per 1,000. On the point that Richard Simpson asked about, in our discussions on the SNBTS as part of the annual review of NHS National Services Scotland, the issue of salvaged blood was raised and we were assured that the service is considering ways of addressing that.  In the longer term, the SNBTS plans to continue to build the donor base. The service estimates that it will need approximately 194,000 blood donors to secure enough blood for patients into the future. I am aware that 95 per cent of Scotland's population do not currently donate. We also face issues such as demographic change—there will be fewer donors to meet the needs of an ageing population with increased transfusion needs—and increased safety measures as science progresses. In the shorter term, we also face the possibility that the H1N1 virus will have an effect on the donor base. Therefore, I ask members to do all that they can within their constituencies to underpin the message from the SNBTS about encouraging volunteers to give blood. If that message comes out from tonight's debate, it will certainly have been a worthwhile debate.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

I accept that we would not want or expect businesses to diversify just like that. Is that not an argument to discuss the lead-in times that are required? Indeed, we have been keen to discuss those with businesses and to encourage them to diversify. For example, we have discussed the potential for changing a vending machine to a dispensing machine behind  the bar, which would perhaps deal with some of the security issues that other people have raised.

The member says that the law on tobacco is out of balance with alcohol legislation. Does she accept that the defence that it is reasonable to think that someone is over 18 is exactly the same provision as in the licensing laws? To be consistent, surely the member would want both laws to be the same.

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to open the debate on the general principles of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill. Before I turn to the substance of my speech, I have a number of people to thank: the organisations and individuals who helped to shape the legislative proposals; Christine Grahame and the Health and Sport Committee for their careful and robust scrutiny of our proposals and the considered conclusions in the stage 1 report; the many witnesses who provided evidence to the committee; and colleagues on the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their considerations. The bill will reform two areas of health legislation: it will update statutory controls on the sale and display of tobacco and smoking-related products, and it will amend and clarify the eligibility criteria for providers of primary medical services. I do not need to remind members of the health risks that are associated with tobacco smoking. Suffice to say, the evidence of those risks is clear and irrefutable. Smoking kills and debilitates. Each day, 35 Scots die from smoking-related illnesses—lives are destroyed and families are devastated. Those are the tragic and completely avoidable consequences of illness and disease caused by tobacco. Significant progress has been made in recent years in reducing the cultural acceptability of smoking, including through the bold and decisive action taken by the Parliament. Everyone in the Parliament should be proud that our actions have made Scotland a world leader in tobacco control. However, there can be no let up, because there is more to be done. Some 15,000 children and young people start to smoke each year in Scotland, and the potential impact on their health is frightening. A child who starts smoking at 15 or younger is three times more likely to die of cancer than someone who starts smoking in their mid-20s. Of course, we will continue to help smokers to quit but, as Minister for Public Health and Sport, I believe that we have a duty to act decisively to prevent children and young people from starting to  smoke in the first place, so that they and future generations of young Scots might avoid the devastating consequences that have robbed so many people of their loved ones. The measures in the bill are firmly embedded in our vision for improved public health in Scotland. They form part of the comprehensive programme that was set out in the smoking prevention action plan that I launched in the Parliament in May last year. More specifically, they are aimed at reducing the attractiveness and availability of tobacco by banning the display of cigarettes and other tobacco products at points of sale; updating existing tobacco sales law, including the introduction of a ban on selling cigarettes from vending machines; introducing a new registration scheme for tobacco retailers; and creating a new system of fixed-penalty notices for breaches of the law. I sensed when I launched the smoking prevention action plan that there was broad agreement within the Parliament for further action to reduce smoking among children and young people. I sense the same feeling now. We might differ, of course, on what form that action should take. I appreciate that there are different views both inside and outside the Parliament. For example, there are those who remain unconvinced about the justification for some of the measures in the bill, particularly the banning of displays and of selling cigarettes from vending machines. However, point-of-sale advertising—which undoubtedly is what displays are—is a powerful marketing tool. I believe that it is totally inappropriate for such a uniquely dangerous product to be promoted in such a way. Similarly, I can see no place in a modern Scotland for cigarette vending machines. The fundamental question is whether tobacco is an appropriate product to sell from a vending machine. The Scottish Government's view is that it is not. I stress, however, that the decision to legislate on those and other matters in the bill was not taken lightly. We were conscious, from the full regulatory impact assessment that was undertaken, that the legislation would have an impact on business. More specifically, we were aware that the ban on displays would have cost implications for retailers and that the ban on cigarette sales from vending machines might jeopardise the future viability of the 15 companies involved in that sector.

The financial memorandum was based on the best available evidence at the time. I assure the member that officials went out of their way to consult the companies involved. They tried on numerous occasions to contact the National Association of Cigarette Machine Operators, without a positive conclusion, and they had discussions with Sinclair Collis. However, only latterly did they manage to have discussions with NACMO, which led to the information that 60 jobs are involved. I assure the member that the provision of that information did not happen without effort on our part. Of course, any job losses or costs to business are regrettable and not to be taken lightly, but that is also the case for the enormous personal and economic burdens that smoking inflicts on Scotland. As I said at the outset, tobacco kills and debilitates. We have a duty to the Scottish people to act decisively to prevent future generations from suffering the distress that it causes.

I think that we have been clear about specialist retailers. There have been many meetings and discussions about such shops. Of course, there is the requirement for 50 per cent of their products to be tobacco products. Discussion has taken place around that, and it will continue. Further, while wishing to do nothing to undermine our stated policy objectives for the bill, members have my assurance that we will continue to work closely with Scottish companies that are affected to minimise the impact of the legislation through providing, for example, longer lead-in times and diversification opportunities. It is worth reminding members that forces are at work that perhaps have a vested interest in undermining our tobacco control efforts in order to recruit new smokers and to maintain the numbers of existing ones. For example, I have no doubt that some of the fears about shop closures resulting from the display ban have been by driven by those who seek to protect their own business interests—namely, the tobacco companies.

I must move on. I have already given way to the member. My only motive, on the other hand, as Minister for Public Health and Sport is to protect young Scots of today and future generations from the  harmful effects of tobacco. I am therefore pleased that the majority of the Health and Sport Committee agreed with the Scottish Government on these matters and, indeed, with the tobacco provisions in general. The Health and Sport Committee's stage 1 report highlights a number of matters on which I have been asked to report back to the committee before stage 2, and makes a number of recommendations on amendments for us to consider. I appreciate the rationale for all the points that are raised in the stage 1 report, including those that were flagged up by the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Essentially, I have an open mind about anything that might improve the bill, so I am happy to commit to considering carefully and sympathetically each of those points and to reporting back to the Health and Sport Committee with a considered view before stage 2. However, there is one issue that it might be helpful for me to address more specifically in this debate. The Health and Sport Committee's report emphasises its desire to bring tobacco sales law more into line with that of alcohol, including by introducing new offences on proxy purchases and underage purchases. As I said in my evidence to the committee—and as I reaffirm today—I am happy to consider amending the bill in those respects. I understand that such significant changes would be within the scope of the bill, but I need to be satisfied that they would be otherwise compliant, including from the perspective of the European convention on human rights. We also want to complete the consultations that are under way with key interests, including children and young people. I turn briefly to the primary medical services provisions in part 2 of the bill, the aims and objectives of which are clear. We wish to ensure that general practice in Scotland continues to be part of a mutual national health service. General practice is, of course, something special. It lies at the heart of the NHS and accounts for the majority of patient contacts. The patient's relationship with their general practitioner is very private and personal. General practice deals with the most important of life's events, so the care and treatment that patients receive from their GP largely determines their confidence in the NHS. Again, we will carefully consider the points that are raised in the committee's stage 1 report. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is leading on that part of the bill, and when she closes this debate she will no doubt address any issues that members highlight. I have great pleasure in moving, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with the COSLA through a series of working groups to improve the clarity and strategic implementation of the free personal and nursing care policy. Some £40 million in additional funding has been provided to local authorities from 1 April to deliver a package of measures to stabilise the policy in the immediate term.

On the issue of refunds, the cabinet secretary made it clear to the Parliament on 7 May last year that our intention was to introduce revised legislation to clarify the issue of charging for food preparation from April 2009. That is exactly what we did. I turn to the response, or lack of response, from COSLA. I am afraid that I cannot take responsibility for COSLA's actions, but I am sure that it will take due regard of David McLetchie's comments. I can say something about our on-going discussions with COSLA, however. As I said in two replies to parliamentary questions from the  member—the first on 27 July and the second on 27 August—we continue to work with relevant parties including COSLA in considering any impact that the judgment may have on current and future delivery of the free personal and nursing care policy. I assure David McLetchie that the discussions are continuing.

I assure Gil Paterson that we continue to raise concerns on the attendance allowance with the United Kingdom Government. We still believe that the money belongs to Scotland—to our older people—and that it should never have been removed from Scotland. Given that the UK Government has published a green paper on the future of social care and benefits such as the attendance allowance, changes to which will have major implications in Scotland, we will take the opportunity to continue to press it on the issue.

It is not currently possible to have a waiting time guarantee for IVF as national health service boards do not report this information to the information services division as the patient data belong to the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority. Scottish Government officials are in preliminary discussions with colleagues in the ISD to consider whether it is possible to develop definitions and data to enable the reporting of patient access to infertility services without breaching Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority guidelines.

The issue is a long-standing one. The Government has begun to take action for the first time on waiting times for IVF treatment. I believe that NHS boards are always looking for ways to reduce waiting times in this area. For example, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has reduced the waiting time between referral and the first out-patient appointment from approximately one year to six months. We should welcome that progress. There is more work to be done. We expect that the work that the Infertility Network Scotland is undertaking on behalf of the Government will help to address the complex and long-standing issues that are involved in waiting times for IVF treatment.

I recognise that there is a mixed picture across Scotland. Some boards, including NHS Borders, NHS Dumfries and Galloway and NHS Lanarkshire, have invested to reduce waiting times. In our work with the Infertility Network Scotland, we are focusing on the boards with the longest waiting times in order to ensure that there is a reduction in waiting times in those areas. In response to Jackie Baillie's question, I underlined some of the complexities of developing a waiting time target in future, but we will keep the matter under consideration.

No more than it would have when Helen Eadie's party was in government, I suspect. These are long-standing issues; I am sure that Helen Eadie has raised them over a number of years. However, the Government has begun to make the area a priority for the first time.  I have no evidence to suggest that that was done previously, but I am sure that Helen Eadie will correct me if I am wrong. That cannot be achieved overnight—it will take time—but the measures that we are putting in place, which I outlined in answer to the two previous questions, are the right way forward and will deliver results in Helen Eadie's area and elsewhere.

NHS Scotland, as a provider of services, is subject to equality legislation, which requires the provision of services that are accessible to everyone. Guidance entitled "Achieving fair access" has been produced for  health boards regarding the implementation of part 3 of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which requires service providers to make reasonable adjustments for disabled people in accessing goods, facilities, services and premises.

I understand that brief guidance is issued with out-patient appointment cards, and that the NHS Grampian website provides advice on parking at the Aberdeen royal infirmary site, which includes details of drop-off points and parking for people who have disabilities and provides the telephone number of the hospital concourse reception for anyone who needs advice on access to the hospital by car. I also understand that there has been extensive public involvement in the Foresterhill master plan and that NHS Grampian is doing work on wayfinding and signage. I am sure that, after the public consultation, the board will come up with measures that take cognisance of the needs of people who have a disability.

The audiology modernisation programme is delivering significant improvements to patients. All national health service boards can now fit digital hearing aids as standard. Central investment, which totals £19 million, has improved the equipment, infrastructure, staffing levels and training of staff throughout Scotland to deliver that service. All NHS boards are working towards meeting the 18-week referral-to-fitting target by 2011 and it is anticipated that they will meet the target. The current status will be published on the information services division website in November 2009.

I commend the work of the NDCS. Much good work is going on in adult and paediatric audiology and we are reaping the benefits of investment and the hard efforts of people on the front line. I am happy to provide that assurance and to discuss the detail of the issue with the member, if he wants me to do so.

I understand the point that Jeremy Purvis makes. We hope that health boards and providers of public services in general look to remove any barriers to communication whatever they may be. The NHS has put a lot of effort into doing so, but there is certainly more work to be done. Sometimes, it is simple things, such as putting a bit of thought into appointments and general communication. With a bit of thought, things can be achieved that make it much easier for patients.

The Scottish Government values all staff. NHS Scotland is committed to improving continuously the fair and effective management of staff through, for example, staff governance, which is placed on an equal footing with clinical and financial governance. As the Minister for Public Health and Sport, I meet representatives from the care commission regularly and we are satisfied that the care commission has appropriately skilled and qualified staff to carry out its range of regulatory responsibilities.

I am sure that Irene Oldfather is aware that, under agenda for change terms and conditions, NHS employers have the discretion to take into account any periods of employment with employers outside the NHS when those are judged to be relevant to NHS employment. Nevertheless, I hear what she is saying and acknowledge her concerns. I am happy to look into the matter further, as she has requested.

I reassure Christina McKelvie that we expect good practice to be followed. The example that she has cited is a good one. The matters that she raises, like those that Irene Oldfather raised, relate to agenda for change and I am happy to take them up with the care commission.

What is different between that and the eight years in which the Labour Administration failed to deliver two hours of PE, which was a commitment from 1999? In our two years in power, what does the member believe that we could have done that his party failed to do in eight years? Does not that reflect—if the  member is being fair—what a challenge the target is?

I am pleased to be able to respond to the Health and Sport Committee's report into pathways into sport and would always describe the committee as influential. The debate provides Parliament with an important opportunity to come together to discuss the key issues that arise from the report—which the convener has laid out—and for me to outline the work to which the Government is committed as we work towards ensuring that young people of all abilities have the opportunity to experience physical activity and sport throughout their lifetime. I welcome the report, as it supports the Government's ambitions for increasing participation in physical activity and sport and will be critical to the successful delivery of our legacy plan from the 2014 Commonwealth games, which was launched on 1 September 2009. The report makes a number of recommendations, which we have considered. The Government has submitted a comprehensive response to the committee, but I am pleased to be able to highlight a number of key responses. We agree that the provision of quality PE to every school pupil can make a significant contribution towards our young people developing a lifetime commitment to physical activity. As Christine Grahame mentioned, the curriculum for excellence experiences and outcomes for health and wellbeing include the clear expectation that schools will work towards the provision of at least two hours of good-quality physical education for every child every week. We acknowledge the efforts of every individual school to make progress towards the entitlement of two hours of PE, but continue to urge them to achieve that goal at the earliest opportunity.

Quality PE is PE that is delivered by someone who is competent to deliver it. We have been making strides in ensuring that primary school classroom teachers have the ability and confidence—because, sometimes, it is a matter of confidence—to deliver PE. Within the secondary sector, we have specific PE teachers. Although they work within the secondary sector, they can also be an important support for the primary clusters that are allied to their schools.

I want to make some progress but will give way in a minute. My colleague the Minister for Schools and Skills met a number of local authorities during the summer months and received positive responses regarding their progress towards the target. In its meetings with local authorities, the Government has emphasised its commitment to two hours of good-quality PE and every local authority has made a commitment to adopt the curriculum for excellence through the 2009 single outcome agreement process. We should remember that two hours of PE is the only component across the curriculum that has an input target. That reflects the Government's commitment to delivery. In turn, the target will be inspected by HMIE to monitor delivery. In his closing remarks, Keith Brown will say more about it and provide further background to his meetings and discussions with local authorities. The committee made a specific recommendation that, at an appropriate age, a physical literacy assessment should be conducted for all pupils to ensure that, by the time children reach secondary school, they have the necessary skills to learn specific sports. It also recommended that pupil report cards should refer to a pupil's physical literacy skills. The Government is committed to developing a greater understanding of physical literacy through specific experiences and outcomes in health and wellbeing and will provide a continuous and progressive focus on physical literacy as children and young people progress through the curriculum. Teachers in both primary and secondary schools have responsibilities to conduct rigorous, robust, assessment, to identify and report on issues at an early stage, and to address any problems that arise. The new assessment framework will be broader and more challenging than a single, narrow snapshot of evidence that is generated by testing.

Presumably for the same reasons that Mr McAveety did not do so when he was the minister with responsibility for sport. I presume that his Government also recognised the limitations of a single snapshot and realised that we should require progress to be made on physical literacy throughout the school years. I am not convinced that a snapshot would be appropriate. When would be the best time to take it? There are various arguments around that, but I am not convinced that that is the right approach. We will continue to have the debate, but I believe that we can achieve the same outcome in a different way within what is a fairly comprehensive change to the way in which we deliver education through the curriculum for excellence. We should allow that to pay the dividends that I believe it will pay. The active schools programme has been a huge success in providing a range of opportunities for children and young people to experience physical activity and sport in primary and secondary schools. Government has invested £12 million a year since 2004, at first under the previous Executive, to develop active schools throughout every local authority. The programme is making significant progress in delivering a wide range of new sport and physical activities in and around the school day and is having a considerable impact on participation rates. Of course, that activity is over and above the two hours of physical education that are undertaken as part of the curriculum for excellence. The importance of the active schools programme should not be underestimated. In 2007-08, it was operational in 2,493 state schools throughout Scotland's 32 local authorities and it delivered some 350,000 activity sessions that covered an extensive range of interests from the more traditional sports of rugby and hockey to activities such as Scottish dance and organised playground games. Activities are organised in response to interest that is expressed by the young people themselves and they take place in and around the school day, with over half taking place immediately after school and the rest at lunch time, break time, before and during the school day, in the evenings or at weekends. The Government, along with sportscotland, is committed to the continuing development of the active schools programme to ensure its long-term sustainability. I know that the committee focused on that, and also that it recommended the hosting of a conference to agree how the programme will be taken forward to 2011. Sportscotland's partnership managers work closely with local  authorities to support and develop the active schools network. As part of the training and support programme, sportscotland delivers a biennial conference for members of staff who are involved in delivering the active schools programme. Sportscotland is reviewing the format of that and it is happy to look at the committee's recommendation.

That is what I was referring to when I mentioned our commitment to ensuring that the programme is sustainable in the long term. It is an important programme and we want it to continue. I recognise the committee's concerns about the matter and we will endeavour to work through it with local authorities. I turn to local sports development. The Government supports the development within each local authority area of sport and physical activity strategies that encompass the provision of opportunities for all communities to participate. Those strategies should also reflect the need for the provision of a facility network, provision of sports pitches and training areas, and the development of the volunteer and coaching workforce to support the development and the club infrastructure. We recognise that local authorities have different paces when it comes to the provision of physical activity and sport. However, a unique opportunity exists to support the development of those strategies and the desired increase in participation through more effective communication across the sporting infrastructure, better evidence, and the sharing of the many examples of good practice that exist, some of which have been mentioned. The Government will support sportscotland in the development of the increased opportunities to be set out in sports strategies within authorities. In doing so, we will ensure that the needs of children and young people with disabilities, who are often the most vulnerable and excluded members of our society, are fully considered and included in the development of such strategies at national and local level. The opportunities in the 2014 Commonwealth games legacy plan should allow us to accelerate progress on the implementation of national and local strategies for physical activity and sport. Improving the nation's health is the overarching theme of the legacy plan. Central to that theme is the development of two key initiatives within the active Scotland component of the plan that are  aimed at increasing the availability and accessibility of physical activity and sport for individuals and communities. In turn, that will help to improve the health and fitness of our people. One of those initiatives is the active nation programme, which aims to create a popular and high-profile movement to motivate people of all ages across Scotland to become more active. The other is the development of a network of community sports hubs. The vision is of a network whereby we can transform the belief in, demand for and delivery of a high-quality community sport system for Scottish people and communities. For school pupils who need a clear pathway into sport and for people who just want to take part, the hubs will provide a way of bringing people together as never before in a systematic manner across Scotland. That is being driven by the Scottish Government—

The impact of the sports hubs cannot be underestimated. They will be backed up by the £25.5 million that has been earmarked for the legacy. I am delighted to stand here to present the Government's response to the committee's report and to discuss further with Parliament the key issues and recommendations, many of which we are happy to take forward.

The Scottish Government is clear that there is no place for any form of discrimination in Scottish society. We are already working with our education partners to support a number of initiatives aimed at stamping out racism. The learning programmes to be delivered in the months leading up to the Commonwealth games will give us a further opportunity to do so.

I will write to Hugh O'Donnell specifically about the £2.9 million from the immigration impact fund. We have undertaken a number of initiatives. There is the important on-going work of the one Scotland message. A number of things have happened recently, such as the rock against racism gigs, which the member may have attended—I am sure that the gigs have been very good. It is important to get the message across in different ways. The Commonwealth games provides us with a unique opportunity to do more on the issue of racism because of the links that can be made by communities and schools with the various Commonwealth countries that are taking part. A lot of work is happening, and there are many opportunities to do more.

I very much agree. The volunteering opportunities of the Commonwealth games are enormous—15,000 volunteers are required. Those opportunities will give people in our more deprived communities the chance to develop their education and skills. As I mentioned previously, the games will also allow communities to make links that will develop up to 2014—and beyond, I hope—and to improve their understanding of the cultures of other countries. Schoolchildren in particular will be able to take advantage of that.

It is important that people from all backgrounds and cultures are involved in the organisation of the Commonwealth games. We want to draw from all communities—not just in Glasgow but beyond—for the volunteering opportunities that I mentioned. The international spirit of the games gives us an opportunity to break down some of the barriers that, sadly, still exist in Scotland.

No specific evaluations have been commissioned on the impact of single outcome agreements on the third sector or on services provided by the third sector. The Scottish Government has commissioned research on how the third sector is responding to the new opportunities and challenges arising from its new relationship with the public sector; that research was commissioned with the engagement of the third sector and public sector partners.

I will say a little more about the research. It will consider not only changes that have resulted from the concordat but planned policy changes, such as the simplification of the scrutiny landscape and reducing the number of public bodies. The research will give us a lot of information about the positive impact on the third sector and could pick up any challenges, too. The research will track 20 voluntary organisations for five years. On funding, there is no doubt that, given some of the financial challenges that are coming the Scottish Government's way, which are partly—or in the main—due to the £500 million of cuts emanating from Westminster, Tom McCabe and others cannot escape the fact that the budget reduction will have an impact across the whole of society. He must recognise that, and perhaps he should make representations elsewhere to prevent it from happening in the first place.

I welcome the many positive contributions that have been made during this important debate. Members have shown their knowledge of the issues and their compassion for those who have dementia and the people who care for them. It is clear that there are no easy solutions and that the improvement of services requires hard work and, to quote Tom McCabe, action. We have already begun that work in advance of the publication of a dementia strategy, the strands of which I outlined in my opening speech. We have worked with the dementia forum and others to identify and take forward work to improve services. I have acknowledged before and acknowledge again the work that has been done by Irene Oldfather and the cross-party group on Alzheimer's. I look forward to the outcome of their work on a charter of rights for people with dementia and will be happy to discuss that work with them further in due course.  As many members have mentioned, we have in place a national HEAT target for the NHS, which is to increase the number of people with dementia who have a diagnosis and are recorded on GP registers. As many members have said, diagnosis is important as it gives access to other services, such as physical health check-ups, carer assessments, treatment and medication, where that is required. Diagnosis was not always seen as valuable; for too long, clinicians and others were reluctant to diagnose because they believed that little could be done to respond to dementia effectively. Similarly, people themselves were reluctant to seek diagnosis because, although they could readily identify the challenges that it could bring, such as exclusion, stigma and the potential loss of freedoms such as holding a driving licence—a point to which Christine Grahame referred—they could not see the benefits. I think that the situation is changing and we have recently completed a pilot media campaign in Dundee, which was focused on raising public awareness of dementia. The outcomes of that pilot suggest that, with information and signposting, people are more likely to seek help earlier. I will take into consideration Maureen Watt's suggestion that we produce a leaflet that is similar to the stroke leaflet that has been distributed. As Richard Simpson pointed out, the evidence shows that seeking help earlier results in people maintaining capability and capacity for longer and it allows them to stay in their own home, in familiar surroundings, for longer. It also allows the health and care systems to work with carers to enable them to manage the process for longer and with less stress. As many members have pointed out during the debate, information and support for people with dementia and their carers are crucial. We are still learning about the best ways to organise and deliver post-diagnostic support and information. We have commissioned three local projects, which are being led by Alzheimer Scotland and the dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling, exploring different approaches to providing interventions, support and information following first diagnosis. The projects are taking place in Renfrewshire, Shetland and Lothian and we will use them to learn how best to organise and provide post-diagnostic support. We have also updated and published "Coping with Dementia—a practical handbook for carers" as well as "Worried about your memory?" and "Facing Dementia: how to live well with your diagnosis", and we are making those publications available throughout Scotland. Those are high- quality resources that have been produced in association with service user organisations and which I hope will help people who have had a diagnosis. As I said in my opening speech, our work on dementia overlaps and interacts with other work, such as our work on palliative care, carers, self-directed care and shifting the balance of care and the work that we are doing collaboratively with local government on the future of care for older people. Jackson Carlaw was right to point out that that will require an honest discussion with the public about the role of the state, the family and the community in the care of older people.

I turn to some of the other points that have been made during the debate. Cathy Jamieson mentioned the role of Alzheimer Scotland, which is, of course, a key leading organisation in taking the strategy forward. The consultation that it undertook is forming part of the consideration that the work streams are taking forward. Ross Finnie said that we needed to move quickly on some of the issues in "Remember, I'm still me". I reassure him that I speedily met the care commission and the Mental Welfare Commission to put in train action that will deal with some of the immediate issues, and that work is continuing. Mary Scanlon made a number of points. The one that I want to pick up on was about GP practices being linked to care homes. We are getting better at that. The Royal College of General Practitioners is keen, and it proactively approached me to talk about how it can help to facilitate that. That work is also continuing. Christine Grahame mentioned the chief scientist office funding of more than £1 million over the next three years to aid research into dementia. That is important on two fronts. It might help us to find a cure, and the fact that that work and research is going on also gives families hope. I confirm to Sandra White that the older people's assembly will be able to feed its comments into the strategy. Maureen Watt mentioned the training of paid and unpaid carers, which is indeed important. Many members mentioned the lack of mental stimulation, which is another important area. We have funded the elderflowers initiative, which is an innovative programme that goes into hospitals and other care settings to work with people with dementia. If members have not seen it in action, I suggest that they do so, because it does amazing work.  I reassure Ian McKee that the involvement of dementia service users and carers is important and they are represented in each of the five work streams.

I told Lewis Macdonald in writing that that is a matter for local resolution, which is the view that he would have taken when he was a minister with the same responsibilities that I have now. I reiterate Maureen Watt's point about the Rubislaw Park care home, which is run by crossreach and which provides excellent care. I would have thought that Lewis Macdonald would welcome that. I am proud to have been able to open and close this afternoon's debate on a dementia strategy. I welcome the support for the work that was offered by members in all parts of the chamber. I welcome their comments and challenges, which are based on a shared commitment to seek the best for people with dementia and their carers in Scotland. Let us get on with the job in hand. I certainly look forward to working with members as we do so.

It is weeks.

It might help Mary Scanlon to understand the target if I explain that it is linked to the number of people with a diagnosis of a dementia on the GP dementia register. The onus is then on the GP, with monitoring from the health board, to ensure that there is a regular review and assessment. That ensures that the person is known about and that their case is managed.

I am pleased to open this debate on dementia for the Scottish Government, and I welcome the representation from all parties in the chamber. I recognise the support that all members offer to those with dementia and their carers. Dementia is an illness that usually develops slowly. It causes impaired memory, thinking and judgment. It predominantly affects those over 60 and is a major cause of disability for elderly people. If people live longer in Scotland, more people will be affected by it. We project that the number of people with dementia will increase from around 70,000 in 2009 to 127,000 in 2031. Therefore, the number will close to double in just over 20 years. Nearly every person who has or develops dementia will have a partner, children and friends, whose lives may also be transformed by the onset of the illness. It is estimated in work done by the European Union that, for each person with dementia, on average three other people are directly affected. It is a life-changing event for everyone who is concerned with their care. The illness will affect all of us, either directly or indirectly. People with dementia require a range of services over the course of the illness, from initial information and support following diagnosis, to more intense treatment and care in the community, and to residential and long-stay care in some cases. The cost of that care is not insignificant. Alzheimer Scotland suggests that the overall cost of dementia in 2007 was between £1.5 billion and £1.7 billion, which is an average of £25,000 per person per year. Those figures include the costs of national health service and social work care, housing and the significant and valuable informal care that is provided by family and friends. The Government gave a commitment to make dementia a national priority for Scotland, and we have been working to make that a reality. That commitment is reflected in our national target on early diagnosis, in our funding of activity on post-diagnostic support and the raising of public awareness and in the guidance that has been issued on care in acute and accident and emergency settings. We are committed to  publishing a dementia strategy for Scotland next spring, and I am keen to hear the views of Parliament as we take that work forward. The work to develop the strategy is already well under way, with five work streams that focus on different aspects of the improvement challenge that we face. The first work stream is consideration of how we can offer effective treatment and manage challenging behaviour without inappropriate recourse to anti-psychotic medication. The work stream directly responds to the issues that were raised in the "Remember, I'm still me" report, which was published earlier this year by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. It will also consider the effective implementation of part 5 of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which the Parliament passed to protect the rights of those who lack capacity. The second work stream focuses on assessment, diagnosis and patient pathways. It builds on the work that is already under way in taking forward integrated care pathways for dementia and the work that is being pursued with health boards and general practice on early diagnosis. It considers both the different services that will be required by a patient over time and the process by which they move through the system. The third work stream will consider the general service response to dementia when people with dementia come into contact with general health services. We know that accident and emergency services can respond poorly to people with dementia and that people with dementia are more likely to be admitted inappropriately. Similarly, the care that people with dementia receive in general hospital settings is not always of the standard that we would like it to be. We believe that we can improve systems, skills and knowledge and, through those improvements, produce better outcomes for people with dementia. The fourth work stream focuses on rights, dignity and personalisation. It is a key area for improvement, as it brings together both the legal context and the culture and behaviours of the people who provide care and treatment for those who have dementia. Our objective is to improve the knowledge and understanding of those who provide services so that they are better able to maintain people's dignity and provide more humane care and treatment. We want to embed the idea of personalisation into services, so that people will continue to see the person and not the disease. We also want to explore how we might use standards more effectively to promote quality improvement and how we can use the new scrutiny arrangements in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill and the arrangements that  will be brought forward under the proposed patients' rights bill to secure better outcomes for those who have dementia. The fifth work stream is consideration of health improvement, public attitudes and stigma. We know that some health improvement activities that people can engage in, such as taking exercise and being careful about what they eat and drink, reduce the likelihood of developing some, although not all, forms of dementia. We also know that work on the physical health of those who have dementia will improve both their life expectancy and their quality of life. Beyond that, the work on stigma and public awareness will contribute to the creation of a society in which those who have dementia and their carers are not shunned, ignored and misunderstood but regarded with respect and compassion.

I was going to say that all the issues and comments that are raised during the debate will be fed into the work on the strategy to ensure that they are responded to and considered appropriately by all the groups and organisations that are involved in that on-going work. Finally, I should mention that the work to develop the strategy is also supported by the mental health benchmarking project, which is already in place. The benchmarking project will develop our understanding of activity and performance data in relation to services for those with dementia. We have established those work streams following consultation with the cross-sector dementia forum, which I established in 2007. We believe that they reflect the main challenges that we face, but they are not intended to constrain or exclude consideration of other issues. Indeed, we agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other partners earlier this year to take forward a strategy for reshaping care services for older people, and progress with that—which I will bring to Parliament later this year—will tie in closely with the work to develop the dementia strategy. We are committed to issuing a short consultation paper by the end of this month, and we will use that to support engagement across the country on the issue of dementia to ensure that the strategy that we produce reflects the challenges and expectations of the nation.  As I said earlier, I am keen to hear today the issues that are on members' minds and to learn what members want us to take account of in the production of the strategy. I know that many MSPs have direct experience of caring for people with dementia, as well as the knowledge that comes from helping constituents through the health and care system. I assure members that the comments from this debate will be fed into the work streams. I am happy to accept the Liberal Democrats' amendment, which quite rightly focuses on standards of care. I am also happy to commit to producing the strategy by April 2010. I ask members to reflect on whether the Labour amendment is in danger of pre-empting the work streams and the consultation. Given my assurance that the comments that are made during what I hope will be a consensual debate today will be fed into the process, I am not sure that it is helpful to focus the strategy on particular areas at this stage when those issues will be debated and discussed as part of the on-going work on the strategy. We have embarked on a shared endeavour, which we are taking forward with clinicians, carers and those with dementia. We know that the outcome will be richer because we are taking that approach. I am keen to be as inclusive as I can be. Each of the work streams is chaired by someone from one of the organisations that we are working with, and we have not constrained them with regard to who they can work with or what they can consider. We will play our part in committing to providing leadership on this work. There will be hard decisions to make: we cannot do everything all of the time, and resources are finite. We know that change takes work and time. Improving how a whole system works and orientating it to the needs and interests of the individual service user—the personalisation objective—is a huge endeavour. As I said at the outset, we have established dementia care as a national priority in Scotland. That commitment must be measured against the improvement in the quality of care that people with dementia experience. We are committed to delivering on that commitment, and I call on the Parliament to support us in that work. I move, That the Parliament recognises the work that is being taken forward by the Scottish Government to establish dementia as a national priority, working in partnership with the NHS, local government, voluntary sector organisations such as Alzheimer's Scotland, the Scottish Dementia Working Group, regulatory and scrutiny bodies including the Mental Welfare Commission, the Social Work Inspection Agency and the Care Commission and experts from the Dementia Services Development Centre at the University of Stirling, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Royal College of General Practitioners and the Royal  College of Nursing to improve the care, treatment and support available to those with dementia and their carers and welcomes the commitment to publish a dementia strategy for Scotland in spring 2010.

I acknowledge David Stewart's long-standing commitment to the issue in the Parliament. As members have said, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing noted in her reply to the debate last year that the Parliament would want to monitor the issue closely. This afternoon's debate shows that she was correct in that prediction. I fully understand the concern of the insulin pump awareness group and Diabetes UK Scotland that those who would benefit should have access to insulin pump therapy. We know that enabling people to achieve better control of their diabetes can promote confidence in their ability to manage their condition and that improved control reduces the devastating complications of diabetes, which members have mentioned. I am also aware that we are, in the main, talking about young people with type 1 diabetes, who have to manage their condition along with all the other things that they have to cope with, especially during adolescence. I can well sympathise with the anxieties of their parents, who naturally want to ensure that their children are getting the best possible care. For all those reasons, it is already our national policy that each NHS board should have an insulin strategy that covers the full range of insulin usage,  including insulin pump therapy. Ross Finnie made the important point that an insulin strategy must cover all the issues, including communication with patients. We expect NHS boards, in considering their approach to insulin pump therapy, to be guided by the latest evidence on clinical effectiveness. As members have mentioned, that is set out in technology appraisal guidance 151, which was published in July 2008 by NICE and has been validated for Scotland by NHS QIS. Under that technology appraisal guidance, insulin pump therapy should be considered as an option for adults and for children over 12 when multiple dose insulin therapy has failed. I take the point that some members have made about insulin pumps not being used only in response to the failure of other therapies. I will go back and have discussions on that point. Pumps are recommended as a possible treatment for children under 12 with type 1 diabetes if treatment with multiple daily injections is not practical. Despite the concerns that have been raised, which I totally understand, access to pumps in Scotland has improved, although at a more gradual rate than many would like to see—I accept that. As members have pointed out, there are unacceptable variations between NHS boards in terms of the availability of pumps. So, although we have seen, I think, a 66 per cent rise in the use of pumps throughout Scotland since 2007, the baseline figure was unacceptably low and a lot of progress still requires to be made. I have asked the Scottish diabetes group to keep me regularly informed of progress, and I will write to NHS boards, reminding them of the need to make progress.

I will come on to the framework in a minute. Some of the credit for the progress that has been made—albeit that there is still more to do—must be given to the measures that we and the Scottish diabetes group have put in place. Chief among those is the regular reporting of the position on a board-by-board basis. Pump availability is a standing item on the agenda of the regular meetings that our lead clinician for diabetes has with the clinical leads of the diabetes managed clinical networks. The measures also include events such as the very successful insulin pump study day, which the Scottish diabetes group organised in May. The event brought together more than 60 health care  professionals to learn more about insulin pumps from patients, specialists and suppliers. I welcome the fact that other such events are likely to be held in future years. It is at such events that we can perhaps address some of the points that Hugh Henry raised about the differing views among clinicians. We acknowledge the need to do more, though, and there are a number of opportunities to do so. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network is reviewing its guideline on the management of diabetes. I do not want to pre-empt SIGN's work, but the indications are that its advice is likely to be much in line with the NICE technology appraisal. The revised guideline will be accompanied by a resource impact appraisal. That should clearly establish for NHS boards the costs and benefits of further investment in insulin pump therapy over and above other insulin therapies, and encourage them to develop their insulin pump provision appropriately. The Scottish diabetes group's short-life working group on type 1 diabetes is developing a template for insulin strategies that will help to promote consistency of approach at board level. The availability of insulin pumps within each board will be recorded in the Scottish diabetes survey from this year onwards. That will help to formalise the collection of information on insulin pump usage across Scotland, allow boards to compare their progress with progress in other boards and enable the Government to carefully monitor that progress. That approach will be supplemented by Diabetes UK Scotland's plans for its pump up the volume campaign, through which it will ask NHS boards to ensure that those who would benefit from a pump are not denied access. The campaign will ask boards to indicate the level of resources that they will allocate to pump provision over the next five years. The Scottish diabetes group is aware of the need to develop a standard approach to calculating the waiting times for access to insulin pump therapy, which is one of the other issues that is covered by the motion. It needs to be made clear, at the very least, whether the waiting time includes waiting for the essential education and training that are required before someone is able to manage a pump. Insulin pump therapy and structured education are two of the key issues that are discussed in the consultation document on the revision of the 2006 diabetes action plan, which I launched in May this year. That revision gives us the chance to pull together all this work. The consultation specifically asked for thoughts on how the appropriate availability of pumps should be increased, and what support structures need to be in place to ensure that insulin pump therapy is fully effective.  The word "appropriate" was included deliberately, because we need to be a little bit cautious in this area. Insulin pump therapy requires determination and commitment on the part of the person with diabetes. It does not inevitably lead to better control of blood glucose levels. Children, in particular, need continuing care, especially during the transition through adolescence and into adulthood. The choice of insulin regime should be reached by agreement between the person with type 1 diabetes and the team supporting their care—I think that that was one of the points that Ross Finnie made. In framing the section of the revised action plan that deals with insulin pump therapy, I can give a guarantee that we will take account of those responses, as well as the points that have been made in the debate. I am happy to come back to Parliament to inform members of that information. Richard Simpson asked a number of questions, and I will ensure that he gets answers to them. I will make those answers available to others, too, if they would find that helpful.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

I have information on Ayrshire and Arran, which the member might find useful. As I understand it, a redesign of the dietetic resource is going on, to support the insulin pump service. It is expected that the service will be provided by October, so pump provision should improve. I will take a close interest in the matter, as I am sure will the member.

Some 15,000 children and young people start to smoke each year in Scotland, and the potential impact on their health is frightening. It is difficult to be precise on the bill's impact on the number of children taking up smoking, but our modest calculations suggest that banning the display of tobacco products alone could result in 700 fewer smokers from the 60,000 children born each year.

Yes. I am aware of those statistics and of the tobacco lobby's constant attempts to recruit new customers for its product. Obviously, the Scottish Government is determined to reduce its opportunity to do that. On regulations on the display of tobacco products, we are working with retailers, particularly small retailers, to find a way that will meet the aims of the policy but not put undue cost burdens on small retailers. The discussions are going very well indeed. We will continue to keep the Parliament informed of the outcome of those discussions.

I am sure that Rhoda Grant is aware that we have already increased the resources substantially, in the shape of £4.5 million over three years for enhanced tobacco sales enforcement. I hope that Rhoda Grant welcomes that, because it is important that, in our partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the local authorities, we continue to make progress on test purchasing and to make progress with Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs on tackling illicit sales of tobacco. We have put in the additional resources to enable that to be done; I hope that the member welcomes that.

Progressive conditions such as multiple sclerosis require close collaboration at local level between health and social care services. Community health partnerships have a clear role in promoting that integration. That is recognised in our long-term conditions action plan, which was published last week. The multidisciplinary team model developed in NHS Tayside includes a specialist care manager, responsible for assessing the care and welfare needs of people with MS. We would wish other boards and their local planning partners to follow that example.

I will be happy to visit the drop-in centre when it is established. It sounds like a good development, and I encourage the group to talk to partners such as the local authority and the local health board about what support is available and about ensuring that services can be integrated. I will be happy to continue to talk to the member about that.

As I indicated to Parliament last month, we are funding Infertility Network Scotland to work with NHS boards across Scotland, concentrating in particular on boards that do not fulfil the recommendations in infertility guidance, including current recommendations on the number of cycles offered to patients.

NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde includes in one cycle of treatment the transfer of frozen as well as fresh embryos, which, in effect, means that patients in that health board area receive more chances for treatment than those in the many other areas where boards allow only two fresh transfers and one frozen transfer. I am sure that the member will understand that point. As far as timescales are concerned, I have already informed Parliament of our intention to establish this summer the expert advisory group on infertility services, which will consider the draft action plan and some of the changes that will be required. As Margaret Curran will acknowledge, these are long-standing problems that were probably not given the attention in the past that they deserved. Indeed, that is why we are moving forward with the expert advisory group. We are very determined to pay attention to those issues and to ensure that people, no matter where they live in Scotland, are not disadvantaged.

The upper age limit should be 39 years inclusive, which means that, in effect, the woman should not have reached her 40 th birthday. With regard to BMI levels, I have to say that at the moment a woman's weight is not one of the access criteria for infertility treatment. Because clinical decisions are involved, we expect clinicians to follow the relevant clinical guidelines such as the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidance on fertility. I am sure that the expert advisory group will be able to consider the issue, but the fact is that, wherever the age limit is drawn, people will still fall outside it. As these matters are finely balanced, we have to seek expert advice. That is why we have set up the group, which will meet over the summer to come up with advice and conclusions for ministers.

I announced to Parliament on 21 May our intention to undertake a review beginning this summer, and a formal consultation in the autumn.

I am happy to take up that issue with NHS Fife, which I expect will follow the new procedures on consultation that will come in on 1 July, as the member rightly pointed out. During the members' business debate on the subject, I think that I gave an assurance that reapplications would be part of the review; I am happy to give that reassurance to the member again.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that no patient is inappropriately delayed in hospital once treatment has been completed. For the second year running, NHS boards, working with their local authority partners, recorded no delays of more than six weeks at the April census point. Officials are working closely with partnerships to ensure that that position is sustained. The joint improvement team has also provided intensive support to a number of partnerships to help reduce delays.

The preparations for pandemic flu have been developed over a number of years, and the expectation of what boards will have to do has been well set out. We do not know what the impact will be. We do not know whether there will be a second wave; if there is, we do not know what difficulties and challenges it will mean for the health service. Everything is being done to minimise any disruption to the normal flow of patients. We will have to take it one step at a time, once we know the full scale of any challenge that a second wave might bring.

That is something that the joint improvement team, along with partnerships, is addressing. Six weeks is the maximum length of time, and we hope that people will be discharged from hospital as quickly as possible—and, of course, as quickly as is safe. We do not want people to be readmitted unnecessarily. All of that work is proceeding. As Richard Simpson will acknowledge, people have complex needs in some cases, and it can take more time to ensure that the right services are in place for them. That can sometimes take a little time, and such things must be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. We are having active discussions in that regard with our local partners and at a national level.

Mary Scanlon will be aware that that issue is of great importance to the Scottish Government, and we have already put a lot of effort into reducing the number of emergency admissions. That involves getting services right locally: it is about good local partnership working; having the right home care services to allow someone to remain at home; telehealth; telecare; and ensuring that preventive services are in place. We will strive to do more around that agenda, as it is critical to reduce the number of unnecessary admissions to hospital. The evidence tells us that, when an elderly person is admitted to hospital, their chances of returning home diminish as they lose their independence, skills and confidence. That is of the highest priority for the Government.

Services are already in place to address the range of mental health problems that may be linked to the recession, including increased access to psychological therapies, the breathing space telephone advice line, self-help materials and medication. We and national health service boards will keep services under review in light of demand.

We are working to develop the waiting time target for children and adolescent mental health services. For the first time, we have begun to make progress with that. The member will agree that that is a good start, given that mental health services did not previously come within the waiting time guarantee. Is there more that we can do? Yes, there is. We will keep those matters under review to see how far we can go. I hope that the member will recognise the Government's commitment to doing so.

This is a complex matter. The Parliament has some powers in relation to food content and labelling, but there are also reserved matters involved.

Transferring any of those powers back to Westminster would be a retrograde step. In fact, it would make more sense for us to have the whole range of those powers at our disposal in Scotland, as I am sure the member agrees.

At 31 December 2008, 30.8 per cent of children and 15.3 per cent of adults were registered with a national health service  dentist in the Aberdeen South parliamentary constituency. A new four-dentist NHS practice is due to open shortly in the south of Aberdeen city. The dentists in that practice intend to register between 3,000 and 6,000 patients under NHS arrangements, which will increase the percentage of people who are registered with an NHS dentist in Aberdeen South.

The situation has, of course, not suddenly occurred during the past two years. As Nicol Stephen was a minister in the previous Executive, I would have thought that he would recognise the long-standing problems of access to NHS dentistry in certain parts of Scotland, including in his own constituency. We recognise the problems, and we have been working extremely hard to increase the number of dentists, which we have achieved. I hope that the member welcomes the fact that we have delivered the Aberdeen dental school on time and that it is working well. There is more to do, and we will continue to work with the profession to ensure that access to NHS dentistry improves throughout Scotland. I hope that the member welcomes that and will work with us to achieve it.

In reaching agreement with community planning partnerships on their single outcome agreements, the Scottish Government is pleased to note that 25 local authorities have identified sport and physical activity as a priority area in the latest round. I am confident that local authorities are developing a range of initiatives to meet local needs, including the provision and development of facilities. They will be developed further as we roll out our legacy plan for the 2014 Commonwealth games with the support of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Voice of Chief Officers of Cultural and Leisure Services in Scotland.

Sportscotland is engaged in visiting every local authority and discussing how each one can make the most of not just its current facilities but the opportunities to open them up through the community sports hubs initiative that will be a key part of the Commonwealth games legacy. Those discussions are going forward positively. Margo MacDonald specifically mentioned Meadowbank. Clearly, the decision on its future is for the City of Edinburgh Council. Any support to be provided by the Government through sportscotland will depend on how the stadium fits into and supports the council's wider agenda for the development and provision of sport across the city. I am happy to write to Margo with any further detail, if she requires it, and to speak to her, while we continue the dialogue with the City of Edinburgh Council and the other local authorities that are striving hard to ensure that they make the most of 2014.

Sportscotland is heavily engaged with Glasgow City Council. Given that the authority will host the 2014 Commonwealth games, it has a key role to play in ensuring that it makes the most of the opportunities that the event will bring for the city. I would be happy to bring Sandra White up to date on how those discussions are proceeding, but I can assure her that our ambition is to ensure, through the community sports hubs and the other measures that we are taking, that the legacy that the games leave to Scotland comprises not just improved facilities but improved participation and greater use of those facilities.

That is made a lot easier by the £2 billion of investment that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has already committed. The additional £1.25 billion that she announced in yesterday's statement will help to rejuvenate not just the school estate in general but the sports facilities in schools.

The cook-chill system of food delivery is only one method of delivering hot plated meals to patients, and it has no direct bearing on the number of portions of fruit and vegetables that patients receive while they are in hospital care. The national dietary food standard of five portions of fresh fruit and vegetables per day is only one aspect of the nutritional standards that the Scottish Government has set for patients in hospital care.

The national catering and nutrition specification advises: "The menu must provide the opportunity for patients to choose at least five servings of fruit and vegetables across a day including as wide a variety as possible (can be included as snacks)." The nutritional care of patients in hospital is a priority that is backed by £1.5 million of new investment, which covers the screening of patients, the introduction of the nutrition specification, to which I have just referred, and the provision of nutrition leaders in national health service boards to ensure that nutrition is a priority.  As far as monitoring is concerned, senior charge nurses play an important role in ensuring that patients are given the care and support that they require, and protected meal times ensure that patients' meals are not interrupted. I hope that the member agrees that the present position is far better than it used to be.

I thank John Lamont for raising some very important issues. Members will be aware that, over the past few months, there has been significant interest in the procedures by which decisions are made on applications to open community pharmacies—examples of which have been aired in tonight's debate. The issue is greater in remote and rural areas, where the viability of a community pharmacy might not be guaranteed. In areas where patients might have difficulty in accessing pharmaceutical services through a community pharmacy, an NHS board may require a GP practice in the area to dispense prescribed items for some or all of its patients. I agree with John Lamont that dispensing GP practices have an important role. I know that many patients who collect their prescriptions from their GP practice value the service very much indeed. Although there are some overlaps in the knowledge and skills of the medical and pharmaceutical professions, their respective education and training complement each other. The best therapeutic outcome for patients comes from both professions working together for the benefit of the patient—a point captured by Christine Grahame—which is very much at the forefront of our thinking on where we want to get to. The Scottish Government will continue to explore innovative ways to allow patients to have access to independent advice on their medicines from pharmacists. The new community pharmacy contract is designed to build on pharmacists' role in caring for patients by making full use of their clinical skills and expertise. The community pharmacy network across Scotland is well placed to provide accessible services in local communities in a way that enhances patient care and improves health outcomes, as Richard Simpson mentioned. Contracted services already in place include the minor ailment service, the public health service,  and the acute medication service. The chronic medication service, which is currently undergoing early testing in Fife, will be rolled out across Scotland from October this year. There is, and there will remain, a need for some GP practices to provide a dispensing service for their patients. There will continue to be some marginal cases in which a new pharmacy applies to a health board to open in a particular area. Boards must satisfy themselves that the provision of pharmaceutical services at the premises that are named in an application is necessary or desirable in order to secure provision of pharmaceutical services in the neighbourhood in which the premises are located. Such decisions must be a matter for the board concerned. As John Lamont will know—as the correspondence between us has confirmed—the Scottish Government is not involved in making those decisions.

I will come on to that point in a moment. John Lamont is concerned that the application process does not allow the board to hear the views of GPs or of local people who might be affected by the board's decision. I am aware that other members, and members of the public, have raised similar concerns. We have listened carefully to those concerns. As members will know, we laid replacement regulations on pharmacy applications before the Parliament on 18 May. Subject to approval by Parliament, those regulations will come into force on 1 July this year. The regulations will place a duty on health boards, when applications to the pharmaceutical list are made, to take reasonable steps to consult persons to whom pharmaceutical services might be provided as a result of the application. The regulations will replace the requirement on boards to consult local health councils—which were abolished in 2005—and will ensure that local people are consulted. However, how such local consultation should best be undertaken will remain a matter for boards. In addition to those amendments, we intend to review the legislation further and to undertake a formal consultation exercise in the autumn. As I announced to Parliament on 21 May, the review process will begin before the summer recess through open discussion with stakeholders, including the BMA's Scottish general practitioners committee and Community Pharmacy Scotland. We will take that forward and complete the process as quickly as possible.  John Lamont's motion calls on the Parliament to be aware of the Public Petitions Committee's inquiry into PE1220. Members should note that the committee has been kept fully informed of our position. Indeed, the Scottish Government wrote to the committee on 21 May to advise it about the replacement regulations and about the review that I have mentioned. At its meeting on 2 June, the committee agreed to reconsider the petition once our review of the relevant legislation is completed, and I look forward to hearing its views at that time. John Lamont raised the case of the application to open a community pharmacy in Chirnside, in which he has a strong interest and which he has represented extremely well. I am aware of the particular circumstances of the application, although, as he will appreciate, I cannot comment on the decisions that have been taken by the board's pharmacy practice committee or the national appeal panel. Ministers have no involvement in those decisions. The Scottish Government has been called on—by, for example, the BMA—to suspend decisions on applications until the Public Petitions Committee has completed its consideration of the processes, and Liam McArthur made such a call earlier. As I indicated, the Scottish Government is not involved in those decisions. Moreover, we cannot suspend the operation of the current pharmaceutical services regulations, which are subordinate legislation, nor can we ask NHS boards to suspend their decisions, as that would not be compatible with the regulations. I turn to the point that John Lamont made in his intervention. It has been claimed that a dispensing GP practice will be required to cease dispensing if an application to open a community pharmacy in the area is approved. I should point out that the relevant legislation does not require the dispensing GP practice to stop dispensing for all patients. Again, that is a decision for boards, which must take local circumstances into consideration. In such cases, boards are required to reconsider whether any patients would have serious difficulty in obtaining prescribed items.

I was going to repeat that the extra remuneration that GP practices receive for providing dispensing services is intended only to cover the additional cost of providing those services; it was never intended to cross-subsidise their base general medical services provision.  However, I recognise what has been said in the debate about the realities of the situation in some areas of the country. I thank John Lamont and other members for raising important issues. I am grateful for the opportunity to reiterate the Scottish Government's position, which is that we take seriously his concerns, those of the Public Petitions Committee and those of the many others who have an interest in the issue. Although the review will be on the control-of-entry arrangements rather than pharmaceutical services as a whole—it is right and proper that we have restricted it in that way—I am confident that most of the issues raised by Richard Simpson, as well as Iain Smith's point about reapplications, will be considered as part of it.  I welcome tonight's input and encourage members to continue to contribute to the review process as we take it forward.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on the selection of her motion for debate. This debate follows hot on the heels of the debate in February on Margaret Mitchell's motion on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee, which demonstrates the importance of the subject to members. I endorse that. There will be a spotlight on carers next week too, as it will be carers week. That is all to the good. I acknowledge the good work that is undertaken by VOCAL, the coalition of carers in Scotland and the many other organisations that support carers throughout Scotland. I was pleased to meet members of such organisations at the beginning of the march to which Sarah Boyack referred. I want to pick up on points that members made and to reiterate important points that were made during the debate in February. We all know that carers' work greatly complements the work of health, social work and other statutory and voluntary services, and we all recognise and value the work of unpaid carers. Changing demographic projections and the increasing number of people who live in community settings and at home will result in an even greater demand for, and reliance on, unpaid care in the future. That is a huge responsibility and we all need to respond accordingly. For unpaid carers across the board, we have put in place a broad range of measures, which are supported by £13 million of new resources in health and local government. Those measures are helping to make progress towards the provision of  an additional 10,000 respite weeks, and of information and training to support people in their caring roles. As Margo MacDonald said, many carers do not identify themselves as such, so carer information strategies should help to address that. General practitioners and other providers can identify carers who present to the national health service, perhaps as a result of stress or other conditions, and will be able to help them to secure the assistance that they need.

I am more than happy to consider that suggestion as part of the development of the carers strategy. I assure Cathy Peattie, Mary Scanlon and other members that there will be close monitoring of progress on additional respite weeks and on the NHS carer information strategies, which we sign off individually. I assure Sarah Boyack that work on the guaranteed respite entitlement is being taken forward with carers organisations. The work raises complex issues, not the least of which is the need to avoid displacing resources from one group of carers to another. We need to be careful about that. We have provided grant funding for work in a number of important areas that will help to inform our carers strategy, including a mapping exercise of young carers services in Scotland, and carer training pilots that focus on carers in rural areas and in black and minority ethnic communities. Carers' views are fundamental, of course. As part of its inspection of social work services, the Social Work Inspection Agency carried out a survey of carers. Carers returned more than 2,600 questionnaires, which was a good response. The results of the carers survey in the 24 authorities that have been inspected are available and make interesting reading. There is good news, which reflects the progress that is being made. For example, 23 per cent of carers said that the help that they receive meets all their needs, and 38 per cent said that some of their needs are met. There were examples of practice throughout the country fully taking account of carers' needs. In one area, carers of family members who have dementia had the highest praise for all the staff in a dementia centre that even offers a free laundry service for clothes and bedding, which is a big help for the carers.  However, other results reflect that more needs to be done. For example, 23 per cent of carers felt that few of their needs were met, and 17 per cent said that none of their needs was being met. In my view, those figures are too high. As I said in February, we will revise our carers strategy in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and carers themselves. The emphasis is very much on improving outcomes for carers. Two steering groups, with much stakeholder interest, have been established to drive that work forward. In addition, various sub-groups have been set up to consider the progress that is to be made with the personalisation agenda. I reassure Sarah Boyack that work is under way to extend the availability and scope of direct payments to carers and to the people for whom they care, which will enable their individual needs to be met in a more person-centred way. Perhaps that should have been done in the past, but we are where we are. There are sub-groups on training and development issues for the unpaid and paid workforce; on short breaks; on the role of young carers and wider voluntary sector services; and on supporting transitions for young carers. Much work is therefore in train. On young carers, I continue to be impressed by the innovative and effective approaches that are being taken by some local authorities, dedicated carer services and the wider voluntary sector. I accept, however, that much more can be done, particularly in mainstream services. We have awarded a small grant to VOCAL to facilitate a carers reference group of 12 carers from across Scotland who have experience of different types of caring, in order to help to progress the strategy. We are consulting young carers through the successful young carers festival and through smaller groups. I know that caring can incur financial costs, as members have said, especially if people have to give up employment or reduce their working hours. The peak age of caring is between 45 and the early 60s, so it impacts on a crucial stage in a person's life. Carers need to be supported in accessing employment or training, or so that they do not have to relinquish or reduce paid employment. The carers steering group is considering the issues. Eligibility for carers allowance, to which members referred, and the level at which it is set, are obviously reserved matters, and the United Kingdom Government is examining the carers benefits system as part of its wider reform. Following the poverty protest march in April, which focused on financial hardship, I wrote to the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions about the carers allowance, and I specifically put across the views of the carers to whom I had spoken. My  officials will shortly meet the Department for Work and Pensions to ensure that our views are further fed in. On fuel poverty, to which members have referred, we introduced a new energy assistance package in April. As well as there being continuing support for pensioners, low-income private-sector households with young children under five or a disabled child under 16 can for the first time receive help beyond basic insulation measures. That will certainly help some carers. Sarah Boyack's motion refers to "the sharing of best practice in the provision of support with other European countries". I agree with that. Last month, we gave a grant to VOCAL to help with the costs of next year's Eurocare conference in Edinburgh, which will be held from 17 to 20 May.

Sarah Boyack must be a mind-reader, because I was just about to say that we will publish our carers strategy for Scotland early in 2010. Much of the work will obviously be done this year, but I hope that it will be ready in time for the Eurocare conference, which would be a good fit. There is huge potential to improve the lives of carers throughout Scotland. I think that that view is shared across all the political parties. I certainly hope that members will encourage carers in their areas to ensure that they keep up to speed with what is happening and, if possible, to feed in to the carers strategy. We certainly want to hear their views, so I encourage members to play their part in helping us do that.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

The community health nurse role is a pilot in three national health service boards in Scotland. It will be fully and independently evaluated during 2010, and an interim evaluation of early implementers will be undertaken by the end of 2009. The results of the evaluation will inform decisions on the future of the generic community health nurse role.

I remind Malcolm Chisholm that the review of nursing in the community was started under the previous Administration. When we came to power, we decided that the model should be tested. I make it clear that I recognise that some staff have concerns about the model, and we felt that it was important that we test it to answer some of those questions. We have said clearly that we are keeping an open mind on the future of community nursing in Scotland; perhaps Malcolm Chisholm should do likewise.

On behalf of the Scottish Government, I welcome the debate. I know that members of all parties have taken a strong interest in what is a complex and long-standing issue. In 2007, we inherited some complex problems, which, unfortunately, were not addressed by the "Review of Infertility Services in Scotland" that was published in early 2007. The review did not address a range of issues, including the differences in waiting times in different board areas, the problems of gamete donation or the subject of data collection—I could continue. However, we are making progress: boards are making progress, and a number are reviewing practice in their areas. I am pleased to inform members that NHS Grampian plans to implement the guidance fully by the end of this summer; this month, NHS Orkney has fully implemented the guidance; and NHS Shetland and NHS Western Isles fully implemented it at the beginning of the year. That means that nine boards have implemented, or are in the process of implementing, the guidance. I hope that members will welcome that progress. Many areas have invested in order to provide a timely service for patients who need to access all levels of infertility services. In many areas, waiting times have improved since the expert advisory group on infertility services published its guidance back in 1999. For example, the average waiting time in the NHS Borders area is currently three  months, whereas when the guidance was published it was five years. The wait had reduced to four years by 2001 and has been at three months for several years. Over the same period, waiting times have reduced in many other board areas, including those of NHS Ayrshire and Arran, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, NHS Grampian and NHS Lanarkshire. However, we accept that other boards still have considerable work to do. For example, average waiting times in NHS Fife have remained static, at around 24 months, since 1998. That prompts the question why we are beginning to get to grips with the issue only 10 years later. We are giving the matter our attention, and I hope members will welcome that fact. We are considering options on various complex aspects of infertility services, including how best to ensure equity of access throughout Scotland. We are currently finalising a draft action plan that will cover data collection, waiting times, the definition of a cycle and single-embryo transfer, as well as other important issues that members have raised in this evening's debate. During the summer of this year, stakeholders—including clinicians, the Infertility Network UK in Scotland and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists—will be invited to form an expert advisory group on infertility services to consider the draft action plan. I will certainly ask for regular updates from the group as well as an interim report after six months, which I will be happy to share with Parliament. Angela Constance made specific mention of the Infertility Network UK in Scotland and paid tribute to its work—I do likewise. We have had constructive discussions with the charity, which I am pleased to say has offered to work with NHS boards throughout Scotland so that they better understand the barriers that exist and to help them to implement the infertility guidance in full. I hope that Helen Eadie will be reassured that we have been able to reach that position through constructive dialogue. The lobbying that she suggested will, I hope, not be needed because we will have made the progress that is required. I was delighted to accept the charity's offer of assistance, and over the next three years we will provide funding to it to work with boards to help them to address the inequity of access that has existed in Scotland for too many years. Particular emphasis will be placed, initially at least, on the boards that have very long waiting times and those that have not implemented the 2007 updated criteria in full. We very much hope that boards will see that development as a positive step that will assist and complement the work that is already on-going in individual board areas. We will be in touch with boards in the near future with further details.  I am pleased to be able to say that despite all the challenges that we have faced—and while I acknowledge the challenges ahead—Scotland is the only part of the UK that routinely follows NICE guidelines on the number of cycles of IVF treatment. A majority of our NHS boards allow three cycles of IVF treatment to those who are eligible. In Northern Ireland and Wales, only one cycle is routinely made available. In England, some primary care trusts did not refer patients for treatment at all until recently and the remainder offered only one cycle. As a result of Infertility Network UK's work with primary care trusts in England, some trusts now offer more than one cycle, and in one area—in the east of England—trusts now offer three cycles of treatment and up to a maximum of six embryo transfers. When we talk about the situation in Scotland, it is important that we get an accurate picture. We agree that action is required, but we must also recognise where progress has been made. I certainly agree that waiting times require attention and are too high in some areas, but we should recognise the improvements that have been made by the likes of NHS Borders and NHS Lanarkshire since the expert advisory group published the guidelines back in 1998. As some members are aware, data from the four level-3 infertility clinics in Scotland are not collected by the Information Services Division as the data belong to the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority. As the information is not collected, a waiting time target could not be monitored at present. However, we believe that systems need to be established to allow confidential and sensitive patient information to be shared, and over the next few months we will engage with our key partners to discuss those issues to consider how they should be taken forward. We would like those who are eligible for NHS infertility treatment, wherever they are in Scotland, to receive timely NHS treatment. We recognise that much remains to be done, but we believe that, on our watch, we have made a start in addressing issues that did not receive attention previously. We very much look forward to working in partnership with NHS boards and other stakeholders, particularly the Infertility Network UK in Scotland, to ensure that the Government at last takes seriously the subject of infertility. I do not doubt the difficulties faced by NHS boards with long waiting times, but we will work with them and support them to ensure that there is equity of access throughout Scotland. I thank members for their speeches in the debate. I will respond to any points that have been raised during it that I have not been able to cover, but I hope that I have managed to give members some room for optimism for the future.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

I will certainly undertake to do that. I agree that at issue is what we do on our watch, so I am more than happy to take responsibility for what we have done since 2007. However, does Helen Eadie acknowledge that there is a question to be asked about what happened during the previous 10 years? Will she reflect on whether more progress could have been made during that time, which would have put us in a better place today?

I am pleased that the well man clinic that Rangers and Celtic football clubs have run in partnership with the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow is proving a success. I look forward to receiving their final report as funders of the project later this year. It is clear that significant potential exists to use football clubs to get healthy living messages across to hard-to-reach groups and we will explore that with the Scottish Football Association through the citizenship through football group.

The citizenship through football partnership includes the SFA, the Scottish Premier League, the Scottish Football League, sportscotland, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and us. My officials will meet the group's project lead from the SFA next week to discuss progressing health improvement issues through the group. I am happy to feed Margo MacDonald's comments into that meeting. We might well be able to apply lessons to other sports from the work that has been done. As Margo MacDonald said, the results have been impressive. We certainly want to learn from that and take that elsewhere.

I agree with Jackson Carlaw and I pay tribute to the St Mirren players. I hope that what they did will encourage young men to behave likewise. Role models can be positive and negative. In football and in sport in general, it is always good to see positive role models. We will consider how to discuss—perhaps through the citizenship through football group—opportunities to examine sexual health matters. The media campaign and the launch of the website on the sexual health strategy will take place this summer. I am happy to keep Jackson Carlaw and others updated on that.

NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is developing clinical standards for neurological conditions, including standards that are specific to Parkinson's disease. They will improve the care and support that are available to people with Parkinson's in all NHS board areas. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network is also developing a clinical guideline on the diagnosis and treatment of Parkinson's. We have funded the appointment of a rehabilitation co-ordinator in each NHS board area. The NHS Lothian co-ordinator will consider issues such as the longer-term rehabilitation needs of those with Parkinson's.

The member will be aware that NHS Lothian and the Parkinson's Disease Society have recruited two new Parkinson's disease specialist nurses; I am sure that he welcomes that. We appreciate the support that allied health professionals such as physiotherapists and occupational therapists provide to people with Parkinson's disease, their families and their carers. We have made £1.2 million available to support the appointment of the rehabilitation co-ordinators whom I mentioned in my original answer; the NHS Lothian co-ordinator was appointed in April this year. Rehabilitation co-ordinators will be responsible for identifying gaps in rehabilitation service delivery and the redesign of services, where necessary, to ensure that gaps—including gaps involving AHPs—are addressed. I am happy to keep the member updated on the issue.

I am aware of the distressing problems experienced by some people with Parkinson's who are unable to follow their medication regime in hospital; the issue has been  raised in the chamber. Whenever possible, people should be able to self-administer their medicines while they are in hospital. Self-medication is a good example of the principle of self-management, which we are promoting and which lies at the heart of our work on long-term conditions. We are committed to ensuring that the NHS makes the shift in culture and attitude that is required to make that happen. I am happy to keep the member updated on progress on the issue.

I am happy to look into the matter. Margo MacDonald may be aware that we are developing a carers strategy. We could consider the approach that she suggests as part of that work.

The Scottish Government considers osteoporosis and its association with fractures to be an important health issue, and as most fractures occur following a fall, falls and fracture management and prevention strategies are imperative. That is why, in February 2007, the Government published guidance for health boards and community health partnerships on actions to prevent falls. The guidance highlights specific actions that boards and CHPs can take, including working with local partners to raise awareness, improving the recording of falls and appointing a network of local falls co-ordinators to share good practice and develop a combined local falls strategy.

Yes, I expect that information to give us such a picture. It is certainly extremely important that those services are linked up. I am happy to update members on progress on that important work as we move forward. Some excellent work is being done, which is producing highly significant results for people by reducing the number of falls and fractures. That must be good news.

I thank everyone who has contributed to the debate, which has been good and constructive. It is clear that the Scottish Government cannot tackle an influenza outbreak, a pandemic or any major emergency, on its own; dealing with such an event requires effective joint working with a wide range of partners. We need to work closely with those partners, and we are doing so through the eight strategic co-ordinating groups, with the key principle of integrated emergency management. Over the past four weeks, the arrangement has worked very well. Local agencies have risen extremely well to the challenges that have been presented by a fast-moving and unpredictable set of circumstances and we have seen the benefits of strategic co-ordinating groups, which have been  working collaboratively. The existence of the groups has made communication so much easier. We have been able quickly to identify, discuss and resolve a range of questions on an on-going basis. Following the events of the past month, Scotland has achieved a high state of readiness for dealing with the worst effects of a flu pandemic. We are acting now to ensure that we maintain that state of readiness over the coming months. For example, we are securing supplies of vaccines. We want to procure as much vaccine as possible to enable us to start a vaccination programme as soon as we can. Perhaps more important, however, is the fact that we have had the chance to test out the country's preparedness. We will learn from that experience so as to be even better prepared for future flu outbreaks. We have put in place enhanced co-ordination arrangements, to lead and co-ordinate planning for a possible pandemic later in the year. The arrangements will be informed by and take account of the developing scientific analysis of the A(H1N1) virus and assumptions about prognosis, risk assessment and planning. Our links with stakeholders will be key to collaborative working during the coming months. Although our work is not yet over, I thank stakeholders wholeheartedly for the efforts in all sectors of Scottish life that have enabled us to work together so effectively. I reassure Nigel Don that we have been in contact with the business community. Preparations by councils are well advanced and councils are involved in local emergency planning groups. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has joined us at national emergency planning group meetings. We have done as much as possible to ensure that all key stakeholders have been involved and are at a good state of preparedness in their plans. I visited NHS Tayside's pandemic control room at King's Cross hospital on 8 May, to learn about local preparations for a possible flu pandemic. I was impressed by the effort and rapid response of everyone who is involved in the multi-agency team. We have worked closely with the other Administrations in the UK. That has allowed us to keep in close touch with developments throughout the UK and enabled learning about processes and science to be shared quickly among the four countries. However, we have based our decisions on the best outcomes for the people of Scotland. So far, the symptoms have not been too severe in most cases, but we need to remember that they can be severe for a person who has an underlying medical condition, as appears to be the case with the patient in Glasgow. I can inform the Parliament that in the past few minutes the probable case in  Glasgow has been confirmed positive for H1N1. We cannot afford to be complacent. At local level there has been the temporary and precautionary closure of a primary school and a nursery in Greenock. We acknowledge the potential for disruption when schools are closed but we are confident that local decision makers based their decisions on the expert advice that was available. Although it is still early days, the measures appear to have reduced the potential for contact spread. I will talk about issues that have been raised and I will write to members about matters that I do not deal with. Richard Simpson asked too many questions for me to be able to respond to them all in my speech, but I will write to him. On the worldwide research effort, Scotland inputs data to the Health Protection Agency, which in turn submits data to the WHO. The collation of information worldwide is important in enabling us to understand as much as possible about the virus. This afternoon, a research meeting of the scientific pandemic influenza advisory group took place. Scotland is a partner in the group and our chief scientist office will share developments with Scotland's research fraternity. Mary Scanlon asked about discussions with the farming industry. The chief veterinary officer for Scotland has been closely engaged in discussions. Communication has been important, to ensure that key stakeholders, including the farming community, are as informed as possible. I welcome Ross Finnie's helpful comments about access to Treasury funding for vaccine procurement and about the precedent in relation to foot-and-mouth disease. We welcome his support in that regard. Helen Eadie asked about travel advice. We encourage people to use the Foreign and Commonwealth Office website, which gives the most up-to-date travel advice. The FCO is best placed to provide such advice. To assist with communication, a new pandemic preparedness planning team is being set up in Government, to co-ordinate our response, support responders and facilitate the identification and resolution of difficult issues. I hope that that provides Nigel Don with the reassurance that he sought. The Edinburgh and Glasgow virus laboratories are completing validation work in conjunction with the Health Protection Agency's internationally recognised virus laboratory. We expect that to allow them to confirm H1N1 samples after 1 June—if the validation work completes satisfactorily. I hope that that responds to Cathy Jamieson's point about setting up another laboratory.  Many other issues have been raised—too many for me to respond to now, but we will try to respond to some of them in writing. Scotland has shown itself to be ready to cope with an emergency. I commend the pace and willingness of all those involved, across a wide range of agencies, in dealing with the influenza H1N1 outbreak. It has also been helpful for the Government to have the support of other parties. We have tried our best to keep the other health spokespeople informed of developments. We will continue to do that and we welcome their support for the measures that we have taken. I encourage local health boards to keep local MSPs as updated as possible, although I am sure that members realise that the priority for health boards must be getting their plans in place, ensuring that everything is done that must be done and ensuring that communication is accurate. I am sure that they will be able to respond to local MSPs' requests to be kept up to date as much as possible, but I ask members to bear in mind the fact that the situation is fast moving. I thank all members for their speeches. We will respond to their specific points in writing in due course.

The framework against which national health service boards consider pharmacy applications are provided for in the NHS (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 1995, which the Scottish Government intends to review. The process will begin prior to the summer through discussion and scoping work with stakeholders, with a view to a formal consultation being published in the autumn.

As the member will be aware, we lodged an amendment this week, which is designed as an interim measure to ensure that the public continues to be involved in pharmacy applications. As I said in my initial answer, if any further changes require to be considered as part of the review, we will do that, once we have consulted all stakeholders.

Dispensing GP practices were designed to cover areas where patients would have serious difficulty obtaining their medicines. It is important to remember that the extra remuneration that dispensing GPs receive is intended to cover the delivery of that additional service, not to cross-subsidise general medical services provision; there should be no impact on the other GP services that are provided in the area. As I said in my answer to James Kelly, we will of course have an open review. I am sure that the member will wish to submit her comments as part of that process.

Well, yes. As I said earlier, in lodging the amendment we have ensured that the public continue to be involved in pharmacy applications. It was important to do that. Any further changes, including consultation with other stakeholders, are important. The fact is that we are taking forward the consultation. The views of key stakeholders form an important part of the process. I am sure that we will listen to their views and act accordingly. I am also sure that the  member will wish to submit her comments as part of the process.

I thank Cathy Jamieson for bringing this important matter to the attention of  Parliament. It is fair to say, as many members have said, that we all know someone who has been affected by hearing loss. We know how devastating it can be for those who lose their hearing, either through trauma or over a period of time, and the effect that it can have on their life, their family, their work and those around them. Members will be aware of the national health service audiology modernisation project, which attracted £19 million of central funding, and that all NHS audiology services can now fit digital hearing aids as standard, which is a huge improvement on the previous situation. Following on from that, I was delighted recently to launch formally the national NHS adult audiology rehabilitation quality standards and the paediatric audiology quality standards. The approach taken to developing those standards was unique and has put Scotland at the forefront of quality improvement in audiology. There was a successful collaboration of several cross-border agencies, such as the RNID, the National Deaf Children's Society, the British Academy of Audiology and clinical experts from the NHS in England, Wales and Scotland. A number of members asked about the newborn hearing screening programme, which is now well embedded in NHS boards. It is critical to a child's development that hearing loss is identified as early as possible and that appropriate steps are taken to ensure that early intervention has the maximum benefit for the child and their family. I welcome the interagency work that takes on board educational and social needs from an early age. NHS audiology departments are in a position to signal early the need for such interagency support. As we gather evidence, we should keep an open mind about whether there is a requirement to rescreen. I do not think that we have that evidence yet, but of course we must be open-minded about that in future.

The newborn hearing screening programme was introduced because of the evidence on when it is best to screen. We should keep under review the issue of whether evidence comes out of the programme over a number of years that there is a requirement to rescreen later, in the light of things being missed during newborn screening. However, at the moment, we really do not have the evidence for that. Both sets of standards and their associated quality rating tools have been well received by service providers and are seen as making a critical contribution to quality improvement. The on-going  process of self-assessment and peer review of the standards will enrich the sharing of best practice and highlight the need for improvement in areas that are found not to meet the standards. As a result, the process will improve the standards of care to patients and ensure the important principle of equity of service throughout Scotland. Delia Henry, the director of RNID Scotland, also served on the standards group and attended the public meetings. I welcome her involvement and the co-operation with the voluntary sector in general. We are all working to the same end—to achieve the best outcome for patients. By working together, we are more likely to achieve that. Delia Henry also sits on the audiology services advisory group, which represents a variety of stakeholders and advises me directly on matters relating to the provision of NHS audiology services. As Cathy Jamieson said, in 2006, RNID Scotland approached the Scottish Executive to assist with funding the hear to help project in Galashiels. That important project has provided a point of contact for people who are deaf or have hearing difficulties. It provides a place where people can receive at first hand information, guidance and support. Since 2007, the Scottish Government has funded that project, with £40,000 per annum until 2010. So far, we have had excellent feedback on the level of service and the information that is available. Our commitment as a Government goes beyond the support that is required by those who are deaf or have a hearing problem. We are also committed to improving services for anyone who has a sensory impairment, be it hearing loss, vision loss or deafblindness. I will look into the issues that Nigel Don raised with respect to deafblindness in particular. With that in mind, the Government will look to support more innovative ways to ensure that appropriate services and information are provided and delivered. As I said earlier, we will do that by working in partnership with groups, such as RNID Scotland, that represent people with a sensory impairment. The gradual loss of our hearing affects most of us at some stage in our lives—some of us earlier than others—and once we are being cared for by NHS audiology colleagues, the care continues for the remainder of our life. It is therefore important that we give everyone who comes to us the best quality service that we can, and that we support rehabilitation, where possible, to enable a better quality of life. As Cathy Jamieson said, the First Minister announced in September 2007 that audiology services would, for the first time, be brought within the 18-week referral-to-treatment target. I am confident that all NHS boards will meet that target for adult services by 2011. Although the  information and statistics division is still to confirm this, we hope to have the figures that Cathy Jamieson asked for by August. I will keep Parliament updated on that. I am of course aware of RNID's hearing matters campaign; indeed, I attended the parliamentary reception last week to launch deaf awareness week. I agree whole-heartedly that hearing does matter, and I assure members that I take a keen interest in issues affecting those with a hearing loss. As a Government, we need to ensure that all resources are used effectively and that any screening programme that we introduce is both clinically effective and cost effective. We receive advice on population-based screening programmes from the UK National Screening Committee. This Government and previous Administrations have followed that committee's advice. Its advice on screening for adult hearing loss is that, at present, it should not be offered. The NSC has assessed an adult screening programme against its criteria, to determine whether such a programme would be both clinically effective and cost effective. At the moment, there is not enough evidence to recommend it. That was also the finding of a report from the National Institute for Health Research in 2007. The policy was reviewed as recently as March 2009, but no significant changes were made. It is due to be reviewed again in 2011-12, and that review will take into account findings from any new research. Our officials continue to monitor the findings of the National Screening Committee on my behalf. We will keep the situation under review.

No, not in Scotland. The research on which the National Screening Committee based its recommendations is broad and comes from a variety of sources. I can supply Mary Scanlon with more specific information on that. It is encouraging to note from the RNID survey that there is so much support within Parliament to ensure that hearing loss is identified at an early stage. That underpins our commitment, and I believe that our actions will achieve the aim. We are working with audiology services and the primary care sector to ensure that GPs are advised on triage to identify potential hearing loss and to refer people to NHS audiology experts. I believe that it is better to work in that way, to ensure that people—no matter how old they are— can have their hearing loss identified. I believe that our plans will deliver that. I commend the work that voluntary agencies do to raise awareness of issues affecting those with hearing loss, and I commend the commitment displayed by people in NHS audiology services who support patients from referral through to the fitting of hearing aids and their further rehabilitation. I am aware that there is still work to do to ensure equity of service across Scotland, but the standards that I have referred to will go a long way towards addressing that. I am confident that the modernisation of NHS audiology services continues apace and that patients are benefiting from improved services. Scotland is leading the way in quality standards for all. The whole chamber will be proud of that.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

The Dumbarton family planning and well woman clinic will now be part of a new integrated sexual health service based at the Vale of Leven hospital in Alexandria. The service will continue to provide all of the services that were available at the Dumbarton clinic.

Jackie Baillie is quite right to highlight the challenge of teenage pregnancy in those and other areas. However, the service in question is designed to meet that need. It will run from 11 am to 7 pm two days a week, one day of which will be reserved entirely for young people. I would have thought that, given her concern about teenage pregnancy, the member would welcome that.

At the older people's consultative forum in April last year, I proposed the establishment of an older people's assembly or parliament, making it clear that it would have to come from and be organised by older people. The proposal is being taken forward by members of the older people's consultative forum, facilitated by Age Concern and Help the Aged in Scotland, and it is hoped that the assembly will be held on 2 October, as close as possible to national older people's day on 1 October.

I am certainly happy to take up that engagement, diary permitting. I am sure that people will be very keen to involve the cross-party group in what I think will be a tremendous event that will allow the views of older people throughout Scotland to be heard.

We recognise the impact that the council tax has on older people, which is why we have frozen it for yet another year. I am sure that older people throughout Scotland welcome that action from the Scottish National Party Government.

I met the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Andy Burnham, on 31 March to press Scotland's case for the return of the £150 million that is being diverted to the London 2012 Olympic games. That meeting followed three letters to the Department of Culture, Media and Sport to pursue that matter. At my request, my officials are currently arranging a further meeting with Mr Burnham; the Secretary of State for Scotland, Jim Murphy; and the leader of Glasgow City Council, Councillor Purcell.

After the meeting that we had on 31 March, my officials and officials from the DCMS have been working to consider the available options to secure resources for the legacy. I hope to have an options paper soon and certainly in time for my meeting with those ministers and Steven Purcell.

On behalf of the Scottish Government, I very much welcome this debate on international midwives day, and I thank Mary Scanlon for bringing it to the Parliament. I was amused by the looks of shock on the Tory benches, however, when she mentioned the "three expectant fathers"—there were some worried-looking people when she said that. On international midwives day it is good to remember that Scotland's 3,500 midwives are part of a huge global family of midwives of more than half a million men and women—we should remember that there are male midwives, too. Within that family, the role of midwives and the circumstances in which they work differ considerably. Indeed, many countries suffer particularly significant challenges, as has been outlined very well in some fantastic speeches. Irrespective of those differences, however, each midwife around the world shares a bond and a commitment to provide the best possible care for women and their infants during one of the most special phases of life. I am pleased to say that Scotland is a leading light in midwifery practice, and we are determined to ensure that women receive the highest quality of maternity care. As our knowledge and understanding increase, we are constantly developing and improving that care. All women should have as natural a birth experience as possible, which is achieved by working with and listening to the women for whom the care is provided. As members are probably aware, Scottish maternity policy, as set out in "A Framework for maternity services in Scotland", recognises the importance of the midwife as primary carer in the delivery of maternity services. We are committed to ensuring that women and their babies are cared for using safe, clinically effective, evidence-based models of care before, during and after pregnancy. We believe that maternity services should be based on informed choice, promoting childbirth as a natural event, ensuring local accessibility and supporting the establishment of community maternity units where possible—there are currently 22 of them across Scotland. We recognise the vital and valuable role that midwives play in delivering services in community maternity units, and the Scottish programme for clinical effectiveness in reproductive health has  recognised the enormous contribution that community maternity units make to maternity care. The keeping childbirth natural and dynamic programme—KCND—is a great example of our efforts to ensure that women have as natural a birth as possible. Midwives play a central role in that approach: under it, they play their part in implementing a multiprofessional programme of work, which will ensure that the midwife is the first point of contact, that evidence-based care is provided, that unnecessary interventions are reduced and that multiprofessional care pathways are provided. That will ensure an informed choice and provide the best possible support for vulnerable women and families, as has been mentioned by members in the debate. The work is aimed at making the experience of maternity services and childbirth the best possible. To support KCND's implementation we have provided resources for consultant midwives in 12 NHS boards to co-ordinate the work and to implement the changes in practice. That is a significant investment in clinical midwifery leadership, and it raises the profile of midwifery practice. I am pleased that the programme is progressing so well and that all NHS boards are supportive of it. I will turn now to some of the concerns that have been raised about that programme. I reassure members—specifically Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson—that the programme has the support of all stakeholders, including the National Childbirth Trust. It plays well into risk assessment early in pregnancy, which enables early intervention for those who require additional medical or social support that is—crucially—tailored to their needs and delivered by the most appropriate professional. The evidence tells us that that is the way to proceed, whether we are dealing with foetal alcohol syndrome or the low birth-weight issues that Angela Constance identified. I reassure members that women who wish to continue to have their GP as first point of contact will be able to do so; there is no question about that. It is important to recognise that, and I hope that I have reassured members. The programme is positive, and it would be unfortunate to present it as anything other than that. I am aware that time is limited, so I will turn to the millennium development goals. Mary Scanlon laid out well some of the sobering statistics on maternal deaths in the developing world and why the millennium development goals are important. Shirley-Anne Somerville made the point well that we sometimes take for granted what is on our doorstep, given what some women around the world must cope with in childbirth. What should be a wonderful life event can be terrifying for some  women. That point has come across well in the debate. The Scottish Government's international development policy focuses on poverty reduction and achieving the millennium development goals. All Scottish Government-funded projects are required to show how their activities will contribute to that. Nowhere is that more evident than in our engagement with Malawi and the co-operation agreement that our two countries signed. I pay tribute to Jack McConnell for his work on that; his speech outlined well why all that work is important. The co-operation agreement's health strand is well established and has been developed through strong links between organisations, institutions and people. As has been said, Malawi has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the world, so it is not surprising that it has asked us to prioritise funding to address the problems of maternal health and child mortality. We have done that: through the Scottish Government's international development fund, we are supporting several projects that build on work that is under way and in which Scotland has specific skills and expertise to offer. In the most recent funding rounds, we announced support for projects that will target the treatment of children with severe malnutrition and work to prevent malnutrition in the long term—members identified malnutrition as a key cause of infant mortality.  We will also support projects to strengthen and speed up the referral process for women who experience complications in childbirth, through the provision of training for traditional birth attendants in southern Malawi, and projects to reduce maternal and neonatal mortality by training health workers to implement maternal health and safe motherhood programmes. Reducing maternal mortality through training in emergency obstetric skills for health professionals, particularly in rural areas of Malawi, is important. Like members, we recognise that a lot of work has still to be done. We look forward to working together in partnership with Malawi, and we will take the lead from Malawi on what it wants to assist and complement the work that is being undertaken to address the difficult problems that are faced there. I thank members for their contributions to the debate, and I will write to any members whose questions I did not address in the short time that was available for my speech. The debate was wide ranging and good.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

I thank Richard Simpson for lodging the motion and giving us a chance to debate telehealth. I am surprised that this is the first members' business debate that he has brought to the Parliament; the fact that it is on such an important issue makes it all the more important. I look forward to taking part in the reception after the debate, as many others will do. The reception has been jointly sponsored by the Scottish Centre for Telehealth, and I welcome everyone from there to the gallery. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I have visited the centre and seen the valuable work that it is doing. Indeed, the cabinet secretary spoke at its annual conference in February. Like many members, I have been impressed by the range of projects in which the centre is involved. Those projects include the very successful minor injury telemedicine initiative, to which Marlyn Glen referred. That initiative grew out of the videolinks between the North Sea oil platforms and the accident and emergency department at Aberdeen royal infirmary. It is now part of normal service delivery in NHS Grampian and it is being developed in NHS Tayside. The system is already providing better pre-hospital care to patients and treatment closer to home. It has considerable benefits for accident and emergency departments through preventing unnecessary admissions, which in turn, of course,  helps us to meet one of our HEAT—health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—targets. The centre works effectively with NHS boards on improving access to specialist services. One example in that context is the Scottish telestroke network. By linking stroke consultants to a conventional videoconferencing system with access to computed tomography images, it enables more stroke patients to receive potentially life-saving thrombolysis. Telehealth is playing an increasing role in the care of children and young people throughout Scotland by linking facilities without specialist paediatric units to Scotland's children's hospitals. A good example is the Scottish paediatric telemedicine project. The centre is responsible for developing a telemedicine infrastructure that links all the key sites that provide paediatric services in Scotland. That is supported by Government funding of £307,000 as part of the implementation of the national delivery plan for children and young people's specialist services. We also recognise the great potential of telehealth to improve the health and wellbeing of people who live with long-term conditions, especially in remote areas. "Better Health, Better Care" highlights the role of telehealth in improving people's care experience by reducing the need for travel to larger cities or hospitals. Thanks to our national telecare development programme, a range of projects is benefiting people with long-term conditions. Richard Simpson referred to some of them. One example that I will single out is the NHS Lothian initiative for people with conditions such as heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Equipment is installed in people's homes to take regular readings, which are then sent to a health professional, who contacts the person if necessary. GPs have been heavily involved in delivering that project. Other examples are the videoconferences that link a consultant in Aberdeen with people in Orkney who have diabetes, which I am sure will interest Liam McArthur, and the pain management courses that the Pain Association Scotland has developed in conjunction with the Scottish Centre for Telehealth and which are delivered to Shetland by remote link. There is also the renal patient view project, which allows people with kidney disease to log on to a secure website and view the results of their latest blood test. In the area of mental health, cognitive behavioural therapy is provided over the telephone by NHS 24, following a referral by a GP. Members mentioned several other projects, including the NHS Forth Valley dermatology telehealth system, which has reduced dramatically  the board's extensive waiting times for dermatology. I have seen that first-class project at first hand. The motion deals with the early management of people who have had an acute heart attack. The main aim of immediate treatment in those cases is to restore the flow of blood in the heart. That is done either by administering a thrombolytic drug to dissolve the clot, or through angioplasty, a procedure in which a balloon is inflated to reopen the blocked coronary arteries. The recommendations on which approach to use and in which circumstances are set out in SIGN—Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—guideline 93, which is on acute coronary syndromes. The main recommendation is that patients with the most acute heart attacks should be treated immediately with angioplasty, which is known in those circumstances as primary percutaneous coronary intervention, which members will be happy to know I will refer to as primary PCI. When primary PCI cannot be provided within the optimal timeframe of 90 minutes from the time that the heart attack is diagnosed, the guideline recommends that the patient should receive immediate thrombolytic therapy. That pre-hospital thrombolysis would usually be done by an ambulance paramedic. In its response to the consultation on the updating of our heart disease and stroke strategy, the Scottish Centre for Telehealth gave considerable thought to the arrangements that should apply throughout Scotland for managing acute heart attacks. The centre suggests that the overall aim must be to develop facilities so that any health care professional who is faced with a patient complaining of a chest pain can seek decision support, either verbally or through the ability to transmit an electrocardiogram. The centre has identified two main options: setting up a national advice centre, which Richard Simpson favours, or developing a decision support centre in each region. Those regional centres would support their catchment area during normal working hours but, out of hours, they might in turn take responsibility for the whole country. I give an assurance that the issue will be covered in our heart disease and stroke action plan, which we expect to publish in the near future. It is essential that we bring together all the key agencies to ensure that we have the best possible strategy for the whole of Scotland, including the most effective telemetry component to underpin the strategy. We might also be able to draw on the work that is already being done to develop thrombolysis services for stroke cases at regional level. Members have commented on the fact that many of the examples that we have talked about  are still pilots. I take on board what members have said, but I believe that we have got beyond the stage of being wary of telehealth, which has more than proved itself. I want Scotland genuinely to lead the way on mainstreaming telehealth care into routine service delivery. I want us to use telehealth in association with other e-health applications to contribute towards shifting the balance of care in Scotland by allowing people to receive care closer to home and by delivering health care to underserviced areas. Mary Scanlon raised several issues to do with e-health services. There are probably too many issues to deal with in the time allowed, so I will write to her in response.  It is important that we recognise that telehealth is integral to our work on long-term conditions, especially in relation to self-management. I do not need to tell members about some of the demographic challenges that we have ahead. Mainstreaming telehealth and telecare is essential, as they are at the heart of our aim of ensuring that people get the highest quality of health services, wherever they happen to live in Scotland. I thank members for their contribution to this important debate.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

I have enjoyed listening to the many speakers today and I am thankful for their thoughtful and valuable input. I am also delighted at the co-operation that is evident in the Parliament's desire to work together to create a legacy that we can all enjoy and play a part in. I am sure that that approach will continue as we look ahead to the challenges of 2014 as we move from the interim legacy plan, which sets out the direction of travel, to the programmes that will be part of the fuller legacy plan. I reiterate what I said about the games being about the long term. We hope that the benefits from the games will be around for the next generation to enjoy and take pride in. The games will be as important for the people of Orkney and Dumfries as for the people of the east end of Glasgow. As many members have said, the games must provide a legacy for the whole of Scotland. Although much of the games infrastructure will be located in Glasgow, there is no doubt in my mind that all communities can benefit. The Commonwealth games will be the biggest multisport event that Scotland has ever hosted. It will bring more than 6,500 athletes and officials from 71 countries to Glasgow to compete in 17 different sports over 11 days and will provide a unique set of opportunities for our country to raise its game. We have made it clear from the outset that the games are about more than two weeks of sport. Public investment will account for some £298 million out of an overall budget for delivery of the games of £373 million. I reassure members  that that investment is absolutely secure. Legacy resourcing is a bigger challenge. That is why it is so important that we pursue the £150 million of lottery money that we want to return to Scotland. I will attempt to respond to some of the points that have been made in the debate; I apologise if I do not get round to everyone. Frank McAveety was absolutely right when he said that auditing, integration, delivery and leadership are key issues. They are the focus of our discussions; indeed, I discussed them with sportscotland when I attended its board meeting just this week. It is extremely important that we make the most not just of the school estate, but of the community estate. As I am sure Frank McAveety is aware, we are in the process of developing a new school estate strategy. Schools must support the establishment of a legacy, and we will progress that over the next few months. Ross Finnie mentioned the Health and Sport Committee's pathways into sport inquiry. I look forward to reading the committee's report, which will make a helpful contribution to our legacy considerations. Ross Finnie and Jamie McGrigor mentioned the business opportunities that the games will create. I remind members that, in February, the First Minister launched the business club Scotland, which encourages collaboration between Scotland's business organisations and is supported and funded by the Scottish Government to ensure that firms across the country make the best of the opportunities that arise from major events in Scotland and internationally. Members will be aware of CompeteFor and the Scottish Government's public contracts Scotland portal, which will be extremely important for the 2014 games. Opportunities on Glasgow City Council's contracts site and the 2014 organising committee site will be advertised through those portals. It is important that we join all that up so that businesses large and small have the opportunity to benefit from the games. Michael Matheson made a number of important points. He mentioned physical literacy, which I know will be a focus of the Health and Sport Committee's inquiry report. It was certainly an issue at the meeting at which I gave evidence. As I said, I look forward to reading the committee's report. It is important that communities across Scotland feel part of the legacy. We will do what we can to ensure that there is greater engagement. I am sure that Nicol Stephen was in no way implying that any infrastructure gaps have arisen only in the past two years. The £5 million that has been put towards the 50m pool in Aberdeen is £5 million more than was on the table previously. The  making available of money for that project was always dependent on the development of a robust and deliverable business case. As I understand it, we have only recently received that. I am sure that Nicol Stephen would be able to get an update from Aberdeen City Council, which is taking the project forward, should he wish to do so. Nicol Stephen also mentioned the provision of 50m pools in a number of other places. I subscribe more to the approach of Robert Brown, which is that we must do the best we can with the resources we have. We should not raise unrealistic expectations, but we should try to make a step change by addressing some of the issues that Frank McAveety raised. With a bit of imagination, we can pull together the community clubs and the school estate in the community sports hubs, thereby building capacity and providing the necessary pathways. I believe that we can make a difference and ensure that we get the best return for every pound we spend.

I am willing to consider that. It is important to recognise, though, that, as we speak, sportscotland is involved in a dialogue with each of the local authorities on what their priorities would be. Discussions are taking place. In fact, I will meet the COSLA spokesperson on sport, Harry McGuigan, in the near future to talk about some of those issues. A lot of good work is already going on. However, I will consider the member's suggestion. I thank Ian McKee for the Caligula comparison—it is a first and, I hope, the last. He wondered whether we should have a sports champion. I am not dismissing that idea, but what we deliver is more important. We need to ensure that we have sports champions in all our communities, who lead by example. Not for the first time, Margo MacDonald made a number of important points. She talked about the sports governing bodies. I agree with what she said. There is a lot that our sports governing bodies can do. One of the issues that was discussed yesterday with sportscotland was getting clearer outcomes in response to the funding governing bodies receive. We need to  know what they will deliver for the funding we give them.

I agree with Margo MacDonald. The sports governing bodies operate at various levels, and some of them have more capacity than others. Sportscotland identifies that the governing bodies have a role in helping it to build capacity; in turn, the governing bodies will support the local community clubs that will be so important in ensuring that we have a real change in the level of participation in our communities. I am happy to take up Bob Doris's offer of a visit to Partick Thistle to see the work that it does. I will add it to the invitations that are coming in thick and fast. Robert Brown asked whether we are being ambitious enough to help build capacity in clubs and other areas to ensure that people participate in sport. That is the point that I was making to Margo MacDonald. When I met sportscotland yesterday, I heard that more than 13,000 volunteers are already working with the active schools programme. We intend to build on that excellent volunteering effort to support and encourage our children to take part in sport and physical activity. If we can harness the capacity of those volunteers and more, it will be a great asset in taking forward the legacy. My main message to members is that we want all our communities to get involved in the legacy programme. We have the children's games in Lanarkshire in 2011, the Olympic games in 2012, the Ryder cup in 2014 and, of course, the Commonwealth games in 2014. Having all those major sporting events in a relatively short period is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. We must be ready to make the most of that opportunity. I commend to Parliament the hard work that has been done to date, as is evidenced in the interim legacy plan, which was published in December, in developing the ambitions for a lasting and positive legacy. I ask all members to work with the Government to turn our ambitions into reality.

I am pleased to be able to call the debate. I am happy to accept Frank McAveety's amendment, which reflects our ambitions for increasing sports participation and physical activity to be a hallmark of our legacy aspirations. The motion sends out a strong message that our legacy programmes are for all of Scotland. To that end, we have been working in tandem with a wide range of partners including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Glasgow City Council, the latter of which will rightly have its own legacy plan. That co-operation with our partners has been key to our progress to date. Of course, we will continue to work closely with them as we go forward in implementing our legacy ambitions for Scotland. A unique set of opportunities will come to Scotland through 2014, the children's games in 2011 and our work with London 2012. All of them will make a positive difference to our people and communities. I turn to our engagement with United Kingdom colleagues. I was pleased to be able to attend the sports legacy board meeting in London last month. I look forward to further discussions in that regard. We will continue our engagement, but that should not detract from our case that £150 million of lottery money should return to Scotland. In September last year, with all members coming together in Margo MacDonald's debate on lottery funding, we saw this Parliament at its best. The Parliament unanimously agreed to her motion, which called for the return of the £150 million that has been diverted to help fund the London Olympics. Recently, in a meeting with Andy Burnham, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, I pressed our case—again—for the return of lottery funding. I am pleased to say that he has agreed to a further meeting in Glasgow, at which he will also meet the leader of Glasgow City Council, Councillor Purcell, and the Secretary of State for Scotland, Jim Murphy, to discuss the matter. Proposed dates have been pencilled in. We are pursuing the issue as a matter of urgency. On 29 May, my officials will meet to explore all the possible options in our attempts to retrieve Scotland's money.  In December 2008, we published the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games interim plan, in which we set out our thinking to date and commitment to publish a fuller plan this summer. Much has been achieved since the last debate in September. Sportscotland now sits proudly in its new home at the epicentre of the games project. That is one of the first signposts of the legacy, but by no means the last. It builds on our support to deliver top-quality facilities that will benefit Scotland. Thus far, there is the £5 million towards a 50m pool in Aberdeen and a further £5 million towards redeveloping the Edinburgh diving pool. That funding reflects our commitment to spread the legacy across Scotland. Only yesterday, during a visit to the Gorbals leisure centre, I announced a record investment of £1.2 million in swimming. I am aware that that good centre is in Frank McAveety's constituency, and it is a facility that he should certainly be proud of. The investment is evidence that we are committed to doing all we can to ensure that Scotland is investing in a strong and lasting legacy. However, we need to work together as a Parliament and to build on cross-party support to capitalise on the hard work that has been done to date to fulfil our ambition of hosting the best-ever Commonwealth games and to leave a lasting legacy of which Scotland can rightly be proud. We owe it to the people of Scotland, who have backed the games overwhelmingly, to ensure that the benefits of hosting such a high-profile event are felt in communities throughout Scotland. I will touch on some key legacy areas. Last September's debate touched on the fact that the opportunities that come from 2014 do not cover just sport, important though that is. Those wider ambitions cover health, business, tourism, learning, volunteering and the environment, among other things. First and foremost, the games are a sporting event. We want our athletes to build on their recent successes and to do well. Sportscotland and the governing bodies of sport have set bold performance targets for winning medals and for how they will work to develop the sporting infrastructure. We believe that building an excellent sporting infrastructure will deliver not only success at the games in 2014, but sustained success and opportunities for others to progress in sport throughout Scotland. We are clear about the fact that hosting the games gives us a great chance to motivate people of all ages and abilities—perhaps even members of the Parliament—to become more active in the run-up to the event and beyond. Our ambitions are high, and we believe that the people of Scotland will be inspired to set themselves a personal challenge to improve their health and to feel better  about themselves by getting involved in physical activity. That will enable us to begin to tackle the obesity problem that affects so many Scots of all ages and to which the amendment refers. To help to make our ambitions a reality, work is under way to plan a series of events that will capture and use the excitement of the games to encourage people to get involved and to be more active. We will develop an ambitious common health legacy programme to provide us with a real opportunity to use the games to encourage people who do not normally take part in sport and physical activities to get more involved. One size does not fit all—that is why we need to offer something for everyone and to allow people to set their own goals, which they can achieve at their own pace. By encouraging people to change their behaviour, we can achieve a legacy of which we can all be proud. At the debate in September, we heard tales of the frustration that is involved in accessing facilities and resources. We want to improve the situation and to make better use of existing facilities, including outdoor spaces, through activities such as community sports hubs. Hubs are about more than improving access to facilities—they will provide a central focus for schools, local sports clubs, youth groups and others to come together under the umbrella of a single community sports organisation that is linked to opportunities for casual participation in the local community. We will continue our work with COSLA to identify and learn from best practice in developing the hub model. With an estimated 15,000 volunteers required for the games, we have a real chance to engage with those who would not normally be involved and to show them the benefits that are to be gained from working in their communities. Volunteering has a great deal of potential to strengthen communities by bringing them together through activities and by building mutual understanding through intergenerational work. Of course, there are monetary benefits from hosting the games. It is estimated that they could lead to 1,200 new jobs in Scotland, including 1,000 in Glasgow. That is welcome news indeed in the current hard economic times. The recently launched business club will help to prepare our businesses for the networking opportunities that will come as part of the games. The successful hosting and delivery of the games can only enhance Scotland's reputation. The games give us a great opportunity to showcase our unique heritage to the world by having people visit and share in the event. Although we are clear about the fact that our legacy aspirations stretch Scotland-wide, Glasgow—especially the east end of Glasgow— will feel at first hand the benefits that are being delivered. Let me be clear—without the opportunity that is afforded by the games, the regeneration of the east end of Glasgow would not happen on the same scale. The infrastructure that will be put in place to deliver the games will play a vital part in the creation of a sustainable, vibrant new neighbourhood at the heart of Glasgow's east end. That regeneration activity is being led by Clyde Gateway Urban Regeneration Company. With the momentum provided by the games, the company will deliver around £2 billion of new investment, 21,000 jobs, 400,000m 2 of business space, 10,000 homes and 20,000 new residents by 2028. That very much reflects our view that legacy is a long-term process. Clyde Gateway URC is just one of a number of partners with which we have been working closely. A range of organisations from among local government, health, the third sector, sporting bodies, businesses and many other areas has been involved, united in a common purpose of developing a legacy that Scotland can truly be proud of. We will need to continue to work with all those organisations and others if we are to be successful and if we are serious in our ambition for the legacy of the games to reach the whole of Scotland and Scottish society. A key challenge is to ensure, along with our partners, that we transform the warm words into meaningful actions; that we engage with communities; and that those communities feel the benefits of having the games. That could be achieved through the most disadvantaged or excluded people improving their skills by using one of the volunteering programmes; through businesses competing for and winning games-related contracts; or through our towns feeling the benefits of increased numbers of tourists and young people, with a better understanding of the Commonwealth being developed through the international programmes. The opportunities are endless. The legacy that we are developing with our partners will provide opportunities for communities throughout Scotland to enjoy and participate in the cultural programmes that will be delivered and for people to become more physically active, with improved access to local facilities. Any one of those things would enrich and improve the lives of our communities, develop skills and promote our people and country to the outside world. I am delighted to reflect today, around five years from the start of the games, that a lot of hard work has already been done, as is evidenced in the interim legacy plan. However, there is still a lot more to do. We are ambitious, but we are also realistic. Hosting the games and working to secure a lasting and positive legacy from them will not be a cure for all the ills of society; nor can achieving a lasting legacy be done by Government alone—it is  about the whole of Scotland coming together in a common purpose. To be successful, all of Scotland will need to work together, not least in the Parliament, and I encourage you all to consider how the games can help you, our communities and Scotland as a whole to realise our, your and their ambitions. I am pleased to move, That the Parliament welcomes the forthcoming meeting to take place in Glasgow between the Minister for Public Health and Sport, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport Andy Burnham, Secretary of State for Scotland Jim Murphy and Glasgow City Council leader Steven Purcell to discuss the release of a substantial sum of National Lottery funding towards supporting a legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow; supports the work of the Scottish Government and its partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Glasgow City Council, local authorities across Scotland, NHS boards, public bodies and the third sector, in planning for a legacy for the people of Scotland from these Games; agrees that the Interim Games Legacy Plan, published on 18 December 2008, set the right context for that planning with its emphasis on health, physical activity and sport and its coverage of volunteering, education and learning, culture, sustainability, business, skills, tourism and Scotland's international profile; commends the real opportunity that the hosting of the Games offers for regenerating the east end of Glasgow, and further agrees that, following the launch of the full Games Legacy Plan in the summer, the Scottish Parliament can play a part by encouraging individuals, groups, communities and businesses to get involved so that Scotland's legacy from the 2014 Games can be lasting and positive.

The Scottish Government, at official and ministerial level, has been in regular contact with the Scottish Football Association about a range of issues. The SFA has categorically stated its opposition to the concept of a GB football team. The Scottish Government whole-heartedly backs that position and the Scottish ministers are on record expressing their concerns that a GB football team would jeopardise the future of Scotland as an independent footballing nation.

I very much agree with the member. The Scottish Government has always made it clear that it wants to increase the opportunities for Scottish teams to compete on the international stage. The existence of a GB football team could put that at risk, so we will continue to support the SFA's position strongly.

On behalf of the Scottish Government, I welcome this debate on Huntington's disease and thank Hugh Henry for bringing it to the Parliament. As has been said, this is the first time that we have discussed the condition in the Parliament. I, too, welcome the people in the public gallery who have come to listen to our debate. The Scottish Government is well aware of the excellent work that the Scottish Huntington's Association does in supporting people who have the devastating condition and their families. I congratulate the association on its 20 th birthday. The association's contribution to the review of genetic services in Scotland, the findings  of which were published in 2006, is a tribute to its effectiveness at a strategic level. As members have said, living with the condition is hard enough, but its inherited nature compounds the problems and pressures. Several generations can often be affected at the same time and children have to watch a parent deteriorate, knowing that the same might happen to them. It is no wonder that the Scottish needs assessment programme pointed out back in 2000 that the number of people whose lives are affected is far greater than the number of people who live with the condition. It is therefore essential that NHS boards and their local planning partners are aware of the scale of the issue and provide services accordingly. The standards that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is developing for neurological conditions will require boards to collect the best possible data on those conditions. Boards will also need to define and publish details of the services that they provide for people with neurological conditions, which will of course cover Huntington's disease. Those reports will include information about the agreements that boards have entered into with the Scottish Huntington's Association. We strongly advocate that form of joint working in "Better Health, Better Care". Probably the most important thing that we all need to do is to raise awareness of Huntington's, which can be done in several ways. One possibility is to revisit the Scottish needs assessment programme report of 2000 and the follow-up report of 2004. That is now the responsibility of the Scottish public health network, and we have asked the network to consider adding that to its work programme. Another possibility is to develop a SIGN guideline, which Richard Simpson mentioned. The association believes that the evidence base has developed greatly in the three years since it last approached SIGN. I understand that it has submitted another application in time for this year's deadline, and I hope that SIGN will look favourably on that. The motion makes particular reference to the contribution of specialist nurses, which is an issue that several members have mentioned. We are aware of how highly those nurses are valued by people with the condition and their families and carers. I heard what Richard Simpson said about Forth Valley NHS Board, but I hope that he recognises that the board is developing the idea of a neurology specialist nurse. In following that example and adopting such a model, boards would need to be clear that the needs of those with Huntington's were met properly. However, we are interested in the idea. Specialist nurses fit in well with the idea of managed clinical or care networks, which need to define clearly the roles of  all members of the team. Huntington's lends itself to an MCN approach because of the complex nature of the condition and the need for fully integrated services. "Better Health, Better Care" gave priority to the development of MCNs for neurological conditions. The Scottish Government health directorates would be happy to advise the association on that. Managed care networks promote integration of health and social care, which is essential in the case of Huntington's. That integration must include access to mental health services, given that the disease can cause a profound form of dementia, as well as depression and anxiety. There are a number of other levers for achieving that integration. For example, NHS QIS standard 4 emphasises the role of community health partnerships in integrating primary care and specialist services with social care. Richard Simpson asked about genetic counselling services. The single-gene complex disorder project, which is part of the implementation of the genetics review, has a particular focus on the integration of health and social care and draws on the expertise that the association has acquired in the past 20 years. The implementation of the review also involves appointing more genetic care co-ordinators, who will enhance the interface between health and social care. Genetic counselling is a key aim of the implementation. I can tell Richard Simpson that in Lothian there is a project co-ordinator and an administrative post for the project. The other four centres will have a co-ordinator post. All those posts are now in place, except the Tayside post, which is being taken forward. Progress has been made, which I hope that people will welcome. The focus of the community care outcomes framework on improving partnership performance through collecting data that shape the design of specific care packages is important. The single shared assessment is about identifying each person's needs so that the necessary services and interventions can be put in place. Greater uptake of self-directed support has a key role to play in progressive long-term conditions such as Huntington's. We want people to have more independence and control over the services that they receive. That also has an application in end-of-life and palliative care services. I am sure that the needs of people with Huntington's will be kept in mind as we implement our national strategy on palliative and end-of-life care. I shall certainly ensure that that happens. It would be wrong not to pay tribute to the central role of unpaid carers, especially in relation to a condition that affects whole families in such a profound way. I heard what Cathie Craigie said about the need for greater access to respite care,  which is of course one of our main concerns. That is why we have been working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to provide an extra 10,000 weeks of respite care. We are also funding the implementation of carer information strategies in each NHS board area. The clearest message that I want to send from the debate is that Huntington's needs to be rescued, to some extent, from the lack of awareness that exists in society and among some of our health professionals and service providers. I hope that today's debate will play a crucial role in raising awareness. The Scottish needs assessment programme reports of 2000 and 2004 were very clear about what needs to be done to improve services. They must now be placed on the soundest possible long-term footing throughout Scotland. The best models are those in which the NHS and local authorities join forces to provide the funding. That is something for which a number of members have called in the debate. I assure them that we will certainly encourage the NHS and local authorities to go down that path, which is the best way of ensuring that services improve throughout Scotland in the way that we all want.   Meeting closed at 17:42.

We wrote to national health service boards in December 2008, asking for information on the implementation of the updated guidance. We have received responses from all NHS boards. They show that seven areas are now fully compliant with that guidance and that a further three have partly implemented it.

All the issues that Helen Eadie raises are complex and long standing. Progress  has been made on some of them, particularly waiting times, although some of them remain longer than we would like, but they are not as long as they were. I hope that Helen Eadie acknowledges that the issue is a long standing one. I am not sure whether she has raised it previously. Perhaps if action had been taken on some points 10 years ago, we would not be wrestling with some of the issues today. I can assure Helen Eadie that we are aware of the issues that she has raised, which are not easy to address. We are determined to work with NHS boards to get a more consistent pattern across Scotland with regard to access, criteria and waiting lists, but I reiterate the point that the issues are complex.

As I said in reply to Helen Eadie, these matters are interrelated and complex. I reiterate that seven health boards—seven areas out of 14—are compliant with the guidance. Another three have partly implemented the updated guidance and four have not made the progress that I would have liked them to make. I am discussing with them when and how they will make progress. There are other complex issues that surround that of waiting times, which we are more than aware of. As I said in reply to Helen Eadie, we will consider how to address them.

The current eligibility criteria are—I cannot find them among my papers. [ Laughter. ] I will ensure that I write to the member with the current eligibility criteria, which of course cover issues such as age. I would not want to mislead him by giving him the wrong ones; I want to ensure that I give accurate information. Helen Eadie's point is important. The criteria that we have issued and the updated guidance have been followed by some boards but not by others. It is only fair that, no matter where someone lives in Scotland, there should be consistency in access. We want to progress that.

Like others, I associate myself with the remarks that were made about the tragedy in the North Sea. Our thoughts are with the family and friends of those who have been affected. This has been an interesting, worthwhile and quite consensual debate. Members have made a wide range of points that demonstrate the high level of interest in patient waiting times and how vital health care services are to us all in Scotland. I am encouraged that we appear to have general cross-party support on a number of issues, including the need to improve on the current waiting times standards by giving patients a clear indication of the maximum time that they will need to wait from referral to hospital treatment. Delivering on the 18-week target will be challenging and will require an enormous shift in how hospital services are provided. Although Richard Simpson suggested that England was in some ways ahead of us in doing that, I should point out that England started on that process in 2005, whereas the previous Scottish Executive decided not to do so in 2005. Therefore, rather than falling behind, we are now catching up because of the efforts that were taken two years ago to move towards the 18-week target. As I said, the target is challenging, but it can be achieved by building on the changes that are already taking place and by continuing to develop the NHS as an integrated service in which the patient's experience is smooth, swift and seamless. Mary Scanlon and Jamie Stone suggested that targets somehow distort clinical priority. I strongly disagree with that. As we have stated on a number of occasions, patients whose clinical need requires that they be treated quicker than the maximum waiting time should indeed be treated much more quickly. That is the very essence of a clinically driven system and we will always support and defend that. The maximum waiting time is a backstop, as the cabinet secretary said in her opening speech.

I am very aware of some of the challenges that exist with mental health services. That is why, for the first time, we have moved to bring some of those treatments within the waiting time target. Clinical priority is still very important in those areas and most people are treated within the 18 weeks, but there are still too many people who wait too long. That is an issue that we are determined to address. Mary Scanlon and others mentioned the issue of long waits for patient groups that are currently outside waiting time standards. I assure those members that the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that patients have swift and safe access to the full range of services that they need from the NHS. Already, an increase of more than 100,000 patients to whom the standards will apply has been brought within the waiting time target for 2011. The development of the mental health waiting time target for children and adolescent mental health services has been welcomed by many members, as has the work that we are taking forward on access to psychological therapies. I note the workforce challenges that were highlighted by Richard Simpson. We are considering that area. However, it is to be welcomed that, for the first time ever, we have waiting time targets for mental health services. We continue to focus on other services. We are well advanced on the drug treatment HEAT target. Alcohol-related problems were mentioned by some members. Work has begun on the development of the alcohol HEAT target. However, it is important to recognise that, although it is important that we develop a HEAT target, we have not rested on our laurels when it comes to alcohol-related problems. That is why we have invested a huge resource—up to £120 million—in alcohol-related services, many of which are directed at brief interventions. That perhaps answers Ian McKee's point. It is very important that the staff who are delivering those brief interventions, whether it is a GP or a nurse working in A and E, have received the training to do so. That is an important development, which members should welcome. Helen Eadie talked about infertility services. I recognise the challenges, in that some of the waits are longer than we would want them to be. That is a long-standing issue, which goes back many years. Progress has been made, though, and those waits are not as long as they were. However, we recognise that there is more work to be done. We want to work in partnership with  members to broaden our focus and ensure that all patients get a service that is continuously improving. I hope that other members share the same objective and will work with us in that positive spirit. Although the debate has focused on waiting time performance, sustained delivery of that performance depends on having a workforce in place to deliver the highest level of care to the people of Scotland. I am pleased that more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals are working in Scotland's hospitals and community settings. Richard Simpson raised the issue of allied health professionals. If we are going to meet the 18-week referral-to-treatment target, we require to reduce waiting times to see allied health professionals. In turn, meeting the target will drive down waiting times. The latest figures show that, at September 2008, the total number of staff employed in the NHS in Scotland was 165,551—an increase of 2.1 per cent. While I am on the subject of staff, I assure Jackson Carlaw that I appreciate the efforts of all health workers, no matter which setting they work in. I hope that he will welcome the improvement in staffing levels within the NHS, which will deliver for patients throughout Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said in her opening remarks, we are investing more money in the NHS than ever before. We have increased spending on health in Scotland per head of population to record levels and have delivered record investment, which will exceed £11 billion by 2010-11. Capital investment totalling £1.676 billion was made available to the NHS in Scotland over the period 2008-09 to 2010-11—delivering real change and real progress for the NHS so that it can be better equipped and resourced than ever before to improve the quality of the patient and staff environment. As the cabinet secretary stated, we are committed to giving patients better access and to providing a health service of which the Scottish people can be proud. We believe that the maximum waiting time is an important element of that. It focuses the attention of those running the health service on what patients expect, which is quick and safe access to treatment in the NHS. That is what the SNP Government is determined to deliver for the people of Scotland.

Do I take it that the member does not support maximum waiting time targets?

Does the member recognise the worryingly high level of people who consistently drink more than the recommended limits? Does he think that that is a problem or not?

Will the member give way on that point?

This has been an interesting debate. The most revealing aspect of it has been the slightly confused and uncomfortable position of Labour members, as reflected in their speeches, some of which had a history-starts-today feel about them. Our position is clear, as set out in "Better Health, Better Care: Action Plan", which stresses public ownership through a more mutual approach, distancing the NHS in Scotland still further from what we would describe as the divisive market-oriented models that are favoured by some members. That document confirms the NHS's place as a public service that is delivered in partnership with the public. We have made it clear that we are committed to investing taxpayers' money in the NHS rather than in building up private sector capacity. However, we have no difficulty with NHS boards using existing independent sector capacity at the margins for the benefit of NHS patients, although any use of the private sector by boards will continue to be minimal. I correct Helen Eadie, who clearly did not listen to a word that I said in my opening speech. The statistics that she cited were based on a false premise. She did not mention the fact that half the figures that she was using included the figures for private nursing homes and care homes that are run by local authorities, charities and hospices. I say to her that the figures for acute activity—leaving aside Stracathro, on which she clearly has her own views—show a 37 per cent reduction in the use of the private sector between 2006 and 2008. We continue to provide increased resources to enable NHS boards to invest in their infrastructure, which supports the delivery of modern health care services. By allocating resources directly to NHS boards, we are ensuring both that local priorities can be addressed and that there is consistency with national and regional planning agendas. For example, in November 2007 and January 2008, the Golden Jubilee hospital successfully opened  two new dedicated orthopaedic theatres. That has enabled the hospital to increase the number of major joint replacement operations by around 1,000, taking the total capacity to around 2,500 hip and knee replacement operations. In addition, a range of minor procedures is undertaken each year. That benefits patients from throughout Scotland. It is now one of the biggest such units in Scotland. Also, last April, we announced £550 million of additional funding towards the development of the new Southern hospitals project in Glasgow, which incorporates the new 240-bed children's hospital. NHS boards are also making resources available to expand services from their capital and revenue allocations. Examples of that include the extension to Ayrshire community hospital out-patient department; the creation of a new endoscopy suite at Borders general hospital; and an upgrade of X-ray and computed tomography facilities and the creation of a new magnetic resonance imaging suite in Dumfries and Galloway. That move enabled the repatriation of a significant contract from the independent sector in July 2008. Those developments are all aimed at ensuring that NHS boards are expanding their services to meet their populations' needs. However, the NHS is not about adding new capacity without making best use of existing resources. Initiatives such as lean in Lothian have released significant additional resources for investment in front-line services, which is reflected in increasing activity. The overall number of procedures undertaken in NHS acute hospitals increased by more than 27,000 in 2007-08 compared with the previous year. All of that is leading to the success of the NHS in delivering significant reductions in waiting times. No doubt, we will have a further opportunity to discuss that in next week's debate. I look forward to highlighting the achievements of the NHS in reducing waiting times in that debate. We are very pleased that there are now more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals working in Scotland than ever before. The total number of staff who are employed by the NHS in Scotland has increased by more than 2 per cent, bringing the head count to more than 165,000 at September 2008. That figure includes a significant increase in the number of medical staff. The actions that are being taken by the Government and by NHS boards clearly show that the health service is well equipped to meet the needs and expectations of the people of Scotland.

Murdo Fraser and I have been party to the detail of the financing of the pilot. Of course, it would not be appropriate for us to discuss that here, because the information was given in confidence, but does he acknowledge that  the financing arrangements for a pilot are not necessarily what would be required for wider applications?

I welcome the debate, which gives us the opportunity to restate our policy on the use of the independent sector and to correct the claims that NHS boards' use of the private sector has increased during our period in office. I will come to that in a minute. Our primary objective is to have a world-class Scottish NHS. We certainly have no policy of investing in independent services at the expense of the NHS. The funds that were voted for by the Parliament for the NHS will be spent by the NHS for the benefit of NHS patients. However, neither do we have a policy of prohibiting NHS boards from using the capacity of the independent sector at the margins when that is demonstrably of  benefit to NHS patients and represents value for money. For example, NHS boards are perfectly free to continue to use the independent sector to help meet short-term pressures and to provide capacity from time to time when that is necessary to treat patients quickly. That will always be at the margins. We use the independent sector on a tactical basis, with long-term investment in the NHS. That is unlike the previous Administration, which made available £45 million over three years specifically to fund and encourage the use of the independent sector. That funding has now been repatriated to NHS boards, which has allowed investment in direct patient care. The investment that we make available will build sustainable services within the NHS. The independent sector will be used tactically, not strategically, on NHS terms and without central pump-priming where funds are used for acute activity in the independent sector. Let me turn to the statistics. The assertion has been made that official data are showing more use of the independent sector by NHS boards. Members should be aware that only now are procedures that have been taking place in the independent sector being recorded properly. The Information Services Division acknowledges that the published data are incomplete. That is why, last summer, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing specifically required boards to ensure that returns are submitted to ISD Scotland for patients who have been treated in the independent sector. The figures that have been referred to by the Tories as somehow showing an increased use of independent hospitals include private nursing homes, hospices and other independent providers, including homes run by local authorities and charities. In fact, half of the total figure that was cited in the motion—2,435 out of the 4,409 treatments for 2008—is for non-acute activities. The Tories have got their facts badly wrong, and they have interpreted figures incorrectly, despite the explanatory notes and the written answers that have been given to them, which make that point very clearly.

They are our figures—with a very clear explanatory note that members should have read. It would be a mistake to use the welcome increase in local care provision as a means to further the argument that the NHS is increasingly relying on the independent sector for acute activity. Rather, it is clearly consistent with our policy of shifting the balance of care. A proper analysis of the data that were provided by ISD Scotland shows that NHS boards have  recorded a significant downturn in the use of the independent sector for acute hospital activity. The figures show that independent sector acute activity fell by 37 per cent between 2006 and 2008—1,008 episodes in 2008 compared with 1,604 episodes in 2006—notwithstanding the lack of proper recording prior to 2008. It should also be noted that the joint NHS-independent sector facility at Stracathro showed activity of 966 episodes in 2008, compared with none in 2006, which skews the available figures for 2007 and 2008. Figures for core acute activity, leaving aside Stracathro, confirm that NHS boards are not making increased use of the independent hospital sector for acute services. I acknowledge the contribution that diagnostic and treatment centres can make to reducing patient waiting times. However, that can equally well be done in the NHS. The Stracathro pilot is currently being reviewed by NHS Tayside and its partner boards, which are examining their future capacity needs and are considering the full range of options for Stracathro's use to deliver the best outcome for patient care and the public purse. Despite the tightest financial settlement from the London Treasury since devolution—

It is true. Despite that, the Scottish Government has invested more money in the NHS than ever before. We have increased spending on health per head of population to record levels, and we have delivered record investment, which will exceed £11 billion by 2010-11. Capital investment totalling £1.676 billion was made available to NHS Scotland over the period 2008-09 to 2010-11. In 2009-10 and 2010-11, capital resources of £603 million and £548 million respectively have been made available to NHS Scotland. That is a record level of capital funding, which will ensure that the NHS is better equipped and resourced than ever before to improve the quality of the patient and staff environment. With those words, I am happy to move amendment S3M-3796.3, to leave out from "success" to end and insert: "Scottish Government's commitment to a mutual NHS in Scotland and its decision only to use the private sector for health provision at the margins where necessary; further welcomes the fact that there has been a 37% drop in private sector acute activity, excluding Stracathro, between 2006 and 2008 and congratulates NHS staff for achieving this reduction; notes the role of the private treatment centre pilot at Stracathro, established by the last administration, and awaits the final evaluation of this pilot, and commends the Scottish Government policy to direct investment into the NHS rather than divert scarce resources into private sector health provision."

I thank Bill Butler for bringing the debate to the chamber. I agree with him that there is no better example of the impact that a sports club can have on its local community than Drumchapel table tennis club. As members have said, any reference to the club must be made in tandem with mention of Terry McLernon, who is undoubtedly the driving force behind its immense success. His tireless work to improve the lives of young people has rightly received nationwide recognition, most recently at the Sunday Mail Scottish sports awards 2008, where he picked up the local hero accolade—and quite rightly so. I am sure that we all agree that the club can be proud of its achievements since 1989, including for the number of champions that it has produced and its remarkable success in competitions not only in the United Kingdom but in Europe.  However, I am sure that Terry McLernon and other club stalwarts are most proud of the impact that the club has had on local kids. As the motion suggests, Drumchapel table tennis club is to be applauded for its work in promoting healthy lifestyles, tackling antisocial behaviour in a supportive and positive way, and helping youngsters to fulfil their potential in an area that was once associated with social problems and economic hardship. We are talking about a real success story. I understand that the club's schools programme, which began in 2006 with six local primary schools and 300 children, now involves a dozen primary schools, a local high school and more than 800 participants. The value and potentially life-changing aspect of such a programme cannot be underestimated. Together with its equally important partner organisations, the club deserves national recognition for that work. I add my admiration to that expressed by other members in the debate. I would be happy—delighted—to take up the offer of a visit to the club to see the good work for myself. The final part of the motion addresses the role and impact of sports clubs and how Government, sportscotland and local authorities can facilitate support for sports at the grass-roots level. The Government recognises the valuable and important role that local sports clubs can play in galvanising a community and developing the sporting potential of tomorrow. In Scotland, we are fortunate to have an army of volunteers and coaches who are tireless in dedicating their time and energy to the development of sporting talent and imparting their skills, experience and passion to that end—the giving something back that Bill Butler and Frank McAveety mentioned. It is only right for us to build on that talent and expertise while also supporting and recognising the valuable contribution of those volunteers and coaches. That is why "Reaching Higher: Building on the Success of Sport 21", the national strategy for sport, provides a renewed focus on investing in club development and improving coaching education. It also provides a wide range of sporting opportunities from an early age—the access issue to which Frank McAveety referred. "Reaching Higher" also provides a renewed focus on additional support for parents, teachers, coaches and volunteers and strengthening the links between local authorities, leisure trusts and sports governing bodies through the sharing of resources, knowledge and expertise. Naturally, the implementation and ultimate success of "Reaching Higher" is dependent on the Scottish Government, local authorities, key agencies such as sportscotland and other partners fulfilling specific roles. Sportscotland recognises  that sports clubs and community opportunities are absolutely vital if we are to provide a full and diverse range of sporting opportunities. There has to be something for everyone. Sportscotland's community regeneration programme will strengthen the impact that local authorities can have in supporting clubs. That focused investment, coupled with strong relationships with local authority partners, will support directly the development of clubs and sporting opportunities in Scotland's most deprived communities, where opportunities are fewer. Glasgow City Council provides an excellent example of how community regeneration funds can be used to build capacity in local clubs. Its project aims to target 50 voluntary sports clubs and community organisations that promote partnerships and provide programmes to support sports participation and development opportunities. The principal aim is to build capacity within organisations so that increased and sustained opportunities are created for children and young people to take part in sport in their local community at an affordable cost. In order to realise the potential of sport, all local authorities and community planning partnerships will want to consider the development of the local sporting outcomes, indicators and actions that have the greatest impact on local communities and which, ultimately, will contribute to the Scottish Government's national performance framework. Frank McAveety raised the sporting legacy that will emerge from the 2014 games. The focus of the legacy is on building on infrastructure for sport at the local level and implementing a network of community sports hubs across Scotland. Although a number of local authorities have established community sports clubs in their areas, community sports hubs are a new, fresh idea that builds on existing good practice, maximises the use of existing resources in new ways and will gain impetus and momentum from the staging of the Commonwealth games in Glasgow. However, the games will last only 11 days. Frank McAveety was right to make the point that what we do before and after the games to galvanise talent in Scotland and to encourage young people into physical activity and sport will be the legacy that we want to leave behind. The approach that we are taking will ensure that we are able to replicate the success that has been achieved at clubs such as the Drumchapel table tennis club by building stronger community clubs and increasing opportunities for participation in sport across all ages, abilities and ambitions. It is right for the Parliament to take the time to acknowledge and highlight the sometimes unsung work that a great many people, organisations and, in this instance, an important sports club  undertake in communities throughout Scotland. There are many more clubs that do sterling work across Scotland. I thank Bill Butler for lodging his motion, which has given us the opportunity to recognise the valuable work and shining example of Drumchapel table tennis club. I hope that the club will keep up the good work, and I look forward to visiting it and seeing more of its work. I wish club members the best of luck in the future.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

Under their code of ethics, pharmacists must ensure that medicines are delivered safely and securely. In particular, they must ensure that there is a verifiable audit trail for medicine from the point at which it leaves the pharmacy to the point at which it is handed over to the patient or carer.

As my colleague the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism said at question time last week, the Scottish Government shares the widespread public concern about the UK Government's proposals to part-privatise the Royal Mail. As he explained, we will continue to express our concerns and to monitor developments, to ensure that service levels in Scotland are protected.

The first year of the human papilloma virus vaccination programme is proceeding well. National health service boards are currently administering the third dose of the vaccine for girls in school, and we understand that uptake has been very good. ISD Scotland will publish the first set of uptake statistics for school-age girls on 26 March. NHS boards are also currently vaccinating older girls who are out of school. That work commenced in most board areas in January and February, so it is too early to gauge the level of uptake for that group. The first set of statistics for older girls is due to be published later this year.

We have worked closely with NHS boards to ensure that alternative arrangements are provided. Some GPs are taking part in the programme and co-operating with their local boards. However, in most areas, NHS boards have put in place alternative arrangements based around additional community clinics, which are provided in a variety of ways according to identified local needs. We will continue to monitor progress. The Scottish Government provided £1.5 million to NHS boards last year to support the implementation of the programme in 2009-10. Early this year, we provided a further sum of around £200,000 specifically to support the  alternative arrangements for the out-of-school girls.

Responsibility for the overall provision of national health service dental services in the area rests with NHS Fife. The board has put in place a number of measures to improve access to NHS dental services, including expansion of the salaried dental service.

NHS Fife has been allocated funding under the primary and community care premises modernisation programme for 2009 to 2011 to develop the projects to which the member referred. It is currently in initial discussions on proposed sites in those areas. Given that the projects are only in the initial stages, it is estimated that it will be early 2011 before they are completed.

This Government inherited a situation of neglect in investment in NHS dentistry. It was neglected over a number of years, which led to the situation that began to be rectified at the  latter end of the previous Administration's tenure and which has been picked up very much by our Government—so much so that it has been made clear to boards that investment in dental premises should be a priority for the primary and community care premises modernisation programme. I would have thought that the member would welcome that.

NHS boards are very active in ensuring that they address the needs of their areas. I can say to the member that six salaried surgeries are to be opened, probably this summer, at the new St Andrews hospital. Including those, a total of 27 new salaried surgeries will have opened since autumn 2008. Again, I would have thought that the member would welcome that.

The delivery and implementation of the early years framework will be taken forward in partnership between the Scottish Government and local partners. Health visitors, who are key to the delivery of the early years framework, work as part of multidisciplinary, multi-agency teams to support parents and identify risks to health. Working with others, NHS Education for Scotland is running a number of education initiatives to ensure that the training and development needs of health visitors and practitioners are met.

I reassure the member that ministers have been discussing the early years framework across the ministerial portfolios. We also worked together to produce the report "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities", which focuses on early years and early intervention. We recognise that there is a clear need to support parents with children at that stage of life, and the framework asks local partnerships to ensure that they develop clear leadership for zero-to-three services over the next few years. We are developing a number of extremely important initiatives in that area. For example, we will test the nurse-family partnership approach to young, first-time mothers in NHS Lothian, which I am sure will be of interest to the member. As was highlighted in "Equally Well", the approach will allow us to have a sustained input into families from an early stage in an effort to prevent some of the problems that appear later in children's lives. I hope that the member will welcome that initiative, and I will be happy to keep him informed of progress.

There are currently no plans to introduce a national screening programme for asbestos-related diseases. The Scottish Government has been committed to an evidence-based approach to screening and is given expert, independent advice on screening programmes by the United Kingdom National Screening Committee. The UKNSC sets out the criteria to assess screening programmes, the introduction of proposed new population screening programmes, the modification and withdrawal of existing programmes, and the quality and management of such programmes. It keeps a watching brief on and an on-going review of developments in the field.

No useful test is currently available that detects people who have been exposed to asbestos and are likely to get  mesothelioma, although we hope that there will be such a test in time. The Scottish Government has a policy to encourage clinicians to ensure that as many patients as possible are included in relevant clinical trials, and there is significant evidence that outcomes are improved for patients treated in environments where research is the norm and for patients who are involved in cancer trials. The decision on eligibility for inclusion in a specific clinical trial is a matter for agreement between clinicians and their patients in individual cases. All three of the regional Scottish cancer research networks are actively recruiting for a mesothelioma and cancer study, and I am happy to provide the member with further details of that study if he will find that helpful.

National health service boards continue to make steady progress on making insulin pumps available. There are now 407 people with type 1 diabetes who are being supported in their use of a pump. The Scottish Government is committed to making sure that people in Scotland with type 1 diabetes who meet the criteria have access to insulin pump therapy.

I recognise the member's long-standing interest in the matter. NICE's technology appraisal 151 of July 2008 has been approved by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. The member asked about the monitoring of health boards' implementation of the recommendation. We continue to monitor progress on making insulin pumps available on a board-by-board basis and to encourage boards to maintain the current momentum. I will take a close interest in that. We will also continue to emphasise the importance of the issue in revising our diabetes action plan. I suggest to the member that there is potential for him and others to get involved in taking forward that revision.

We have had an extremely useful, if short, debate. It is clear that all parties endorse the idea that we need to improve support for Scotland's unpaid carers. I acknowledge the comments of Johann Lamont, Ross Finnie and others on the shortness of the debate and undertake to find out how we can create further opportunities for the Parliament to discuss what is an important issue in more detail and at a time that will allow feed-in to the development of the carers strategy and the review of the progress of care 21. As has been said, Scotland's unpaid carers, of whom there are more than 600,000, represent the  largest section of the care workforce. To enable carers to continue in their vital role, it is essential that there is early identification of their caring role and that they have access to the support that they need. I am aware that there is a great deal of excellent practice around carer support in local authorities, health boards and the voluntary sector—I have witnessed that at first hand. However, as some members have said and as I am aware from speaking to carers, there are areas in which practice is less well developed. More needs to be done to ensure that carers can access the support that they need when they need it. I will try to respond to the points that have been made during the debate and will write to the members to whom I do not respond. In response to Margaret Mitchell, I should have mentioned in my opening speech that although the census questionnaire for 2011 has not been finalised, a census rehearsal that is planned for the end of March will include a question on unpaid caring. As far as I am aware, that seems to be the case, but I will keep an eye on the situation. Bill Kidd and Sandra White mentioned the benefits trap. I can inform members that during the development of the UK Government's carer strategy, I wrote to the responsible minister, Ivan Lewis, the then Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Care Services, to highlight areas that would impact on Scottish carers, including issues around income and employment. I drew his attention to the relevant sections of the care 21 report, as Scottish carers were keen for us to do. Many issues of financial support will have to be resolved. Malcolm Chisholm spoke about employment. I think that there is some debate in England over whether there is a duty around employment there. Whether there is or not, his point was well made and I will be happy, as part of revising the carers strategy, to explore ways of supporting carers so that they can balance employment with their caring responsibilities. Malcolm Chisholm, Johann Lamont and, I think, Ross Finnie referred to single outcome agreements. I will make two quick points. Single outcome agreements are high-level documents that are not intended to replace all the underlying arrangements for service planning and performance management in local authorities. I have been directly encouraging local partnerships to make the connection between single outcome agreements and national frameworks. One of those frameworks is the community care outcomes framework, which contains a measure on support for carers. I have been encouraging all partners to adopt that particular measure.

Many of them refer to the community care outcomes framework, which is an essential part of bringing together all the important community care indicators. Selecting one particular indicator is not the best way to make progress; we should consider all the indicators as a package. That is why the community care outcomes framework brings all the indicators together. That will be important in providing support to carers and service users. The framework was started under the previous Administration, of which Johann Lamont was a member. I hope that she will therefore be able to support it. Tracking is important. We have a framework in place that will allow COSLA to track the delivery of the 10,000 extra respite weeks. COSLA will report to us annually to inform us of progress across all Scotland's councils. Tracking will help to ensure that those weeks are delivered. Perhaps I have a little more faith in our local authority colleagues than Johann Lamont has. I hope that they share our commitment on carers. Local authorities' expenditure on support for carers was measured back in 2006-07, at which time more than £100 million was being spent on carers services. I have no reason to believe that the amount has done anything other than increase. Resources are being spent on carers services. However, I accept that more has to be done, which is why the extra £13 million has been invested in health boards and local authorities. We should expect our colleagues in local authorities to want to deliver those services, just as we do. I have faith that the issue is a priority for local authorities. Cathy Jamieson asked me a number of questions to which it would be difficult to respond in any detail now, but I will write to her. The questions were pertinent and they can be considered as part of the review of progress so far and as part of progress on the national carers strategy. I hope that my responses have given members a flavour of my views; I will write to members whose points I have not been able to cover.

I join Margaret Mitchell in passing on our condolences to David and Samantha Cameron for the loss of their son. I welcome this debate on unpaid carers, which provides us with an opportunity to recognise the huge contribution that they make to Scottish society, which Margaret Mitchell pointed out, and to highlight the importance of supporting that dedicated group and exploring how best we can do that. I commend the previous Administration on its work to advance the unpaid carers policy. Its response to the 22 recommendations in the care 21 report—"The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland"—provided a robust framework within which to develop unpaid carers policy. We intend to take that work further. The Government is fully committed to improving the identification of and support for Scotland's unpaid carers. I am confident that that commitment is shared by our local partners. I am aware that there is cross-party agreement on the issue. However, more needs to be done to ensure that all carers have access to the support that they need. In recognition of that, as Margaret Mitchell notes in her motion, later this year, we will revise our national carers strategy in partnership with COSLA. The strategy will be informed by a review of progress against the recommendations of the care 21 report and by input from stakeholders. I welcome the efforts that the Equal Opportunities Committee has made to gather evidence on the issue. That evidence will inform the development of the national carers strategy, which will be a key document that will set out the long and short-term priorities in carer support for the Scottish Government and our local partners. It will be an aspirational strategy that puts unpaid carers firmly at the heart of health and social care policy. It will focus on the specific needs of young carers, with a standalone section on improving identification and support to prevent young carers from taking on inappropriate levels of caring. I hope that that gives Margaret Mitchell the reassurance that she requires on that point. The strategy will be the driver for the development of future carers policy. However, since the Administration came into government, we have made support for carers a priority. We have already put in place several measures that will improve support for Scotland's unpaid carers. That includes the commitment in our concordat with local government to make progress towards an additional 10,000 respite weeks a year. We provided an additional £4 million, on top of the  existing resources in the local government settlement, to enable local authorities to deliver that commitment by 2011. To support local planning of that vital service, we published jointly with COSLA short breaks guidance to promote the development of personalised, flexible short breaks from caring, which meet the needs both of carers and of those for whom they care. The Government recognises the need to provide carers with information and training to support them in their caring role. That is why we have invested £9 million over three years to support health boards in the implementation of the NHS carer information strategies. Those strategies are supporting improvements in carer identification and the provision of carer information and training throughout Scotland. They must include measures to meet the specific needs of young carers and carers from black and minority ethnic communities. We have assessed the strategies rigorously before granting ministerial approval to ensure that they meet all the minimum requirements that are set out in guidance. We recognise the adverse effects that young caring has on the development, educational attainment and wellbeing of children and young people. Young carers should be enabled to be children and young people first and foremost. It is absolutely crucial that such young people are identified early and provided with support to enable them to reach their full potential. It is unacceptable that many of Scotland's young carers are falling through the net unidentified and unsupported. We have a responsibility to ensure that they are identified and supported in classrooms and communities throughout Scotland.

As part of the work that we will be doing with young carers, we will look at where projects and services are in Scotland, where they are not and what more we can do to support young carers services throughout Scotland. It was clear to me in talking to young carers at the young carers festival that there is a mixed bag of support for young carers throughout Scotland and we need to get better at ensuring more consistency. That is why COSLA's involvement is critical. To support our work around young carers, we have developed a young carers services self-evaluation guide, which focuses on positive outcomes for young carers and their families, with an emphasis on partnership working.  In response to Mary Mulligan's intervention, I mentioned Scotland's first national young carers festival, which we funded. The event provided young carers attending with a break and some fun, which was important, but it was also important that it provided a national voice to a group that is often hidden. They certainly used that voice and without a doubt the festival raised the profile of young carers, with both local policy makers and the media. I was delighted to attend the festival, and the issues that were raised by young carers who attended will inform the development of the young carers section of the national strategy. Quite simply, Scotland's health and social care services could not cope without the dedication and expertise of unpaid carers. It is vital that we provide the support that they require and this Government is committed to doing so by working with carers to achieve that end.

The Scottish Government supports the delivery of well-designed, sustainable places where everyone can access the amenities and services that they need. We provide direct support for the promotion of green space through the funding of organisations such as Greenspace Scotland and initiatives such as paths to health and green gyms. We also fund research into the links between green space and health. "Equally Well", the report of the Scottish Government's task force on health inequalities, recognises the importance of healthy physical environments in tackling health inequalities and outlines the actions that are taken as a result of that link.

I will certainly look at that, because it is important that we identify which areas to focus our attention on. It is obviously important for our partnership working with local authorities that we are able to do that. As part of improving our understanding, we are funding research into the links between green space and health, which will input into policy development across a range of areas. I am sure that we will take that forward with our local authority partners to improve their understanding, too.

According to the most recently published delayed discharge census, in October 2008, 263 elderly patients in hospital were waiting to move to a care home. Of those patients, 50  were delayed for more than the agreed discharge planning period of six weeks. Although the level of delayed discharges at the October census was 87 per cent lower than was the case in October 2006, under the previous Administration, the Scottish Government is determined to ensure a positive return to zero as soon as possible.

Local authorities have received record levels of funding, which were reflected in yesterday's announcement by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Of course, the priority that delayed discharge is given is shared between ourselves and colleagues in local government. I hope that, because of that shared priority and because of the extensive work that is going on between local authorities and health boards to redesign services, to make them more fit for purpose and to ensure that people can have as quick as possible a transition from hospital, not only will there be a return to zero but—this is important—such a position will be sustained. I am confident that the work of local partners will deliver that.

As I indicated when I spoke at the conference, which launched the research on the subject, the Scottish Government has still fully to consider the recommendations that were made in the report. SurvivorScotland, the national strategy for adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse, will continue to address the needs of all survivors, including male survivors. The national reference group that was set up to implement the strategy will discuss any relevant action arising from the report.

I acknowledge the long-standing commitment of Marilyn Livingstone as convener of the cross-party group, and I can outline a couple of things that we are doing. We have provided thrive, a Glasgow-based service specifically for men, with funding for a three-year period provided under section 10 of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. We have also provided  health in mind, a service that carries out specific work with male survivors, with funding for the forthcoming period. That work is important, but it is also important that mainstream service providers throughout Scotland, which might well come into contact with male survivors, are sufficiently sensitive and can signpost people to the right support. I am happy to work with the member to consider how that could be done better. One of the recommendations of the research report dealt with that issue, and I am happy to keep the member informed about how we take it forward.

The responsibility for the overall provision of NHS general dental services in the area rests with NHS Borders, which has plans in place to increase access in its area. The number of dentists providing NHS general dental services in the NHS Borders area has increased from 47 in September 2006 to 54 in September 2008.

Access to NHS dentristry has been a long-standing issue in too many areas in Scotland, but the Government is determined to resolve it. I advise the member—I am sure that he will be aware of this—that the new dental centres at Hawick and Coldstream are nearing completion and will be opened by 27 April 2009. They will have state-of-the-art facilities both for staff and for patients. All together, 11 new surgeries will come on stream. That will go some way towards relieving the waiting list situation in NHS Borders. I will be happy to keep the member up to date with how NHS Borders plans to address what is a serious situation.

This has been a far-reaching debate on an issue that impacts on us all. I am very grateful indeed for the constructive contributions that have been made on all sides of the chamber, which shows the seriousness with which the whole Parliament treats this important issue. The cabinet secretary took some time in her opening speech to set out the actions that we are taking across the NHS in Scotland and I want to use a little bit of my time to restate the significance of those actions and how they impact across the NHS. NHS boards now have better local surveillance systems in place, which are more transparent, robust, sensitive and reliable in identifying situations that require further investigation. A far better understanding of the different C diff strains is emerging through the work of the C diff national reference laboratory, a more robust reporting regime is in place and there is a zero tolerance approach to non-compliance with hand hygiene standards.  I was struck, as I think other members in the chamber were, by Patricia Ferguson's description of the nurse pulling up the doctor. I think that that is absolutely right; it should be understood throughout the NHS that it is everybody's responsibility, no matter how senior the person who breaches the guidelines, to speak out. I say well done to the nurse who did that. It is important to reiterate that we are investing record levels of resources in tackling HAI and increasing spend by £39 million over three years, which is a 260 per cent increase. We have announced a target, from April 2009, for NHS boards to reduce C diff rates by at least 30 per cent by March 2011, but we will ask boards to set themselves a more challenging target for reducing C diff year on year.

I was just coming on to talk about the 15-point action plan. We have confirmed our understanding that much of what is in the Labour Party's 15-point action plan—

I will come on to Jackie Baillie's specific point if she just gives me a chance to do so. Much of what is in the 15-point plan is already in place in Scotland in the 57-point action plan that is being actioned by the national HAI task force, which has been asked to review the detail and consider what actions would further enhance our already extensive HAI work programme. I can tell Jackie Baillie that it is on the agenda for the next meeting of the HAI task force on 24 February to take that work forward, so it is happening very quickly. I hope that that assures members across the chamber that the HAI task force will act on that very quickly indeed, as is quite right and proper. It is also important to say that our rates of MRSA are now at their lowest since surveillance reporting began: C diff rates are down by 17 per cent on the previous quarter and by 2 per cent on the same quarter last year; and, of course, despite concerns that have been raised in the chamber about hand hygiene compliance, it is at its highest level—93 per cent—since reporting began, so that message is getting through to front-line staff in our health service. It is clear that only by continually improving and redoubling our efforts to tackle HAIs will we see those trends continue, so there is no room for complacency. Only by doing that will we  give the public the necessary reassurance that they deserve.

I thought that I had made it clear that the task force will consider all elements of the 15-point plan. None is excluded. The task force will look at the 15 points and advise what further progress needs to be made, including in relation to the target in the 15-point plan. I can give the member that reassurance. Finally, members can be assured that our HAI work programme will continue to engage with a wide variety of agencies through the national task force, which is responsible for overseeing actions on reducing infection rates in Scotland. I am sure that members will welcome the fact that we are also engaging with many linked sources, including the patient safety and patient experience programmes.

With Parliament's co-operation, I am sure that we can make the progress that everyone wants to see. I urge members to support the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon to take that important work forward.

I thank Irene Oldfather for bringing this important debate to the Parliament. We have led the way in making dementia a national priority. I welcome the support and attention that the Scottish Parliament and, in particular, the cross-party group on Alzheimer's have given to dementia, and I look forward to continuing to work with the Parliament in future. Last year, when I met the Scottish Dementia Working Group—the only patient-led dementia group that we know of in the world—it showed its support for our commitment and focus, but it was clear that there is more work to do before we can be satisfied with dementia services in Scotland. I agree. In the past year, we have taken several steps to establish dementia as a national priority in practice. We now have a national NHS target that requires all health boards to deliver by 2011 agreed improvements in the early diagnosis and management of patients with dementia. From the review visits at the end of last year, it is clear that boards are already getting to grips with that important agenda. The mental health collaborative, which supports local delivery of national NHS targets, published a toolkit at the end of last year that is designed to enable boards to analyse their dementia services from the perspective of those who use the service. The information from the analysis will be used to make progress with local service redesign to improve interventions, outcomes and the patient experience of the service. Health boards are working with general practitioners to improve their knowledge and understanding of dementia with the aim of increasing the rate of early detection and referral to specialist services. Diagnosis means more than going on a register; it triggers regular physical health checks for those with dementia, as well as formal assessment of the needs of those who care for them. To build on the work to improve diagnosis, we have commissioned Alzheimer Scotland and the dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling to carry out work in Lothian, East Renfrewshire and Renfrewshire, and Shetland to develop better structured intervention, support and information services following first diagnosis. The work is intended to develop our understanding of how we can best offer those services so that they meet patients' and carers' needs in an understanding and sensitive manner. The project has developed from what we have  already learned from the work of the dementia services development centre in Forth Valley NHS Board. That work provided a focus for service development, together with information, education, and tools and techniques to implement change, with the aim of improving the overall experience and outcomes of care for people with dementia. We published the outcomes of that work last year, and boards are now using that information in the redesign and development of services. NHS Health Scotland is offering post-diagnostic support through the publication "Coping with Dementia—A practical handbook for carers", which is widely available in Scotland, and through the publications "Worried about your memory?" and "Facing Dementia: how to live well with your diagnosis", which were recently updated by NHS Health Scotland working with Alzheimer Scotland and the Scottish Dementia Working Group. In 2008 we undertook research into public attitudes to and understanding of dementia, and we will shortly launch a pilot public awareness campaign in Tayside to increase the number of people with dementia coming forward for diagnosis. We will evaluate the outcome of the campaign and use the learning from that to inform possible future national campaign work. Irene Oldfather mentioned memory clinics. They are one way in which dementia can be identified and responded to, and recent research has identified that they are a common component of old-age psychiatry services in Scotland. We are taking forward work on awareness raising, early diagnosis and information for people with dementia and their carers. The development work on the integrated care pathways, which will be accredited from later this year, also brings a focus to end-of-life care, social support and quality of care. I am glad that those developing the English strategy have been able to learn from the Scottish experience. We, too, are happy to learn, and I welcome the report from the cross-party group on Alzheimer's. It has highlighted the needs of people in A and E who have dementia and identified areas in which clear improvement is possible, and I am pleased to be here to respond to the debate on it, particularly given that my response can be positive. It is important that we can identify properly those who come into A and E who may have dementia and that we can track them through their time in the unit. In that way, we can ensure that they receive the sensitive care that they need. Staff in A and E need to know how to care for people with dementia, and it is important that cultures and behaviours are appropriate for this patient group. I agree that the more that we can do to prevent  those with dementia ending up in A and E the better, but if people end up in A and E the way in which they are treated is crucial. It is for that reason that I have written to all NHS board chairs and chief executives to indicate my support for the report and provide guidance on how boards can implement its recommendations. The guidance that was provided was drawn up with the support of the dementia services development centre. I turn to the two points that Irene Oldfather raised. On the first point, I assure her that we will look at how to ensure joined-up working across health and social care as implementation takes place. Although the report's recommendations focus on A and E, they are relevant to other care settings, so it is important for us to do that.

Quite a lot of work has been done on the issue, particularly considering the new role of the senior charge nurse. We want to ensure that those in that leadership role on the ward pay much more attention to the nutritional needs of people in their care. A lot of work is also going on in care homes. I can write to the member with more details on that: patients' medical needs are important but so too are their personal care needs, including nutrition.  Irene Oldfather second point was on specialist nurses. The role of dementia specialist nurses is part of the solution in caring for people with dementia who are in hospital, but we must not forget that the main thrust of the report's recommendations was that all staff should receive training in dementia. We must be cautious as we do not want to end up giving the impression that all the responsibility comes down to one person. All the recommendations were important, but the key recommendation was to ensure that all staff have a basic awareness of and training in dementia. We will look in more detail at how to take that forward. I have written to the convener of the cross-party group on Alzheimer's to set out the steps that I have taken, and I am happy to join the Parliament in giving my support to the motion. We are clear about the challenges that we face in offering high-quality and sensitive care to people with dementia, and we will not shirk the need to take action. I assure members that I have heard the issues that they have raised and I will reflect on them in the development of our further plans. I am happy to continue to work with the cross-party group on Alzheimer's as we take forward that work.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and  Wellbeing recently met the healthy living centre alliance and had a constructive discussion on the future of healthy living centres. In the long term, we want to see effective healthy living centres continue their good work where that fits with local funders' assessment of people's needs and local service priorities. Some local funding decisions for 2009-10 have already been signalled. Further decisions will need to be determined now that the budget positions for 2009-10 have been resolved.

I agree that healthy living centres make a positive contribution. We established a transition fund to give local partners time to consider long-term, sustainable funding. I am well aware of the excellent work that getting better together provides in Shotts and know that local partners are well ahead in their discussions to resolve the provision of sustainable funding for that project. I make the point that the transition fund that we established has allowed such discussions to take place. That is in marked contrast to the position under the previous Administration, when six healthy living centres were allowed to close. We have provided transition funding to enable those centres to have a future.

I thank Karen Whitefield for securing the debate. I welcome, as she did, our visitors to the public gallery, particularly Janet Rae. I have seen the picture of you, Janet, from when you were one and a half or two years old; it is remarkable that we have moved so far from those days to where we are now. However, more needs to be done; I will return to that point in a little while. I congratulate Diabetes UK Scotland on its work over 75 years in supporting people with diabetes and their families and in driving much of the change that has taken place. The motion quite justifiably refers to the "contribution of Scotland" to the setting up of the organisation and to the management of the condition. I am glad to say that the tradition continues. The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has been doing pioneering work on isolating pancreatic islet cells. As a result, an islet cell transplantation programme is starting in Edinburgh in April, with an investment of £1 million a year. That will bring great benefits to certain groups of people with type 1 diabetes. As the motion says, we face the prospect of a substantial increase in the number of people in Scotland who live with diabetes. Getting across the messages about prevention has to be a priority for us all. Prevention is very high on the Scottish Government's agenda. Our work on tackling unhealthy body weight through better diet and increased physical activity is a key contribution to reducing the incidence of type 2 diabetes; many members mentioned that. There are £40 million of new resources to back up the healthy eating, active living strategy. We are mindful that there could be as many as 90,000 people whose diabetes has not yet been diagnosed. Ensuring that people get a diagnosis at the earliest stage is essential, so that steps can be taken to reduce their risk of developing any of the serious complications that diabetes can bring in its train. The UK National Screening Committee advises all four UK health departments on population screening issues. I very much welcome the  committee's recent decision to reconsider the issue of screening for type 2 diabetes. That will complement work that the Scottish public health network is doing on a needs assessment for diabetes, which the Scottish diabetes group has commissioned. That approach is consistent with the recommendations on the assessment of cardiovascular risk as set out in SIGN guideline 97 from the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network, which is clear that diabetes should be regarded as a type of cardiovascular disease. Work that was commissioned by the Scottish diabetes group last year confirmed the strong relationship between deprivation and type 2 diabetes, but it also reported for the first time an association with type 1 diabetes. We are therefore all the more determined to tackle the health inequalities that are associated with diabetes. The keep well programme is our main vehicle for that work. Implementation of equally well, our strategy for tackling health inequalities, will also help. Diabetes UK Scotland is keen to stress the extent to which people with diabetes are responsible for managing their own condition. We fully recognise that, and self-management is one of the main elements of our general work on long-term conditions. In partnership with the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, we are implementing the national strategy for self-management, "Gaun Yersel", which is backed up with resources and which the alliance published last autumn. People with diabetes and the organisations that support them will undoubtedly benefit from that important work. Above all, it involves acknowledging people's expertise in managing their condition. Such an approach is very different from the doctor-knows-best approach that Richard Simpson talked about—I apologise if it was Karen Whitefield who made that comment, which was spot on. We have moved a long way from that position. The motion refers to research. The Scottish diabetes research network's 2008 audit showed that 80 academic studies and 37 commercially funded clinical studies on diabetes were being carried out in Scotland. Those studies will make a major contribution to the research base. I very much welcome the acknowledgement in the motion of improvements in services that have arisen from the Scottish diabetes framework and the action plan that was published in 2006. The Scottish diabetes group, through each NHS board's diabetes managed clinical network, monitors progress against all the actions regularly and reports to us. The MCNs have a crucial role to play. For that reason, the Scottish Government supports the diabetes voices training programme, which prepares people with diabetes to take an active part in the work of the MCNs. Their input  contributes in a substantial way to the effectiveness of the MCNs' work and we are grateful to Diabetes UK Scotland for developing the programme. Considerable progress has been made in a number of key areas, such as SCI-DC, the diabetic retinopathy screening programme and the foot care of people with diabetes. There are also areas in which it is clear that more effort is needed, such as structured education, insulin pumps and psychological support. I give an assurance that we are committed to continuing the action plan approach. I understand that the Scottish diabetes group intends to produce a consultation document that sets out its assessment of progress on taking forward the 2006 plan. The group will also invite comments on priorities for action over the next three years. The group hopes that the revised action plan will be ready for this year's world diabetes day in November. Of course, Diabetes UK Scotland will be fully involved in the work. SIGN is revising guideline 55 on the management of diabetes. That work will provide the NHS with an up-to-date assessment of the evidence on the clinical effectiveness of all aspects of the management of diabetes. I understand that the new guideline is likely to be published in March 2010. The needs during school hours of children and young people with diabetes are a matter of great importance to Diabetes UK Scotland. Karen Whitefield mentioned concern about the findings of a survey that considered whether schools have policies in place to support staff to give diabetes medication. Guidance exists on the administration of medicines in schools, and the Scottish diabetes group's short-life working group on type 1 diabetes will consider how the implementation of the guidance can be improved in practice. I await the group's report with great interest. I applaud the constructive role that Diabetes UK Scotland plays at a strategic level in all the work of the Scottish diabetes group, as well as its important work to support individuals who have the condition. I am particularly pleased that Diabetes UK Scotland will help to refresh the diabetes action plan. Of course, 75 is no age nowadays. I wish the charity very well for the next 75 years and beyond. If we can make the progress during the next 75 years that we have made during the past 75 years, I am sure that we will get on top of a condition that is devastating for some people. Effort is needed to ensure that people who have the condition receive support, and to ensure that the condition is identified in people in whom it remains undiagnosed. As Nigel Don said, it is important that we take action on issues that have  an impact on diabetes, including obesity, which the Government takes very seriously indeed.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

Officials and I regularly meet the convener, chief executive and senior management of the care commission to discuss a range of issues relating to its functions. Officials last met the care commission on 3 December. Subjects on the agenda included the commission's performance in quarter 2 of 2008-09 and its health care associated infection plan.

The care agency to which the member refers was already operating in December 2003 when the care commission began regulating care home services. Special provisions applied in those circumstances and financial checks were not done on providers that were in business at the time. That is a significant factor in the case that he cites. Of course, local authorities' contractual arrangements with providers should require them to provide an assurance on their ability to provide the contracted service in future. That said, the issue that Michael Matheson raises is relevant.  The care commission has much practical day-to-day experience in the operation of the procedures for giving notice of closure. The need for early warning of closure, about which Michael Matheson is concerned, will feature in my discussions with the care commission at our next regular meeting in March.

The deployment and training of social care and health professionals—based on assessed needs and local priorities—is the responsibility of local authorities and health boards. We would expect all social care and health staff who support people with profound and complex needs to be fully trained in meeting their needs.

I will make a couple of points about that. First, I understand that NHS Fife and Fife Council have based their decisions about the level and skills of staffing in Kilrymond on the assessed needs of the residents who are currently living there. I assure the member that the resource level that is available for the service that Kilrymond provides has remained the same. She will be well aware that the resettlement programme is aimed at ensuring that people with learning difficulties do not have a hospital as their home. As part of that programme, only those who were clinically assessed as being fit for discharge were moved to community settings, with care packages based on individual need. It is not at all unusual for the level of nursing staff to be reduced as care staff become more skilled in providing appropriate care. The skills mix of staff in any care setting should be based on the needs of those who require care and support, and I understand that the proposed changes to nursing provision at Kilrymond are in line with that. I hope that that provides the reassurance that the member requires.

The planning of the workforce, including specialist nurses for motor neurone disease sufferers, is a matter for national health service boards, which are responsible for planning services in their area based on clinical need. In doing so, and as part of their plans to ensure that services meet the needs of people living with long-term conditions, they are required to consider the role of specialist nurses, and nurses with a broader remit to work in the community. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has been consulting on draft generic and specific standards applicable for neurological health services, including motor neurone disease. The publication of the standards is likely to take place this summer, and NHS boards throughout Scotland will  be expected to comply with the generic and specific standards drafted by NHS QIS.

I join Christian McKelvie in paying tribute to the work of the Motor Neurone Disease Association. It does a tremendous job, and I am sure that the event to which she referred will go very well indeed. It is important that the partnership involving the voluntary sector and the health service continues to grow. It is a strong partnership, which has delivered some innovative ways of working in the health service. As a Government, we will continue to encourage boards and to support them in working with the voluntary sector to deliver not just specialist nurses, but a range of other services that are important to the patients who receive them.

The Scottish Government has provided £2,014,386 to NHS Grampian for the provision of alcohol brief interventions and alcohol treatment and support services in Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire and Moray. The Scottish Government does not determine which services should be delivered through those funds, which is a decision best made locally according to identified need. Officials will be visiting each NHS board over the coming months to discuss progress on delivering brief interventions and the allocation of resources among brief interventions and other services.

I remind Richard Baker that we have committed about £120 million for  between 2008 and 2011 to tackling alcohol misuse, the majority of which has been allocated for provision of treatment and support services. A number of partners are involved in decisions on funding in regard to the services that are offered by Albyn house. The process is not simple, and I am sure that all the agencies involved are fully aware of the need for a decision, and will make a decision as soon as possible in the normal manner.

Alcohol Focus Scotland is working with Alcohol Support Ltd in Aberdeen to provide the online counselling service to which Brian Adam refers. The scheme has been in operation for only a short time, so it is too early to assess the results. However, Alcohol Focus Scotland will conduct an evaluation at the end of the pilot, before considering whether the scheme can be developed and then rolled out to other areas. I will take a keen interest in that evaluation.

NHS Grampian is of course aware of the long-standing problems with access to NHS dental services in the area, and the board has been working with dental practitioners to try to increase provision. In addition to the establishment of a new dental school for Scotland in Aberdeen on 6 October 2008, the Scottish Government has provisionally allocated to NHS Grampian £6.62 million under the primary and community care modernisation programme for 2009-10 and 2010-11. A priority for the funding is the development of new dental centres for independent general dental practitioners working in the NHS.

I remind Mike Rumbles of the bit that was missing from his question—the fact that his party was part of the previous Administration that negotiated the contract in 2005, and which we inherited. Mr Rumbles's efforts to pass the buck to the Labour health minister at the time, as he tried to do on the BBC this morning, will not have gone down well in parts of the chamber. I will answer Mr Rumbles's question directly: yes, we are concerned about waiting lists and we want to get them down. However, we also have to consider other measures of performance in dentistry. Registration figures are one such measure. I am pleased to be able to tell Mr Rumbles that, in the year to June 2008, the number of registrations of children in Grampian increased by more than 5,000, and that the number of registrations of adults in that period increased by more 16,000. We now have more dentists working in Grampian, and we have a programme of new build for premises—30 new dental units have been built since 2005. That is good, and over the next 12 months another six new premises will be opening in Grampian. By making dental premises a priority in the community care modernisation programme, this Government has certainly given dentistry a priority that it has not had before. We have also delivered the dental school. Mr Rumbles talked an awful lot about a dental school during the eight years when he had influence, but he delivered very little indeed.

Harmonised measures exist to control the safety of food produced in establishments within the European community and for the control of imports. Only food products imported from outside the European community are considered imports and are therefore subject to imported food controls. A range of measures is in place to monitor the safety of food imported from outside the European community.

The role of the Food Standards Agency in respect of controls of imported food from non-European Union countries is to give enforcement support and advice and undertake audits of enforcement activity with respect to local authorities' food safety and food standards controls on imported food. The environmental health services of the local authorities that have responsibility for food safety and food standards check imported foods at points of entry. Veterinary officers employed by local authorities carry out veterinary checks on products of animal origin presented at border inspection posts. Local authorities are also responsible for inland checks. I am happy to write to the member to give a more detailed response to the rest of his question about the role of importers and retail outlets.

Imported food should, of course, meet at least the equivalent required public health standard as food produced within the European community. It is important to make that point. The labelling issue to which the member referred is subject to on-going discussions among the Food Standards Agency, me and Richard Lochhead, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. We are happy to keep the member updated about progress on the matter.

We are conscious of farmers' concerns and continue to have a dialogue with that sector about its concerns. However, I reiterate that imported food has to meet at least the equivalent required public health standard as food produced within the European community. I want to ensure that that point is made. Imported foodstuffs can be subject to documentary, identity and physical checks. As I said previously, I am happy to keep the member informed about the measures that we are developing and, of course, to continue to listen to the farming community's concerns.

Argyll and Bute Council and its local partners are responsible for ensuring that older people in their area have access to appropriate care services to meet their needs. [ Interruption. ] If Opposition members want the answer, they might want to listen; this is a very important issue. The Scottish Government has provided Argyll and Bute Council with record levels of funding to meet its responsibilities, including for care services for older people. I understand that the council and community health partnerships have been consulting locally on the future delivery of care services for older people. Alongside that, the council has been progressing the action plan of improvements that it was required to prepare following publication of the Social Work Inspection Agency performance inspection of its services last year. A follow-up inspection visit was undertaken in June, which confirmed that progress was being made across the 24 recommendations. A further follow-up performance inspection will be undertaken in January, which will look specifically at outcomes for service users.

I have taken a very close interest in Argyll and Bute. I understand that officials from Argyll and Bute Council have discussed a number of individual cases with Jackie Baillie and have assured her that care decisions in each case have been based on each individual's assessed needs and not on financial considerations. I also understand that Argyll and Bute Council has submitted to the Social Work Inspection Agency anonymised details of individual cases that Jackie Baillie has raised. The agency has been working with the council ahead of a follow-up inspection of its social work services, which is scheduled for January. That inspection will look specifically at the delivery of outcomes for service users. In the light of that, I hope that Jackie Baillie will acknowledge that Argyll and Bute Council has raised the issue with the Social Work Inspection Agency. She should take comfort from that and be assured that the issue is not related to finance but to the care assessments made by the professionals—I am sure that she would not want to challenge their professional judgment.

Argyll and Bute Council is receiving record levels of funding this year to meet its responsibilities. It has stated explicitly that its current plans to redesign its care services for older people are not about making savings, but about improving outcomes for older people and their families. In fact, the council's single outcome agreement includes several commitments that are relevant to care services for older people. Those include a commitment to reduce the number of emergency hospital admissions of people aged  over 65; a commitment to increase the proportion of older people with intensive care needs who receive care in their own homes; and a commitment to the wider joint redesign of long-term care services for older people, including NHS continuing care. I would have thought that the member would welcome those commitments.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of supporting all carers in continuing with their caring role. That includes the carers of people who have mental health problems. We have put several measures in place to improve support for carers. Those include the commitment in our concordat with local government to make progress towards the provision of 10,000 additional respite weeks a year. We have provided local government with an additional £4 million to enable authorities to deliver that commitment in full by 2010-11. The additional weeks are intended to benefit a wide range of carers, including those who care for people with mental health problems. To support the local planning of respite, we have issued jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities some short breaks guidance that includes a reference to the needs of people with mental health problems and their carers. In addition, we have invested £9 million over three years to support health boards in the implementation of their carer information strategies. Those strategies could include the provision of information on how to care for someone with a specific mental health problem or the provision to carers of training in how to deal with challenging behaviour.

There has been widespread consultation on the broad principles of the reorganisation of the way in which our scrutiny bodies operate. There was widespread agreement in the chamber—including on the Labour benches—that the public scrutiny landscape was cluttered and that changes should take place. There will be further detailed consultation with stakeholders on the specific proposals that are now on the table concerning the roles and status of the new bodies. I am very well sighted on the issues that have been raised around the particular role and independence of the Mental Welfare Commission, and I assure the member that I will bear those in mind. I am happy to keep the member posted on developments as they happen.

NHS Fife is planning to transfer the podiatry service from Kirkcaldy health centre to Whyteman's Brae. That will free up accommodation in Kirkcaldy health centre to allow for expansion of the general practitioner practices based there.

I am reviewing the proposals from all boards on the use of primary and community care premises modernisation programme funds. I expect to be able to advise boards of the results shortly. In addition to those funds, Fife has access to its normal capital allocation. My officials will be working with the board to help it to deliver its identified projects as quickly as possible. NHS Fife has received an increase of £0.768 million over its 2007-08 formula capital allocation. It has also been notified of its indicative formula capital allocations for the next two financial years. I am happy to remain in communication with the member over the issue.

The Scottish Government established the Scottish Centre for Telehealth in 2005 to  facilitate the national introduction of telehealth services. There are many good examples of how the centre is helping to bring patients closer to health services, including testing access to hospital specialists from the homes of patients with chronic illnesses, such as motor neurone disease and epilepsy, and extending the use of telemedicine in areas such as unscheduled care and paediatrics. Looking to the future, the centre intends to mainstream such uses throughout Scotland where appropriate. The Scottish Centre for Telehealth is nearing the end of its third year of existence and a review of its work is under way. That review will be complete by the end of January next year.

The cabinet secretary will visit the telehealth centre on Monday, where she will see for herself the excellent work that is going on there. We have supported that work with resources over the past three years. The review that I mentioned will report early in the new year. Funding will be considered in relation to the outcome of that review. The member asked about the work that the telehealth centre has been involved in. It has developed a number of interesting services. In Orkney, there is a service for patients with suspected minor stroke. In the Western Isles and Shetland, there are ear, nose and throat tele-endoscopy clinics for patients. We want to consider how the services that have been developed in those areas can be used elsewhere. It is about providing the evidence base for how we would do that. Of course, we would expect to share that learning with other boards and that they would use that information. Such work is especially relevant in areas such as the Highlands and Islands. Not only can it produce a better health care system for patients, but it is very cost effective.

Yes, I am aware of that potential. The development of telehealth—and, of course, telecare, which is separate but linked—has potential in many areas. We must use the technology to our best advantage. I have said before and I will say again that we are only scratching the surface of the potential of both telehealth and telecare. I want us to step up their use in future—not only because of the demographic challenges that will face us, but because such systems will be better for patients in many respects. For example, patients may not have to travel to specialist clinics or other services. I agree with the point that the member makes, and I will be happy to keep him informed of progress.

We understand from Epilepsy Scotland that in Scotland there are 24 epilepsy specialist nurses: 11 for adults, seven for children and six for people with learning disabilities. We very much recognise the value that people with epilepsy attach to having access to an epilepsy specialist nurse and welcome the fact that the draft clinical standards on epilepsy, which were published on 24 November by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, highlight the important role that epilepsy specialist nurses play in the provision of services.

As I said, NHS QIS's draft clinical standards on epilepsy will play an important role in ensuring that health boards consider the role of specialist nurses in their areas. For example, the managed clinical network approach is a good way of involving specialist nurses in the delivery of services. The draft epilepsy standards recommendation that services be organised through an MCN approach will, I am sure, be of great relevance to children's services as well as adult services.

The motion highlights vividly the enormity of the worldwide HIV/AIDS epidemic and of the issues that we face here in Scotland. As the Minister for Public Health, I welcome the opportunity to close the debate on behalf of the Scottish Government. I thank Marlyn Glen for bringing forward an important debate. It is clear from the many and varied speeches that her motion has struck a chord with a great many members. It is important that, in addition to our work throughout the year, we take time on world AIDS day to recognise its importance and to highlight the challenges that we face. As has been stated, more than 33 million people worldwide are living with HIV. In 2007, there were 453 new diagnoses of HIV in Scotland, which is the largest annual figure since records began in 1981. Although some of the increase reflects an increase in testing, and recent figures show a reduction in the number of undiagnosed cases, there is evidence of transmission occurring among certain at-risk populations in Scotland. Specifically, in Scotland, men who have sex with men and people from sub-Saharan Africa are more likely  than anyone else to be affected by HIV. These stark figures not only set us a global challenge to work together internationally to reduce the spread of HIV, but also set the Scottish Government, health boards, local authorities and voluntary organisations a challenge to reduce transmission of HIV in Scotland. One of the overarching aims of respect and responsibility, our national strategy, is to tackle the rising incidence of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV. As members may know, the strategy is supported by additional funding of £5.18 million per annum until 2010-11. We are also investing £9.5 million each year to prevent the spread of blood-borne viruses in Scotland. The majority of that funding goes directly to NHS boards and is used to improve and support access to clinical service and for local targeted prevention work. That support is, of course, vital for health boards to continue their work. However, following a stocktaking review of the strategy, we are refocusing our efforts in order also to address the culture and attitudes that are associated with sexual health and HIV in Scotland. I have directly reflected that change in focus in the membership and work of the national sexual health and HIV advisory committee, which I chair, and in the new outcomes for sexual health, which were issued widely in September. I accept that changing some of the long-standing attitudes and values of the Scottish population is a real challenge and that it will not happen overnight, but it is a challenge from which we must not shy away. Change cannot be achieved by any one body or organisation alone. It is important for each of us to recognise our own role in providing leadership, delivering change and working together to achieve change in an often sensitive area. I will now discuss the work that is taking place on the wider social and cultural factors. I am pleased to be supporting the work of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender hearts and minds agenda group. The group is made up of representatives of the Scottish LGBT community and has been working over the past two years to examine in more depth negative attitudes towards that community. In February, the group published its report, which contains recommendations for the Government and others on how we can make progress in tackling some of the negative attitudes and prejudice to which Patrick Harvie referred. The report is aptly called "Challenging Prejudice" and it has the potential to be a significant step in changing attitudes and reducing discrimination. Although the Government has not yet responded to the recommendations in the report, we will do so shortly. I believe that the report can act as a catalyst for change and as a tool for making  policies and services more inclusive and more relevant to the LGBT community. I have already spoken of my concern about the rising incidence of HIV infection in Scotland and the need for action. One area of work in which members will be particularly interested is the development, in partnership with key stakeholders, of an HIV action plan for Scotland. The plan, which will be published early next year, will be overarching and will encompass not only HIV prevention but actions for care and treatment of people who are living with HIV. Its actions will aim to reduce HIV transmission, to reduce the number of undiagnosed cases of HIV, and to reduce stigma and discrimination. It will also aim to ensure effective co-ordination of prevention, care and treatment. I want to reassure members who raised issues about testing in primary care. The professional associations that work on sexual health and HIV recently produced the UK guidelines on HIV testing, which cover testing in primary care and other national health service community settings. We will take that forward. It is worth noting that, despite the availability throughout Scotland of a comprehensive range of anti-retroviral therapies to prevent HIV disease progression, the disease still has no cure. Marlyn Glen noted the lack of awareness and of public understanding about HIV in Scotland. I agree that, in recent years, HIV has not been as high on the public agenda as it should be. That is why the Scottish Government has allocated funding to the first national sexual health social marketing campaign since the tombstone campaign of the 1980s. It is in the developmental stages, but the campaign will focus in its first stage—from spring next year—on encouraging the public to talk about relationships and sexual health in general. Our aim is to create a more positive culture in which a more targeted approach can be used. As part of those social marketing efforts, we will undertake targeted work that is aimed at men who have sex with men, and at HIV. That work will use the important learning that has emerged from the successful HIV comeback tour and the equal campaign to develop materials for use throughout Scotland. That approach will be delivered locally through a range of community settings, to ensure effective targeting. I have mentioned the importance of working closely with key stakeholders to deliver change. The Scottish Government funds Oxfam Scotland to work with communities in Malawi to assist the most vulnerable people who are affected by HIV. We also provide funding of more than £350,000 a year to several voluntary organisations, including the National AIDS Trust, to undertake not only general HIV prevention activities, but specific work  with African people and men who have sex with men. I cannot overestimate the value and importance of the work of the voluntary sector, which has expertise in campaigns and in supporting individuals who need that support most. The voluntary sector also makes efforts to make a much wider impact on society, for the benefit of all.  I am happy to consider the calls that have been made for a full debate on sexual health. I will look at opportunities for that.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

Decisions regarding choices for patients, carers and families are a fundamental element of the planning and provision of palliative and end-of-life care services, regardless of diagnosis or location. By publishing the national action plan, "Living and Dying Well", the Scottish Government has provided a clear framework for NHS boards to ensure, for the first time, a consistent and comprehensive approach across Scotland which promotes choice about the nature of care at the end of life.

The clinical diagnosis made by the health professionals who are treating the individual concerned is important, as is the care that the patient receives, and how it ensures that a patient's wishes are respected as far as is practicable. Any care and treatment has to be provided in line with professional obligations and within the law. "Living and Dying Well", the care that people receive, particularly the identification of their needs by general practitioners and 24-hour community nursing, and the health boards' delivery plans, will ensure that care is improved across Scotland, and I hope that Margo MacDonald will welcome that.

I am aware of the bill and, as ever, we will consider the details of the proposal and respond accordingly. Roseanna Cunningham makes some good points, which is why "Living and Dying Well" is so important. It will ensure that, no matter where people live in Scotland, they will have their needs identified by GPs and 24-hour community nursing, and that the electronic palliative care summaries  for patient medical records will ensure that the right information is given to any health care provider, including out-of-hours services where we know there have been some issues around critical times. All that will be brought together and underpinned by education, training and workforce development, and the appointment of national and local clinical leads. I am sure that Roseanna Cunningham and other members will be interested enough to look at the delivery plans that health boards have to have in place by March 2009.

Fife NHS Board acknowledges that further upgrading of Glenwood health centre will not be sufficient to provide an environment that will continue to be fit for modern health and care services. Plans are therefore under development that should see the replacement of the existing health centre with a purpose-built, modernised health facility.

Tricia Marwick makes some important points. The development has moved on to the work required to review the scope and to ensure that the capital investment is manageable within the board's capital allocation plan. It is estimated that the outline business plan will be submitted for consideration by the capital investment group in February or March of next year. I am sure that Tricia Marwick will welcome that.

I, too, congratulate James Kelly on securing a debate on this very important topic. I am impressed by the number of people with Parkinson's disease who have come along to listen to the debate; the turnout in the public gallery is one of the biggest I have seen for a members' business debate for quite some time—it is a clear indication of how much the issue means to those people and their families. It is also good to hear that there was such a good turnout of MSPs at the event earlier today. I welcome the support that the Parkinson's Disease Society provides for people with the condition and their families and carers. "Better Health, Better Care" signalled our wish to work more closely with the voluntary sector. Our work on long-term conditions emphasises the importance of signposting people to the information and support that organisations such as the Parkinson's Disease Society can offer. The motion mentions that there are about 10,000 people in Scotland with Parkinson's  disease. There has been some discussion with the society about the number involved. We are advised on these issues by the information services division of NHS National Services Scotland. I am pleased that the ISD and the society have reached agreement on a figure of around 10,000 people. I shall answer a parliamentary question from Kenneth Gibson on that point shortly, which will provide another opportunity to put the figure on the record. The main issue that the motion raises is the problems experienced by people with Parkinson's who are unable to follow their medication regime after they have been admitted to hospital, either because they are not allowed to administer their own medicines or because they are not given their medicines at the right time. As James Kelly and others have made clear, disruption to the medication that people with Parkinson's need can cause serious and distressing problems. I agree fully with the part of the motion that says that that problem must be addressed. It is unacceptable that anyone with Parkinson's should feel scared of going into hospital. Several pieces of work will tackle the problem. The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guideline 35 on Parkinson's disease, which was published in June 2006, highlights the importance of timely medication in hospital, including self-medication. Of course we expect health-care professionals in Scotland to be aware of such guidelines and to implement them. Both the NICE guideline and the guideline that the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network is developing on Parkinson's will form part of the evidence base that underpins the clinical standards on Parkinson's disease, on which NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is working. A draft of those will be published next week. An essential principle of those standards is that they should focus on the issues of importance for those for whom services are provided. I have no doubt that, through the work of the Parkinson's Disease Society, the standards will emphasise medication in hospital. We need to ensure that the standards are followed. Similarly, I am sure that the standards will highlight the important role that Parkinson's disease nurse specialists can play, such as helping hospital staff, especially those in general wards, to understand how important it is that people with Parkinson's get their medication on time. We should expect health boards to follow those standards. I undertake to ensure that how that is taken forward is monitored. Another way of ensuring that the issue is addressed is through the development of managed clinical networks for Parkinson's disease. That would give a strong voice to patients and the voluntary sector in the delivery of services.  We have recently received a proposal for the development of such an MCN in the west of Scotland. One of its specific aims is the resolution of areas of current concern, and the application explicitly refers to the hospital management of anti-Parkinson's medication. We strongly support the proposal in principle as it is consistent with the priority that "Better Health, Better Care" gives to the development of MCNs for neurological conditions, and we are considering how best to take the application forward. There are other pieces of work that have a bearing on the problem. With the backing of the then Scottish Executive, the national pharmaceutical forum and the Scottish Medical and Scientific Advisory Committee issued a report in 2006 called "Patients and their medicines in hospital". It emphasised the need to support patients and encourage them to take responsibility for their medication, including, when appropriate, self-administration. The national pharmacy strategy, "The Right Medicine", issued in 2002, recommends the involvement of pharmacy staff in pre-admission clinics and on admission wards so that any medication issues are identified and addressed as soon as possible after the patient enters hospital. National health service boards should ensure that those initiatives are being implemented in their areas. We can follow up on that. We are also undertaking a review of the role of the charge nurse. An important element of the work is to empower charge nurses to ensure that each clinical area responds effectively to the needs of patients so that people have a better experience in hospital. That includes supporting self-medication for individual patients when appropriate. I hope that it is clear from what I have said that the Scottish Government fully supports the principle that patients should, whenever possible, be able to self-administer their medicines while in hospital. It is also essential that they receive their medication when they need it, in line with their prescription and individual care plan. Naturally, hospital staff will have genuine concerns about safety and the need to ensure that powerful medications are stored securely, but local policies should be able to address those concerns. Self-medication is a good example of the self-management that lies at the heart of our long-term conditions work and informs the national strategy for self-management, "Gaun Yersel!", which was developed by the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. The core of that strategy are the beliefs that people with long-term conditions are the leading partners in their own care and that, in managing their condition, the professionals should recognise the expertise that, as Richard Simpson  outlined, they and their carers have. I am in no doubt about the shift in culture that such an approach requires but, as the motion points out, people with Parkinson's, their families and their carers must be listened to. We must ensure that their voices are heard, and I can give a commitment that, as minister, I will play my part in ensuring that that happens and that boards play their part in delivering change on the ground.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

The rules governing the importation of skins are set out in European Union legislation that has been transposed into domestic Scottish legislation. The legislation is enforced at points of entry by Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs and official veterinary surgeons. In light of recent events, the Scottish Government has written to Scottish importers reminding them of the import rules that are applicable to the products.

We have reviewed the recommendations in the report with Health Protection Scotland and animal health officials. As Christine Grahame will know, the Public Health etc (Scotland) Act 2008 introduced new legislative controls to address issues that are faced during such incidents regarding access to property and other matters. We will review the need to take further action following the outcome of the fatal accident inquiry to which she referred. I am happy to keep the member informed of the discussions that my officials have on that matter.

It was one case.

Will the member give way?

How does one follow that? I do not think that I could be any nicer to the cabinet secretary. I wish that the debate had been constructive, but it was based on a false premise and opportunism. I will start with a little list—actually, it is quite a big list—of spending commitments that the Labour Party has made during the first 18 months of this SNP Administration. The list, which amounts to just over £0.5 billion, covers areas such as buses, student funding, apprenticeships in the creative industries, Scotland's sports ambassadors fund—a proposal from Cathy Jamieson—and pledged support for higher bursary funding. All those things add up to a fair bit of money. Labour members stood before the chamber this morning demanding more money for the health service, yet they did not, of course, specify where the money would come from. Labour member after Labour member, in every speech, failed to give an indication of which budget they would cut to fulfil the party's desire for higher health spending. That is not worthy of an Opposition party, let alone a party that wishes to be in government again. Labour members cannot come to the chamber and tell the Government what it should be doing without putting forward any solutions.

Cathy Jamieson did not offer up any answer to the question: where is the money to come from?

No; when the Opposition calls for extra spending, it is the Opposition's job to tell  us what budget cuts it will make to fund that spending. I return to Cathy Jamieson's misinformation and selective quoting. She said that NHS Shetland is making cuts in cancer services, but the fact is that NHS Shetland said: "One-off savings achieved by the Board include vacancy savings in a nursing post. No services have been withdrawn and these specific savings total £10k. Absolutely no savings have been made in Mental Health." Saying that savings would be made in mental health services was another piece of Opposition misinformation from Cathy Jamieson. That is only one example; there are many more that show the level of misinformation, opportunism and selective quoting that Cathy Jamieson used in introducing this shoddy debate. Gary Coutts, the chair of NHS Highland made his position on the savings clear. I repeat: "It will not affect the outcomes for patients. Patients might see the way that they get services is different, but waiting times are going to come down, cancer waits are going to come down, the length of time you wait for a consultant is going to come down." What a different picture he paints from the scaremongering about people dying—I think that that was what Rhoda Grant said—because of what were described as cuts to the health service. That is unacceptable language for any member to use about our hard-working staff in the NHS. Such language would not be good enough for members on any side of the chamber, but especially not for a member of a party that has been in government. Labour members should know better; they know about managing budgets. I need say nothing more on the misinformation in Cathy Jamieson's speech, other than to repeat that it was misinformation. I turn to Mary Scanlon's speech. I reiterate the point that, given that NHS Highland is on NRAC, it will consider issues including the future funding formula, which Mary Scanlon raised. Of course, joint working with the island boards is very important in making more efficient use of the services that they provide.

That is one of the very issues that NRAC will look at in taking forward the important piece of work with which it is tasked.  Ross Finnie made an interesting speech, some of which was reflective. As always, he said some interesting things. However, he cannot get away from the fact that the efficiency savings that will be made will be reinvested in front-line services. We have made that very clear from the outset. If Ross Finnie does not want those efficiency savings to be made and if he does not believe that that is the best way to free up resources to reinvest, he has to answer the question: where will the £800 million of savings that his party advocates come from? It is not good enough for any member, on any side of the chamber, to demand more money from the Government without saying where the money should come from. It is also not good enough to advocate cuts but not to say where the cuts will fall. I turn to Jackie Baillie. Frankly, she surpassed herself in opportunism today. She raised the issue of efficiency savings. Who was in charge in 2005-06? Oh, sorry—it was Jackie Baillie's Government; she might even have been a minister at the time. Efficiency savings under that Labour Government that year were £169,383. In 2008-09, under this Government, the savings are £158,129. Our efficiency savings are less than those that were expected or made under the Labour Government.

I am in my last minute. Jackie Baillie said that we should scrap efficiency savings, but yet again she gave no indication of where that money would come from. That is not good enough. No Labour member other than Malcolm Chisholm had the guts to offer up suggestions. He suggested that the abolition of prescription charges should not go ahead. No other Labour member had the guts to tell us where alternative savings should be made. Labour is not worthy of opposition, never mind government.

Will the member explain why, despite her comments, NHS Highland's chairman Garry Coutts has said that the savings "will not affect outcomes for patients. Patients might see the way that they get services is different, but waiting times are going to come down, cancer waits are going to come  down, the length of time you wait for a consultant is going to come down"? How does that comment square with Rhoda Grant's scaremongering?

There have been a number of attempts during lupus awareness month in previous years to secure a debate on the condition. Kenneth Gibson has succeeded—I congratulate him on securing the first ever debate in the Parliament on lupus. The motion contains a number of elements and I will try to cover them all. I acknowledge the help that we have received from the Scottish lupus exchange, an informal network of rheumatologists that met for the first time last year. I also record our appreciation of the work of Lupus UK, which is effective at providing information and support for those living with the condition. Lupus is a rare disorder of the immune system that presents with a range of symptoms that often mimic other illnesses, complicating the process of diagnosis. It comes in a number of forms—tonight I will talk about the systemic kind. As has been mentioned, lupus affects about 5,000 people in Scotland, 90 per cent of whom are women. On that prevalence, each general practice would have, on average, about five patients with lupus. As the motion states, the condition can be not only debilitating but disabling and, sometimes, fatal. Fortunately, in most people lupus can be treated with drugs; most people with the condition can lead active lives. The Scottish lupus exchange suggests that services for people with lupus have been improving, thanks to the appointment over the last 10 years of more rheumatologists with an interest in the disease. Thanks to funding from Lupus UK, there is now a lupus specialist nurse in the west of Scotland. Among other things, she has developed  the first telephone advice line for people with lupus. As Kenny Gibson said, the post is funded only until the end of the financial year, but it has been a highly successful initiative. A major concern of those with lupus is that we should not lose the expertise that the specialist nurse has built up. I hope, therefore, that national health service boards in the west will help to put funding for the post on a sounder basis for the longer term. I would also like NHS boards in other parts of Scotland to take up this approach. I intend to maintain an active and keen interest in the issue. The motion suggests that there is an urgent need in Scotland to raise awareness of lupus, especially given the difficulty of making a diagnosis. Lupus UK runs local meetings that provide information and assistance for those with the disease. Medical staff and the lupus nurse specialist contribute to those meetings. For GPs in training, the new Royal College of General Practitioners curriculum includes on the checklist of essential knowledge requirements a specific reference to lupus as one less common condition. The Scottish lupus exchange also has a role in supporting general practitioners. At NHS board level, it is keen to raise awareness of the potentially serious complications of the disease. The motion also calls for increased funding for research. Many fundamental aspects of lupus are still puzzling, such as why women are nine times more likely than men to get it. The chief scientist office would be pleased to consider proposals for research on the disease. Patients in Glasgow are already contributing to such research, and the Scottish lupus exchange would like to find ways to promote larger studies, which could address some of the issues that Sandra White raised. The British isles lupus assessment group has developed a system for collecting clinical data that, with the proper safeguards, could be used as a basis for developing Scotland-based research projects. Targeted education for health professionals is another issue that the motion raises. I understand that a clinical research fellow has just been identified to consider the best way of providing undergraduate medical students with educational information about lupus. Links between the division of nursing and health care at the University of Glasgow and the lupus specialist nurse have started a process of education for nursing students in Scotland. I am sure that members will consider that to be a positive move. The motion regrets the absence of a national centre of excellence in Scotland such as the lupus unit at St Thomas' hospital in London. It is, of course, possible for people in Scotland to be referred to that unit if that is considered necessary on clinical grounds. The Scottish lupus exchange is keen to build on expertise at local level to  develop what it describes as a virtual centre. That would allow patients access to excellent local services while providing support for staff and patients alike through a national mechanism. As Ian McKee outlined in his speech, such a pattern of services may be better suited to Scottish geography and circumstances than a single centre of excellence. Services should be provided locally wherever possible, but with prompt access to specialist services when necessary. We need to bear it in mind that travel may be difficult for those with the more severe manifestations of the condition. The model of a virtual centre also holds the promise of helping to sustain higher-quality services more locally. The Scottish lupus exchange considers itself to be a managed clinical network in its infancy—Richard Simpson and Mary Scanlon picked up on that point. I encourage it to develop as a formal MCN, and the Scottish Government health directorates stands ready to help with advice on that process. Through our general work on long-term conditions, we aim to improve services for people who live with any such condition. The particular emphasis on self management is relevant to lupus: patients can be given help to understand why they suffer flare-ups of the illness, how to treat them when they occur and how to maintain better health—for example, by avoiding unnecessary exposure to the sun. I am in full agreement with the spirit of the motion. We must provide the best possible services for those who live with the debilitating condition. I hope that I have been able to persuade the members present that I am keen to work with them and the organisations that I have mentioned to make progress.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

We believe that NHS clinical services should be provided by the NHS. Cleaning and catering services are regarded as core to the delivery of our clinical services, and as such are better provided directly by NHS staff.

I am happy to do so. It is clear to us that when cleaning and catering services are part of the NHS, it is easier to have control over them and they can be better integrated. That adds  up to better patient care, a more seamless joining up of services and the ability to vary services within hospitals, particularly cleaning services, when required. Such services are better delivered as part of the NHS.

We all owe Michael McMahon special thanks for securing a debate on an important subject that does not get as much attention as it deserves. I strongly support the motion and pay tribute to Marie Curie Cancer Care, the British Heart Foundation and others in this important area for the work that they have done. At the moment, probably about 100,000 people in Scotland are living with a diagnosis of heart failure. With people living longer, the prevalence of heart failure is set to increase markedly, so it is a matter of concern that we are not doing well even now for people who have advanced heart failure. The Scottish audit of surgical mortality raised that issue at least 10 years ago. In a series of reports, it drew attention to the plight of people with end-stage heart failure who were dying in acute hospitals and had a worse prognosis and poorer quality of life than many patients with cancer. To make their situation even worse, those people and their families had no access to the benefits of palliative care.  SASM's work was taken up by the CHD and stroke task force in its report of 2001. The CHD and stroke strategy that was published the following year noted that the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care had set up a working group to address the issue of ensuring that people with end-stage heart failure had access to palliative care. The Scottish Government and its predecessors have made clear that we want to move beyond the traditional association between palliative care and cancer. We firmly believe that palliative care, both general and specialist, should be available to anyone suffering from a progressive, incurable condition. As the motion says, "uncertainty around prognosis should not be a barrier to people with advanced heart failure" getting appropriate palliative care. We are now well placed to heed that call. The report "Living and dying with advanced heart failure: a palliative care approach" was published by the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care and the British Heart Foundation Scotland in March. I record my thanks to both organisations for the work that they put into it. The report's recommendations set out a clear way ahead. As the motion mentions, that is recognised in the consultation on our revised CHD and stroke strategy. That work is supported by SIGN guideline 95, on the management of chronic heart failure, which contains a valuable section on palliative care. The key recommendation is that a palliative care approach should be adopted in the early stages of chronic heart failure by all clinicians who are managing people with the disease. The introduction of palliative care from the time of diagnosis, not just in the final stages of the illness, is especially important in the context of heart failure, given the uncertainties about the course of the condition and the ever-present risk of sudden death, to which members have referred. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is considering how best to implement the recommendations in the SIGN guideline. I hope that the clinical standards on heart disease that NHS QIS is developing will include a standard dealing with palliative care for people with heart failure. Work on broadening the availability of palliative care beyond cancer has also been boosted by the Audit Scotland review of palliative care services. The section of its report that reflects the views of patients contains some quotes that make clear the importance that people attach to the role of the heart failure specialist nurse. That echoes a finding of recent research by the British Heart Foundation. Having one person with whom they  can build up a relationship of trust and understanding bolsters people's confidence in being able to cope with their condition. The voluntary sector has made a hugely important contribution to the provision of heart failure specialist nurses. The number of such nurses has grown considerably in response to the growing evidence that their intervention not only improves quality of life but reduces admissions to hospital, and possibly even mortality rates. The Scottish heart failure specialist nurses forum plays an important part in developing nurses' role. It has highlighted the importance of integration with other services, such as palliative care, including the need to develop formal protocols for referral. On palliative care more generally, we have just published our national plan for palliative and end-of-life care in Scotland, "Living and Dying Well", to which members have referred. The thinking in that action plan and the additional investment that we are making available will create a positive context in which to take forward the work on palliative care for end-stage heart failure. Approaches such as the introduction of the Liverpool care pathway for the dying patient have been developed to transfer the hospice model of care into other care settings. I hope that its wider adoption will help to ease the plight of those with end-stage heart failure who die in acute hospitals. Michael McMahon raised the issue of nurses not being released for palliative care education. The action plan recognises the importance of education, training and workforce development. I believe that implementation of the plan will address Michael McMahon's concerns. NHS Education for Scotland and the Scottish Government will work to develop an educational infrastructure for palliative care. I say to Mary Scanlon that the Nairn anticipatory care project, which she highlighted in her speech, is included in "Living and Dying Well" as an example of good practice. Our general work on long-term conditions is providing a favourable climate. "Living and dying with advanced heart failure" tells us that people with heart failure and their carers feel uninformed about their condition, feel excluded from decision making and feel that control of their lives is taken away from them. That could not be in greater contrast to the approach that we are trying to encourage. I assure members that the revised CHD and stroke strategy will, as the motion requests, seek to pull together all the initiatives that I have mentioned. In our managed clinical networks for cardiac services and palliative care, we have the best possible vehicles for taking forward that  important and long-overdue work. I hope that Michael McMahon and others are reassured by that commitment. I am happy to keep them informed of progress.   Meeting closed at 17:33.

NHS boards can currently extend that opportunity to living patients when the tissue may have value for research purposes. The importance of having such a policy in place will be included in forthcoming guidance to NHS boards on the collection, storage and use of human tissue for research.

It is recognised that the current procedures relating to the storage and use of tissue in Scotland for research purposes are not all of the same standard; some procedures may fall short of the Human Tissue Authority standards. It would not be prudent to issue guidance on the collection of tissue before the guidance on its storage and use is ready. As I suggested in my previous answer, discussions on some issues are continuing. I hope that draft guidance for consultation might be circulated among the research community within the next few months. I hope that that offers some reassurance to Malcolm Chisholm.

We are committed to a national health service that offers appropriate care and treatment quickly and safely. In most cases, those who require access to mental health services already receive treatment well within 18 weeks. However, as we announced during the summer, we are considering new waiting time targets for areas in which delays occur.

I certainly recognise that general practitioners deal with a high percentage of cases in the area of mental health, and I acknowledge Tom McCabe's point about inmates  in prisons. That is why we are taking forward a number of actions that span the psychological services and therapies to which GPs can refer people. We have set challenging national performance targets for mental health, including a target to reduce antidepressant prescribing; a target for suicide training for front-line staff; and a health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—or HEAT—target on dementia. As I said in my initial answer, we will shortly complete our considerations on the extent to which mental health services could, for the first time, be brought into the 18-week waiting time target.

We have confirmed an additional £5 million a year to 2011 for joint spend by agencies on mental health. That is in addition to the resources that are being given to health and local government, where there is, of course, a lot of joint work on mental health services. As I have said to Mary Scanlon before, we are developing some easily accessible psychological therapies to which GPs will be able to refer people as an alternative to antidepressant prescribing. I do not underestimate the challenge of reducing the rate of antidepressant prescribing. Such treatment is appropriate for some people, and in some cases it is a life saver, but there is no doubt in my mind that, for other people, we need to provide a range of alternatives. I am keen to do that, and we are making progress on that front.

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On policies that will make a difference, what policies has Richard Baker proposed in response to the consultation?

We have done that.

On the issue of consensus, the other main plank of the proposals is minimum pricing. Do the Conservatives support that? Did they submit alternatives in the consultation process?

I add my thanks to Trish Godman for securing a debate on this important but complex issue. Her motion mentions the death of Katie McPherson, and the first thing that I want to say is how much we sympathise with the McPherson family over their sad loss. We understand the family's wish to raise awareness of deep vein thrombosis to ensure that other families are spared the grief that they have been through. The events surrounding Katie McPherson's death were investigated in detail by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman. The Scottish Government and a range of agencies have been working on taking forward the key recommendations in the ombudsman's report. Before I describe that range of work, I will say something about the number of deaths in Scotland that are associated with thrombosis—a matter to which Margaret Curran and Trish Godman referred. The vast majority of the deaths are due to a thrombosis, or clot, in the arteries. Arterial thrombosis causes heart attacks and certain types of stroke. Coronary heart disease and stroke continue to be clinical priorities for the NHS because of the degree to which premature deaths from those causes can be prevented. We are doing a great deal of work to tackle the underlying risk factors for CHD and stroke through encouraging people to stop smoking, to adopt a healthier diet and to take more exercise. We are also refreshing our national strategy on CHD and stroke. Our keep well programme is about identifying people in our most deprived communities who are potentially at risk, so that they can be offered a health check to assess their risk of cardiovascular disease. Those initiatives relate to far and away the majority of the deaths that are associated with thrombosis in Scotland. I make it very clear that there is no question of there being more than 12,000 deaths a year associated with DVT. DVT can cause death when a blood clot that has formed in a deep vein, usually in the leg, breaks off and becomes lodged in the lung. That kind of clot is called a pulmonary embolism. According to figures from the General Register Office for Scotland, there were 257 deaths in Scotland related to pulmonary embolism in 2007. In the same year, there were also 112 deaths in which DVT was recorded as the underlying cause of death.  A number of risks are related to developing a DVT, but the only one that is related to lifestyle is obesity. It is therefore worth mentioning that we are pursuing several measures to promote healthy body weight, which are backed up with new resources of £56 million.

Yes, of course. I will say a bit more about that. The other risks for DVT include pregnancy, age, underlying cancer, being on the pill or hormone replacement therapy and immobility. However, in most people's minds, as Trish Godman said, DVT is associated with long-distance travel. Inherited abnormalities of blood clotting can also predispose people to DVT. I will return to that later. One of the ombudsman's main recommendations was that we should develop a standard information leaflet about DVT. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland therefore identified what it considered to be the best existing leaflet. An adapted version of it was issued to all NHS boards in January by the chief medical officer and the chairman of NHS QIS. A letter was sent to the chief executives of the boards, asking them to provide information on how they intended to adopt the standard leaflet, because it was clear from the boards' returns that the matter was a work in progress. NHS QIS is carrying out a follow-up exercise in November, as Margaret Curran said, and it will then provide another report to the chief medical officer. I am happy to keep members informed of progress in that regard. We also commissioned Lifeblood to develop an information leaflet on DVT, which was mentioned earlier. That has been distributed to every GP practice in Scotland and I am happy to follow up some of the concerns that have been raised about whether that leaflet is being used in all practices. One of the main messages in both leaflets is that there is no definitive test for DVT. If people are in doubt, they are advised to go back to their local DVT clinic or accident and emergency department. All that work has been undertaken on an interim basis, until SIGN completes its revision of its guideline 62, on the prevention of venous thromboembolism, or VTE. That work is well under way, and I am pleased that SIGN has included Gordon McPherson as a member of the guideline development group. The motion refers to the possibility of establishing a screening regime. The national screening committee advises all four United Kingdom health departments and has considered proposals for the introduction of a population screening programme for thrombophilia. The  discussion centres on a genetic abnormality called factor V Leiden, which has been shown to increase susceptibility to DVT and affects about 5 per cent of the population. However, it is important to realise that a positive test for that gene does not mean that a person will go on to develop VTE, and doctors would not offer any preventive treatment in those circumstances. We have therefore accepted the national screening committee's advice that it would be inappropriate to introduce population screening for VTE. That has nothing to do with cost; it reflects a lack of evidence to justify introducing such a programme. Government action has to be evidence based.

I am just about to deal with that issue. We agree that high-risk groups should be tested, and we are clear that the adult relatives of someone with factor V Leiden should be offered genetic testing and be given suitable advice in the light of the results. Testing would apply above all to people with the genetic abnormality who might be considering going on the combined oral contraceptive pill. The pill carries an increased risk of VTE for all women but, in women who carry the factor V Leiden gene, that risk is increased by a factor of three. Although that is a different process from population screening, it means that those who are most at risk should be picked up.  Attempts have been made to draw unfavourable comparisons between our attitude to thrombophilia screening and the programme that we introduced recently to assess the risk of sudden cardiac death in young athletes taking part in competitive sport. I emphasise that those are two very different issues. The cardiac assessment of young athletes is a pilot programme that is designed to contribute to the evidence base for another issue that the national screening committee has been looking at over a number of years, which is whether to recommend a population screening programme for a condition called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This is a good example of the way in which the committee keeps under active review the issues that it is asked to consider. I hope that it will be clear from what I have said that we have taken the ombudsman's recommendation extremely seriously. We have also made sure that the McPherson family has been fully involved in all this work. Above all, we want to make sure that people who are at most risk of VTE are identified through genetic testing. I am happy to keep Parliament informed of the developments as we proceed.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

First, I acknowledge the extent and quality of the debate. Members in all parts of the chamber have evidenced the fact that the issues are highly emotive, complex and often contentious. The accounts of individual experiences clearly demonstrate the very real impact of processes and decisions on patients and their families. I, too, pay tribute to the late Michael Gray and his wife Tina McGeever. What has come to the fore today is a clear understanding of the numerous strengths of the Scottish system; in very many dimensions, it works, and works well. As Richard Simpson outlined, the Scottish Medicines Consortium makes decisions on every new medicine quickly. We can have confidence in that and that debate at the SMC is robust and that many perspectives are taken into account before a decision is reached. SMC decisions are authoritative and its recommendations are widely accepted. Cathy Jamieson was right to say that its guidance is not statutory, although it is important to make it clear that SMC guidance is not advisory either; health boards are expected to adhere to it.  The recent SMC evaluation work provides evidence of just how far Scotland has come. Indeed, some might argue how far ahead Scotland is in being able to undertake assessments of all new drugs at an early stage after they have received marketing authorisation. We have evidence that area drug and therapeutics committees have robust arrangements to ensure that SMC recommendations can be fully considered in the local context. In that context, it is important to mention the proactive role that regional cancer advisory groups take in supporting the introduction of new cancer drugs. Those who work in the system consider that the processes that have been put in place have congruence, are robust and reflect the key values of the NHS. However, as members have made clear this afternoon, and as others have set out in their oral evidence and submissions to the Public Petitions Committee in its inquiry, the public, patients and their families need to be given a much better appreciation of why arrangements are in place, how they work and how decisions will be made about patients' care. Those are, and will remain, difficult decisions. After the evidence of benefit and disbenefit have been weighed up, decisions have to be taken in the cold light of day—on whether a new treatment will make a real difference to the quality of life and survival of a patient and whether a case can be made in the context of many competing demands. As Ross Finnie said, there will always be constraints in a health system. In "Better Health, Better Care" we committed to providing high-quality evidence-based care. That is what we will strive to do, against a background of an NHS that faces increasing demands. Before I concentrate on co-payments, which have received considerable attention, I will take a few minutes to focus on the actions that will follow this important debate. The forthcoming Scottish Government better cancer care plan, the e-health strategy and the outcome of the evaluation of the Scottish Medicines Consortium provide the basis for taking forward the recommendations in the Public Petitions Committee report. Further work is planned to deal with some of the more specific recommendations, but I underline that it is important that the recommendations are addressed as a whole and in a manner that demonstrates a coherent policy framework with a strategic plan for delivery. That will mean providing better information to the public, making better use of data, ensuring consistency of process based on a principled approach, undertaking further work to develop health economics methodology and continuing to engage in UK-level discussions on  drug pricing. NHS boards will continue to be held to account through existing performance management arrangements, and the SMC and ADTCs will continue to develop and build on their success to date. The fundamental point is that patients and their families will, in time, feel more supported and better informed about the decisions that are made on the care that is in their best interests. Moreover, as we see the true benefits of mutuality within integrated organisational arrangements, patients and their families will feel more involved in such decisions when that involvement is appropriate for them, when they are able to be involved and, most important, when they want to be closely involved. All that is achievable, much of it through work that is already under way or planned, and through the enhancement of existing arrangements. It is worth mentioning the work that the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry and the Scottish Medicines Consortium are doing together on market access schemes—something Richard Simpson and other members raised. That is important work that could lead to a new partnership. Duncan McNeil made some wider points about health inequalities. I recognise that, as he said, for people who live in our most deprived communities, the issue is why they present later and die earlier. Those important matters are being tackled through "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities"—we will have the implementation plan for that by the end of the year—and the keep well programme and its expansion. They are also being tackled through our continuing discussions about the development of the GP contract and our consideration of the minimum practice income guarantee—in which Duncan McNeil is well versed—and its relationship with the funding of practices in our more deprived communities. It is important to recognise that some of the other work that is going on has a direct relationship to important issues that have been raised in the debate. I will now address co-payments. Patients are entitled not only to receive free NHS care but to exercise choice about receiving some or all of their care privately. The NHS cannot charge patients unless legislation specifically allows for that to happen, but the fundamental and overriding principles must be patient safety, probity and clinical accountability, as a number of members said. In taking forward the work on co-payments, we will ensure that patients can continue to receive the free NHS care to which they are entitled, that the NHS's wider interests are protected and that patients who seek private  treatment have a clear understanding of what the NHS will continue to provide. The policy position remains the same: we will not preside over a two-tier health system. That point was raised in the debate, and I hope that I can give reassurance on it. We recognise that the guidance must be clarified and updated—and it will be. The measures that we have set out demonstrate a constructive and robust response to the committee's recommendations. The focus will now be on implementation. We will be pleased to keep the Public Petitions Committee informed of progress. I thank all members who have taken part in the debate and concur with many people that it shows the Parliament at its best. We can take the issue forward united across the chamber. The outcome will be all the better for that.

Adam Ingram and I were pleased to take part in Scotland's first young carers festival on Sunday 14 September. As well as providing an enjoyable break for 350 young carers from across Scotland, the event provided the largest single consultation with young carers. It generated significant media coverage, helping to raise the profile of this vulnerable group. Initial feedback from the event includes calls for more secure funding for local young carers projects and for the festival to continue in future years.

Much of the support for young carers is the responsibility of local authorities and health boards, working in partnership at local level. The Scottish Government has developed measures to support that local partnership. For example, the national health service carer information strategies that are in place in all health boards must include measures to identify and support young carers, and we are investing £9 million over three years to support the implementation of those strategies. We have urged boards to prioritise front-line services when allocating that funding, and we address carer issues in our annual reviews of boards. In addition, we have secured agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities for an additional 10,000 respite weeks over the next three years. Finally, we will consider additional support for young carers as we develop the young carers section of the revised carers strategy next year.

As I said in response to Alasdair Morgan, one issue that was raised at the young carers festival was that young carers projects are funded in a variety of ways: some are funded by the Big Lottery Fund, some by charities, and others by local authorities. The support is a mixed bag. The message that I got from young carers was that there needs to be a look across Scotland at where young carers projects are strong and where they need more support. As I said in response to Alasdair Morgan, we want to take that work forward as part of the development of the important young carers section of the revised carers strategy. I am keen for that section to become almost a stand-alone policy on young carers, although it has to be within the wider context of the carers strategy. Funding is one issue that we want to take forward as part of that work.

It was an interesting experience that we shared. I cannot promise that future young carers festivals will return to Jeremy Purvis's constituency, but we will bear his offer in mind. It is extremely important that we take a Scotland-wide look at the support that is provided to young carers. As I said in my earlier reply, that work will identify where there are strengths and where there are gaps in service provision. To my knowledge, there is not a set ratio, but we must examine situations in which young carers might be waiting for support from particular projects because those projects are under pressure. I want to progress that work as part of our work on the young carers element of the carers strategy.

I have asked officials to find out why some young carers were not able to come to the festival and to establish whether that was because they did not have enough support in the home to enable them to do that. I have also asked officials to find out whether the more vulnerable young carers are in that situation. The backdrop is that we have provided local authorities with record levels of funding and that we have an agreement with them to provide a higher level of respite care than ever before. We have also provided health boards with new funding to identify young carers. None of that work has been done before now. However, I acknowledge that there are gaps in the service, particularly in on-going support for young carers projects that provide vital continuing support to vulnerable young people. I want to address that as part of our work.

NHS Borders is committed to improving access to NHS dental services in Roxburgh and Berwickshire. Of course, patients may be registered with a dentist in a neighbouring constituency, so John Lamont's figure is therefore likely to be an understatement of the number of residents who are registered with NHS dentists. However, access remains a challenge and that is why work has started on the creation of two dental units—one in Coldstream and the other in Hawick—that will improve access in Roxburgh and Berwickshire. It is hoped that work on those centres will be completed by early 2009. I understand that Borders NHS Board has plans to upgrade the existing dental suite at the Borders general hospital and to submit dental proposals under the recently announced primary and community care premises modernisation programme for 2009-10 and 2010-11.

The dentists will certainly go a long way towards helping the access problems. We have asked NHS Borders and the other health boards to ensure that they continue to expand their commitment to NHS dentistry either by having salaried dentists on their premises or through support to general dental practitioners. The modernisation fund gave a clear steer to health boards that dental premises were to be a priority. We know from the figures—John Lamont cited 17 per cent—that we still have some way to go to fix the problem so that no one in Scotland who wants access to an NHS dentist is denied that. We have made good progress along that road, but we still have some way to go.

That information is not held centrally. However, 281 patients over the age of 16 were referred to the scoliosis surgeons in Edinburgh during 2007-08.

The national service for adult scoliosis surgery has been approved and will come into effect in April 2009. As the service develops, treatment will become available to young people with neuromuscular conditions, including spinal deformity. I hope that the member is reassured that the national service will improve the situation for patients.

Lead national action on implementing our national strategy and action plan to prevent suicide—choose life—is being taken by NHS Health Scotland. As part of that, each local authority area now has an identified suicide prevention co-ordinator, who works with community planning partners to ensure that local suicide prevention activities are tailored to local circumstances and needs. Some 240 suicide prevention trainers are running courses across Scotland and more than 14,000 people have been trained. We are also committed to training 50 per cent of key front-line staff in mental health, primary care, accident and emergency and substance misuse services in the use of suicide assessment tools. We aim to do that by 2010.

I will investigate the issue that the member raised. We are taking action to improve the provision of psychological support through a number of initiatives. The member might be aware of initiatives such as the living life pilot service—a telephone-based support service. There is also the breathing space service, which is geared towards people who are experiencing low mood or depression and has been very successful. Support mechanisms are in place and more are being initiated and piloted.

Our officials are discussing what more can be done to control such sites and I will be happy to keep the member informed on the matter. On local authority funding, local authorities have allocated about £3 million in 2008-09 to suicide prevention action. All local authorities are committed to delivering the suicide prevention strategy. Good work is going on throughout Scotland and we very much value the partnership with local authorities in delivering the strategy. I hope that we have all members' support in taking forward the don't hide it, talk about it campaign, which tries to ensure that we are a nation in which people can talk about their feelings more than perhaps we did in the past—particularly young men, who are a target audience for the choose life strategy.

Oliver Gillie has made an important contribution to the debate on Scotland's health. The Scottish Government has been considering the evidence on vitamin D and has arranged a meeting of experts in the field, which will take place later this year, to consider the significance of existing research and to recommend further action.

Vitamin A and vitamin D supplements for children and vitamin D and folic acid for women are available through the healthy start scheme. As part of the follow-up to the ministerial task force on health inequalities, the health directorate has begun a review of the evidence on vitamin D as a promoter of better health. A meeting of experts has been arranged to consider what actions might be taken in the light of that evidence, but we need to gather clear evidence. A meeting will be held on 25 November to bring together researchers and funders to review all the current research, discuss the practical issues of giving supplements and advice throughout the whole population, and draw up a research programme that links with others who are involved in such work around the world. I am happy to keep the member informed of progress in that area.

The Scottish Government is working with our national health service, local authority and voluntary sector partners to deliver an ambitious programme of change and improvement and to increase the availability of evidence-based psychological therapies—including, but not restricted to, CBT—for everyone who needs them, where and when they are needed.

As the member will probably be aware, I have commissioned work to examine how we can improve the scope of waiting time targets in the area of mental health. That on-going work will consider what can be achieved and what the time frame will be.

I join those who have congratulated Michael Matheson on securing this evening's debate and thank him for focusing Parliament's attention on the physical, social, emotional and financial challenges that are faced by people who live with cancer, and by their families. I particularly thank him for highlighting the work of Macmillan Cancer Support. I join him in acknowledging the work of its staff and partners in providing support and advice in a network of centres throughout the country. The debate is timely because, as many members have said, the Scottish Government is finalising its new cancer plan—"Better Cancer Care" will be published in the next few weeks. I record my thanks to the many people who took the time and trouble to contribute in person or in writing to the hugely successful and informative  national discussion that helped to shape the plan. As the Scottish population ages, as treatments advance and as our screening programmes become ever more effective at detecting cancers earlier, many people find themselves living with and, indeed, beyond cancer. We recognise that, throughout their journeys, patients and their carers will face uncertainty and might need to cope with the unpleasant and sometimes debilitating consequences of treatment. Cancer does not care about a person's age, responsibilities or potential. It does not care that they are about to start a family, that they are looking forward to a long and active retirement, or that they are in the middle of a glittering career. However, people do care, so our task is to find whatever ways we can to support people with cancer, to give them access to the highest quality advice, and to enable them to live their lives to the full. "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Equalities" identifies the big killers of cancer and cardiovascular disease as priorities for action. It commits us to enabling people to take advantage of opportunities to improve their life circumstances and to shaping our public services so that they meet the needs of those who are at greatest risk of ill health, now and in the future. That includes a clear commitment to helping people to maximise their income and encouraging them to take up the benefits to which they are entitled. I will return to that point in a moment. As has been mentioned, we are moving towards the abolition of prescription charges for all by 2011, which will rid the country once and for all of an unfair tax on ill health that has had an impact on many people who live with cancer and their families. As Joe FitzPatrick said, we announced earlier this month that car parking charges at NHS hospitals will be abolished from the end of the year, in order to help to reduce the financial burden that is placed on patients and their visitors at a time when there are pressures on family budgets. I acknowledge what Joe FitzPatrick said about the situation at the private finance initiative hospitals, but we encourage those three hospitals, if they have not done so already, to introduce assistance schemes for regular patients. In November, we and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities will publish a joint framework to tackle poverty, inequality and deprivation in our country. It will be based on the best available evidence and will set out a series of actions to help to reduce inequalities, tackle the drivers of low income, support people who experience poverty, and make the tax and benefits system work for Scotland. It is good that Des McNulty acknowledged the good work that West Dunbartonshire Council has been carrying out,  although from what Christine Grahame said, it sounds as if there is more work to be done and progress to be made by other local authorities. We hope that that will occur. I confirm that we intend to set out before the end of the year the actions and resources that are needed to implement the new self-management strategy for Scotland, which was developed in a groundbreaking partnership with the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. Among other things, a new self-management fund will be launched that will provide grants to improve the information and advice that is available to patients, support self-management education programmes, and enable people to share their experiences with others who are in similar circumstances through support groups and other opportunities that will be designed and delivered by the voluntary sector. The cancer plan "Better Cancer Care" will be published on 22 October. I am pleased to announce that the plan will include specific actions to support people who live with cancer. Importantly, it will also include specific actions to support the work of Macmillan Cancer Support and other partners in raising awareness of the benefits that are on offer, and in enabling people to take advantage of them. That commitment encompasses a belief on our part that referrals of this kind are a legitimate and necessary part of the complete assessment of a person's needs, and are therefore a legitimate and necessary part of effective clinical practice. Obviously, I cannot give an awful lot of detail before the plan is published, but I am sure that Michael Matheson and others will be reassured by what is in the plan. I am also sure that it will meet the aspirations of Michael and others to improve, and make more systematic, the way in which patients can access help. Taken together, the measures that I have outlined demonstrate our commitment to supporting people in living with cancer and living beyond cancer. When it is published in a few weeks' time, I look forward to the plan having the support of the whole Parliament. I look forward to hearing members' comments on it.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

We have had a good debate that has been consensual, with perhaps one or two exceptions. I will try to respond to all the points that members made—if I do not do so in my speech, I will write to the relevant members. Margaret Curran raised a number of issues. On free fruit, we have tried to ensure that we consider the evidence on where our efforts should lie, so that we refine our activity. Many members mentioned health inequality, which is the reason why we are focusing on children and expectant mothers in the most deprived communities and giving them priority through the healthy start scheme and other programmes. Of course, health boards have some latitude in what they do, which can include supporting the community initiatives to which Margaret Curran referred. I hope that I have given the member some comfort in that regard. As I said in my opening speech, we will come back to the Parliament with more detail on PE provision. Suffice it to say—for the moment—that Learning and Teaching Scotland will shortly publish new guidance for schools on health and wellbeing under the curriculum for excellence, which will include outcomes that are related to physical activity and regular, high-quality PE. We expect schools to continue to work towards the provision of at least two hours a week of good-quality PE for each child. I was asked when the report on free school meals would be published. The answer is soon. I assure members that they will not have to wait too long for it. Ross Finnie made important points on, for example, food labelling. He and a number of other members talked about engagement with retailers and manufacturers, which is important. I and other ministers, in particular the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, have had regular engagement with supermarkets and others. Food and drink policy will be critical in that regard. I attended a meeting of the food and drink leadership forum, at which a diverse range of interests was represented. The health agenda is central to its work. The policy is about considering how we might better use land in Scotland to produce healthy, local, sustainable food, which will not just improve people's health but help our farmers, manufacturers and retailers—that is all part of the package. I hope  that I have given members a flavour of what will emerge from the food and drink policy. Through the active schools programme, children have access to a wide range of activities, including dance, which I hope will encourage them to partake in physical activity. It is not about the cross-country running that I remember being forced to do on a cold winter's day. We have moved beyond that. We must ensure that there are good choices for people. We are on the case. Mary Scanlon made important points. I agree that the sample in the Dr Foster Research study was small and that the report should be treated with caution. She made an important point about pathways into support. The counterweight programme offers a clear pathway through GPs, who will refer people to experts who can work with them on their weight management programme. Mary Scanlon also asked about school nurse training. The pilot programmes in three health board areas will not only harness existing skills among staff but develop and shape new roles, to ensure that we can offer effective care and support to children who require it, starting with our most deprived children. We are developing the model on that and we are ensuring that there are clear pathways.

The roll-out of counterweight has followed two phases. It started with the keep well programme, and its roll-out is under way. Wave 2 commenced in April 2008 and wave 3 started in August 2008. Patients from 66 practices had access to counterweight, and 1,300 patients have been enrolled. The programme continues and is building up. Mary Scanlon talked about outdoor education policy, which I know she is keen to have developed. Maureen Watt has, of course, agreed that outdoor education should be embedded in the curriculum. What matters is not just having five-day residential courses but the broader outdoor education policy. That work progresses as we speak, and we will keep Parliament updated through the channels to which I agreed in accepting the Labour amendment. Nigel Don talked about engaging the commercial world—absolutely. I point him to the food and drink policy. The forthcoming supermarket summit offers the opportunity, which I assure members we will take, to engage with big and important players on many of the issues. James Kelly mentioned investment in gym and sports facilities. Significant investment has been made. The Government has provided almost £3  billion in capital over the next three years, including an additional £115 million for 2008-09, to secure investment in schools and other local government infrastructure. Such funding will help to continue to secure investment in schools and in PE and sports facilities. Funding to sportscotland has also increased by 44 per cent, which local authorities can access to develop local sports facilities. Michael Matheson talked about the bigger picture—absolutely. That is why the action plan is a down payment on how we tackle obesity. The obesity strategy, which will follow, is about the whole societal approach. However, I would like to think that the action plan has given a sense of how we will create sustainable towns, encourage the use of public transport and develop community initiatives to involve all the community in deconstructing the obesogenic environment. Testing of that in communities, along with help for individuals, gives a sense of the cross-Government approach. The issue concerns not only health and education services but the whole Government. That is why we are working across portfolios. We encourage local authorities to see it as their role to promote public health, so that when they make planning or licensing decisions they wear their public health hats, too. That is important, particularly in tackling inequalities and in relation to the facilities in some of our deprived communities, which we need to change. Elaine Smith raised a couple of issues, one of which was the breastfeeding target. The previous target was unclear, because it could include mixed feeding with infant formula. The difference is that the new target is exclusively for breastfeeding, which makes it clearer for us all to understand. Margo MacDonald talked about poverty and inequality and about supporting important community initiatives—absolutely. The vending machines issue is important, as is the point about canteens, particularly in public sector workplaces. We are taking that forward, and the Scottish centre for healthy working lives is helping us. It is important for the public sector to take a lead. We have done much work in our hospitals and schools, but I would like that to spread throughout the public sector. Ian McKee and Margo MacDonald talked about cooking classes. I remind members that we launched the cooking bus, which is a start. It goes round schools to supplement work that is taking place, engages pupils and their teachers in improving cooking skills and leaves a trained resource in schools to continue its work. That initiative has been important.  I am sorry if I have not covered every member's point. We have also to focus on the positive achievements, on which Richard Simpson made an important point. We have to create a vision of where we want to get to. When there is good news about increased fruit and veg intake, we should seize that information to paint a different, more positive, picture of our children. I thank all members for their contribution to the debate. I look forward to continuing the dialogue.

In June, the Government published "Healthy Eating, Active Living: An action plan to improve diet, increase physical activity and tackle obesity (2008-2011)". We have demonstrated our commitment to delivering the actions that it sets out with an increase in the budget from £16 million to £56 million—£40 million of new money. An important aspect of the action plan was our desire to build on the solid foundations that have been established through the implementation of the Scottish diet action plan, which was published in 1996, and the national physical activity strategy, which was published in 2003. Those strategy documents on diet and physical activity have been key to the work that has been developed over the past few years, and they will continue to provide the strategic map for much that we do. I am sure that their importance is recognised by members across the chamber. To kick off today's debate, I would like to reflect on some of the actions that we are taking and how they will contribute to tackling obesity. I want also to outline how we will fulfil our commitment to developing a longer-term strategy to tackle obesity. Before I do so, I put on record my appreciation of the hard work of members such as Mary Scanlon and Nigel Don in getting the cross-party group on obesity up and running. It held one of the best-attended cross-party group functions that I have been at for some time, which perhaps reflects the cross-party support for action on obesity. The problem of obesity has been a long time in the making and will take a long time to resolve. However, if we do not tackle obesity, we are in serious danger of losing the health gains that we have already made. The potential costs of the obesity problem are quite startling. The most recent published estimate is that, by 2050, obesity will cost the United Kingdom £50 billion in today's prices. That would translate to a Scottish figure of some significance. Our action plan identifies how we will spend the £56 million over the next three years to support people to change their behaviours. The additional £40 million will also be supported by work across Government to make our lives healthier. Today, we have issued advice to health boards on our allocation of £19 million over the next three  years in support of maternal and infant nutrition. That is in fulfilment of our commitment to provide free fruit to mothers and pre-school children, but it goes much further, in line with the best evidence. The importance of ensuring that mothers and their babies are well nourished is widely recognised. A pregnant woman's nutritional status influences the growth and development of her baby and forms the foundations for the child's later health. The mother's health, in both the short and the long term, depends on how well nourished she is before, during and after pregnancy. A child's diet during the early years has an impact on the child's growth and development, is linked to the incidence of many common childhood conditions and influences the risk of developing, later in adult life, conditions such as coronary heart disease, diabetes and obesity. We are very much aware that women who are deprived do not access services and do not enjoy the same health outcomes, so we have focused the additional £19 million on those most in need. That supports the clear recommendations in "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities", which was widely welcomed by members of all parties when it was published back in June. The £19 million will support health boards to increase the uptake of healthy start among the estimated 48,000 potential recipients in Scotland. Although uptake is currently high—at around 87 per cent—more than 5,000 of the most vulnerable are still not getting access to benefits that they deserve. The £19 million will also support health boards to assist with progress towards achieving the breastfeeding health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—or HEAT—target. It will also support boards in improving training opportunities for health professionals to help them to deliver this important agenda. Of course, I expect health boards to work with local authorities, community health partnerships and other partners in the voluntary sector to support that work. That is just one of the strands that we are working on to help to improve Scotland's diet. In response to the recommendations of the task force on health inequalities, we have commenced a project that will increase the health care capacity in schools through the development of community-based integrated school health teams, which will be supported from an additional £7 million that is being made available. Over the next two years, we will initially work with three health boards on identified demonstration sites—in NHS Ayrshire and Arran, NHS Forth Valley and NHS Lothian—to strengthen nursing in schools, especially in the most deprived areas. The boards will involve local communities, councils, education staff, the third sector and other independent providers. That model, which we will begin to introduce later this  winter, will be designed not only to harness existing skills but to develop and shape new roles in order that effective care can be offered to school-age children, young people and their families. It should also provide opportunities for teachers and school staff to be proactive in identifying those who are particularly vulnerable or have complex needs. We will also promote and encourage more people to become active, which is the flip-side of the coin—diet is one side and increased physical activity is the other. We certainly want to build on the enormous success of our Olympic athletes who provide inspiration as to what can be achieved, but we recognise that, although we can encourage as many people as possible to try a new sport, that should not be our only focus. We need to encourage people to be more active in their everyday lives. We need to change people's perceptions of how to become active to reinforce the key message of 30 minutes of physical activity a day. Taking the stairs instead of the lift, getting off the bus a stop or two early, walking briskly to the shops, doing the gardening and playing outside are the sorts of everyday activities that children, young people and adults can be encouraged to undertake. We will continue to support children to be active at school, through the two hours of physical education and the active schools programme. We are working to encourage adults to be physically active, and we are doubling the support for paths to health, which already has 20,000 people walking every week, supported by nearly 2,000 volunteers. With regard to the Labour amendment, we are happy to come back and inform Parliament of some of the more detailed aspects of the plans for PE and outdoor education. We can build on the work that is supported by other parts of Government that contributes to our objectives. We are, for example, supporting the seven smarter choices, smarter places sustainable travel demonstration towns—that is a bit of a mouthful, but it is very important—with £1.5 million. We are taking a whole-system approach to get people to use sustainable transport as well as boosting their physical activity levels. It is about joining all those things up. I will talk a bit more about some of the actions that we are taking to target obesity specifically, although diet and physical activity are key strands of that. We are devoting nearly £15 million to programmes that support people to achieve—and, which is important, maintain—a healthy weight. We previously announced £6 million for health boards to support the introduction of a child healthy weight intervention, which we expect to target up to 20,000 children over the next three years.  We are also continuing to support and expand the very impressive and productive counterweight programme, which the previous Administration initiated. The first two waves of the programme were targeted in those health board areas that hosted the keep well pilot. From August, the health boards that have not been participating in the keep well programme—including the island boards—will introduce the counterweight programme. One of the more exciting projects that we are developing is a community-based healthy weight intervention. It is based on a French model that is described in the "Healthy Eating, Active Living" plan. The French model is interesting, because a decline in childhood obesity was measured in the communities in which it was active, which tells a compelling story. Features of the French model such as providing nutritious school meals and encouraging children to walk or cycle to school have already been replicated in Scotland for some years. However, we need to translate those elements of the French model that were unique and which seem to have made a significant difference, such as taking a more joined-up approach at a local level between different initiatives, which focused the work and achieved a bigger impact. We have to find our own Scottish solution to some elements of the French model, such as the use of a local champion to drive forward the project. We will be writing to local authorities and health boards in the next few weeks to invite them to express an interest in hosting one of the community health weight initiatives over the next three years. I have picked out just a few of the projects that we are taking forward in order to highlight the work that we are doing, but the rest are laid out comprehensively in the action plan. However, we recognise that those actions alone will not solve the obesity problem that this country faces. We believe that if we are to fulfil our purpose of creating a more successful country with opportunities for all, we need to increase sustainable economic growth, and we need to do things differently. Obesity is one of the problems that, like climate change, does not have a simple solution and requires a new way of thinking. In "Healthy Eating, Active Living" we announced our commitment to develop a longer-term strategy to tackle obesity. The development of that strategy is timely, as we are developing a national policy on food and drink and are taking stock of the national physical activity strategy to understand how it has influenced the development of policy in all areas of Government. Both of those exercises will report in the next few months and both will have to reflect on our commitment to tackle obesity.  Although we are doing many positive and welcome things that have improved our health, we have, as a society, tilted the balance away from actions that promote good health. We have created an environment and a lifestyle that we all enjoy but which makes it inevitable that obesity will grow as a problem. We need to tackle that as a society, which requires people to change their lifestyles and their habits. The role of Government is to make that as easy as possible, to support the good initiatives and, in particular, to get an early start by supporting our children. We must reposition the balance to ensure that the impact of our actions at least goes in the right direction, and of course we have to monitor that. I am happy also to accept the Liberal Democrat amendment and its recommendation that we measure improvements. We are committed to change. We are committed to tackling obesity, and work has begun to identify the actions that we must take if we are to do that. We want to engage with our key partners in the next few months to discuss the shifting of the balance. I hope that we will get contributions not just from members who are in the chamber today but from the cross-party group on obesity and beyond. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the commitment of the Scottish Government to tackle obesity as highlighted in the recent publication, Healthy Eating, Active Living: An action plan to improve diet, increase physical activity and tackle obesity , and further welcomes the £56 million over the next three years, which the Scottish Government has made available to build on the existing good work in support of the Scottish Diet Action Plan and the National Physical Activity Strategy as outlined in the action plan.

Information on the number of people with autistic spectrum disorders and the levels of needs are primarily of importance to local agencies with a responsibility for planning and designing services to meet the needs of the local population. The Scottish Government issued policy and practice guidance on commissioning services for people on the autism spectrum in April. It emphasised the need for local areas to have good-quality shared information about current and future demand for the services and supports that people with autism may require. It included positive evaluations of successful models of services to address the range of needs.

Research projects are, of course, going on. For example, the Medical Research Council has funded such projects and has committed more than £3 million to new research, but it is not particularly focused on the issue of prevalence. I would certainly be happy to reflect on that further and write to the member with further details.

Officials have been working since August 2007 with NHS Grampian, Aberdeen City Council and the local alcohol and drug action team on issues raised by the SWIA-led multi-agency inspection of substance misuse services in Grampian. That work will continue and take into account the findings of this most recent inspection to which the member refers.

Progress has been made in tackling the substantial drug treatment waiting lists in the city. The health board, the council and the ADAT have worked together to develop robust proposals for tackling what has been a long-standing problem that, as the member knows, goes back to at least 2006. NHS Grampian invested an additional £500,000 to increase service capacity. The most recent figures, which were published earlier this week, and to which the member referred, show that there has been a significant reduction in the waiting lists in the city, from 622 to 500, although that is still too high. More work requires to be done and we will be encouraging and supporting local partners to continue their robust action.

As Brian Adam points out, there has been a substantial reduction in waiting times. However, as I said, progress still requires to be made. On 18 June, I met those on Aberdeen City Council who have responsibility for social work services, along with Kenny MacAskill and Adam Ingram, to take forward some of the issues in the most recent SWIA report. That meeting was very constructive and the local partners are under no illusions about the need to make further progress. However, it is important to record the progress that has been made and to give praise where it is due.

The Royal College of Physicians defines ambulatory oxygen equipment as items that weigh up to 4.5kg and can be carried by most patients during the activities of daily living. The Scottish Government recognises that equipment weighing 4.5kg is not suitable for all patients. The cylinders that are listed in the Scottish drug tariff weigh around 3.2kg.

As the member will be aware—I have written to him and several other members about this—the shortages are the result of a manufacturing problem at the French company that supplies BOC. We have worked closely with BOC, NHS National Services Scotland and Community Pharmacy Scotland to ensure that there is no disruption to the supply of portable oxygen to patients. However, we are aware that maintaining the supply to patients has involved the reintroduction of older heavier cylinders, which is  causing concern to some patients, as the member mentioned. I have recently approved the use, on a temporary basis, of the home-fill system, which is a new product that offers concentrator patients the possibility of filling and refilling small cylinders without the need for repeat prescriptions from their general practitioner or the supply of portable oxygen to community pharmacists. I assure the member that we are well aware of the concerns and we have done everything possible to resolve the situation. We are assured that the problem will ease as the supply is re-established and the issues are resolved, but the problem is United Kingdom-wide. The issue has been challenging, but we are determined to get on top of it.

On that last point, cylinders are sent to England by BOC for testing but they are returned to Scotland when tests confirm that they are safe to use. As Dr Simpson will know, NHS community pharmacies have individual contracts with BOC for the supply of oxygen cylinders. Supply problems have therefore been somewhat unpredictable and outwith our control. However, I take his point about the contracts and I am certainly prepared to look into the matter and get back to him.

The principal funding for the Scottish centre for healthy working lives is provided through the core budget of NHS Health Scotland. Salus operates the healthy working lives national advice line under contract to the centre.

Arrangements for the purchase and provision of occupational health services are a contractual matter between the organisations concerned. However, we would expect any occupational health service provision to promote the health and wellbeing of employees. I have every confidence that Salus's good work will continue. I will keep an eye on that to ensure that it does.

On that latter point, I intimated some time ago to the member that I would be prepared to meet her to discuss the matter. The provision of occupational health services comes down ultimately to the contract between the organisations concerned. However, I stress that any occupational health provision must promote the health and wellbeing of employees. Good occupational health services have an important role, not only in helping people who are off sick to get back to work, but in ensuring that early interventions prevent people from going off sick in the first place. A lot of work is being done. In health for example, OHS extra is a very good model to follow. The evidence is compelling that investment by employers in the health and wellbeing of their staff  more than pays for itself. I would certainly encourage Scottish businesses and the public sector to ensure that they offer an occupational health service that is as good as it can be.

Last year, we developed with colleagues in NHS Scotland a leaflet on plagiocephaly for all new parents to help raise awareness of the condition. The leaflet, "Protect your baby's natural headshape: tummy time to play, back to sleep", gives information on tummy time and repositioning advice, while strongly reinforcing the back to sleep message.

The majority of health boards give out the leaflet to all new parents antenatally or soon after birth, but I am aware that a few boards currently do not and I am taking steps to ensure that all boards give a copy to all expectant parents or new parents and to ensure that it is on display. At the beginning of June, more than 65,000 copies of the leaflet were issued to boards throughout Scotland. That is being followed up with a letter at director level asking boards to ensure that all new parents are given a copy of it. We will ask for confirmation from boards that that is happening. I am also pleased to tell Joe FitzPatrick that the two boards that did not previously distribute the leaflet to all new parents have now indicated that they are doing so.

The early years and early intervention framework sets out a joint approach to early years and early intervention by the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Improving health outcomes for children and young people and tackling inequality through early intervention are integral to the framework. We aim to create environments for pre-school and school-age children that promote their physical, social, spiritual, mental and emotional wellbeing, both in school and in other settings.

That outcome was devised when the member's party was in government. We thought that it would be appropriate to continue with it, given the difficulty of addressing the issue. We thought that the previous Executive had got that outcome right. We believe that it is achievable. I am very surprised that Iain Smith is dissing his own previous commitment in such brutal terms. There is no confusion over the two hours of PE. The outcome is clearly set out in the curriculum for excellence and it is part of a wide-ranging set of ambitious proposals in the obesity action plan. Of course, that action plan is a first because, yet again, the previous Government, of which Iain Smith was a supporter, failed on all occasions to produce any coherent obesity action plan. I am proud that the present Government has now produced such a plan.

Does the member accept the link between price and consumption?

I say for the record that those practices will not be affected by the proposals. I am glad that Jamie Stone recognises that.

I ask the member to clear up a bit of confusion in my mind. As I understand it, with licensing boards' new powers, they will be able to take a one-strike-and-you're-out approach if they so wish and if that is deemed appropriate. I cannot understand how the member can argue that his suggestion would be a stronger measure. Will he explain that?

Does the member accept that, as I said, test purchasing was rolled out properly only towards the end of last year and the figures that are emerging demonstrate that we are moving in the right direction? The figures to which she refers are fairly old.

I accept what Mary Mulligan is saying, and that we need to work through the problem. However, will she also accept that we have made record investment in tackling alcohol misuse?

The important point is that the discussion paper is about the misuse of alcohol. We are not saying that alcohol is dangerous in itself. It is the misuse that is dangerous. I do not think that there is any contradiction in that.

I am a little confused: Pauline McNeill's initial comments seemed to be fairly supportive of the proposal, but she seems to have changed her mind. More specifically, what does she have to say about the evidence from Armadale that has been brought to light?

The Government is ambitious for Scotland, which is why, last week, we launched "Changing Scotland's relationship with alcohol: a discussion paper on our strategic approach". The document outlines a comprehensive package of measures for tackling alcohol misuse in Scotland. The Government is not anti-alcohol, but we are anti-alcohol misuse. The stark truth is that our relationship with alcohol is holding us back, as individuals, families and communities and as a nation. The statistics make sobering reading. More than 40,000 people are hospitalised each year with an alcohol-related illness, and Scotland has one of the fastest-growing rates of alcohol-related liver disease and cirrhosis in the world. An audit of Scottish emergency departments found that at least 70 per cent of assaults may be alcohol related. Alcohol misuse does not affect only the misuser; it costs us all dearly. Recent figures suggest that the total cost to Scotland of alcohol misuse is a staggering £2.25 billion a year. However, the personal cost to shattered families and individuals is unquantifiable. In one in three divorces, excessive drinking by a partner is cited as a contributory factor; around 65,000 Scottish children live with a parent whose drinking is problematic; and a quarter of children on the child protection register are there because of parental drug or alcohol misuse. Many of us experience the effects of alcohol-related violence and antisocial behaviour in our communities, and almost half of prisoners report being drunk at the time of their offence. We have to dispel the myth that alcohol-related harm affects only people with chronic alcohol dependency or so-called binge drinkers. Anyone who is regularly drinking too much can be putting their health and wellbeing at risk and affecting the lives of people around them. This is not a marginal problem. The uncomfortable truth is that many of us—and probably many of us in this chamber—fall into that category. Up to 50 per cent of men and 30 per cent of women are regularly drinking more than the amount specified in guidelines on sensible drinking. Those people place themselves at increased risk of being involved in accidents, of becoming a victim or a perpetrator of a crime, of  contributing to family break-up, and of developing cancer or liver disease. We believe that something has to change. We want to put an end to the daily deluge of reports telling us about the negative impact of alcohol misuse on Scots and Scotland. We want to foster a self-confident Scotland where alcohol can be enjoyed sensibly as a pleasurable part of life, and we want to stimulate discussion and debate across the chamber and across Scotland about how we can best achieve that. I think it is fair to say we have already been quite successful in kick-starting the debate. I am sure that we will hear more about that today. We welcome all views on the package of measures that we have proposed, which, taken together, can begin to change our relationship with alcohol for the better. There are those who suggest that taking action to tackle alcohol misuse is somehow at odds with support for our indigenous alcohol industry. That is certainly not the case. We will continue to champion the Scottish drinks industry and we recognise the valuable contribution that it makes to Scotland's economy. Indeed, last week we launched our national food and drink policy to champion the best of Scottish produce. Our national drink is a key element of the year of homecoming 2009 celebrations. However, the evidence is clear: if we are to fulfil our ambitions as a country, we must rebalance our relationship with alcohol. It is clear that no single, simple solution exists. We do not believe for a moment that simply raising the purchase age is a solution to all Scotland's alcohol problems.

I will in a moment. Alcohol misuse is a complex problem, and an effective alcohol policy is one that encompasses a range of interventions designed to support a fundamental shift in culture. That idea is supported by the international evidence base. For example, the World Health Organization recommends adopting a package of measures—including policies controlling the price and availability of alcohol; drink-drive measures; and brief interventions for those who are drinking at harmful and hazardous levels.

There are already different ages at which people can do certain things. For example, people can get married at 16 but they cannot drink alcohol or buy cigarettes at 16. I believe that people should have the vote at 16, as that would allow them a say in what their Government decides to do on these or any other measures. That is democracy. We believe that 16-year-olds should have the right to have a role in deciding the Government of their choice. Our package on alcohol misuse is bold, and we make no apology for that. The response must be proportionate to the scale of the problem.

Not just now. Our consultation paper seeks views on whether the minimum legal age for off-sales purchases should be raised to 21. We accept that, for many people, that is a controversial issue, but we are asking an open question and we will listen to all views. In Scotland, the short-term harms associated with alcohol misuse are higher among young people and the impact of their drinking in public is felt by the communities in which they live. International evidence shows that raising the minimum age can reduce alcohol sales and problems among young drinkers. Alcohol is much cheaper and more widely accessible in off-sales. Raising the age in relation to off-sales should reduce the amount of alcohol being purchased by young people and should act as a particular deterrent for those under 18 who are more likely to purchase their alcohol from off-sales. I commend the responsible attitude of local retailers in Armadale, West Lothian, who—recognising the problems of alcohol-fuelled antisocial behaviour in their community—agreed to take part in a trial to limit the sale of alcohol at weekends to those aged over 21. The success of the pilot in reducing antisocial behaviour, youth drinking and vandalism is encouraging and cannot be ignored by any member. We strongly believe that the scale of the problem is such that we need to have a mature and constructive debate about the age at which alcohol can be purchased. We are seeking views and we are prepared to listen, but we must not forget that alcohol is an age-restricted product with the potential to cause great harm. We are, of course, doing all we can to ensure that the existing licensing laws are more effectively enforced. For example, we are already reaping the benefits of the roll-out of alcohol test purchasing. Figures obtained from the Crown Office suggest  that the number of reports has increased significantly since October 2007, which we can safely assume is the result of the roll-out of alcohol test purchasing. That may lead to an increased number of prosecutions, but, more important, it is already resulting in licences being suspended, which, as we know from the pilot evaluation, is a much greater deterrent for licence holders than prosecution. Here in Lothian, for example, where the first phase of alcohol test purchasing began in West Lothian in December, 71 premises have been tested to date, of which 17 failed the first test. Three of those failed for a second time, resulting in all three having their licences suspended. Moreover, we are considering giving local authority trading standards officers an enforcement role in relation to off-sales and, more specifically, allowing them to assist the police in the conduct of test purchasing operations. That will greatly increase enforcement capacity. The evidence base tells us that levels of alcohol consumption are closely linked to the retail price of alcoholic drinks. As alcohol becomes more affordable, consumption increases, and as it becomes less affordable, consumption decreases. When Finland cut tax on alcohol by a third, in one year alcohol consumption increased by 10 per cent, and liver cirrhosis deaths were found to have risen by 30 per cent. Alcohol is 62 per cent more affordable today than it was in 1980, which is why we have included further proposals to take action to end three-for-the-price-of-two type promotions, which encourage impulse buying of extra alcohol that consumers were not intending to buy. If we buy more drink, the consequences are there for all to see. We are consulting on the principles of a minimum pricing scheme for alcohol products. We believe that it is unacceptable that alcohol is often sold more cheaply than water. I ask members to consider whether they believe that the price at which some alcohol is sold is acceptable. In some cases, cut-price selling means that strong cider can cost 16p per unit and vodka can cost as little as 24p per unit. Any system of minimum pricing that is introduced needs to be clear, fair and transparent. We believe that a system that relates the price of an alcoholic drink to its relative alcohol content is the best way to achieve that. Any such system would have the benefit of encouraging the greater promotion of low-alcohol products. I will leave Kenny MacAskill to deal with other elements of the plan. In addition to our record £85 million increase in funding for alcohol prevention, treatment and support services, ours is a package that is designed to begin to turn around our unhealthy relationship with alcohol. As I said, there is not one magic bullet; this is a package of measures on which we want to consult. We hope  that we will hear constructive proposals from members.

Thank you for that very temporary promotion, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to announce that the Government is publishing today the report of the ministerial task force on health inequalities, which I have chaired since last October. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I have said repeatedly that reducing Scotland's shameful inequalities in health between the wealthiest and the poorest is our top health priority. This report, "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Equalities", will put us on the road to real improvements. I thank my six ministerial colleagues who took part, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, NHS Scotland, the third sector and the research community, who have worked creatively together. The task force's work also reflects consultation through the "Better Health, Better Care" action plan last autumn and, more recently, with front-line staff, third sector organisations and young people. The Government accepts and will implement all the task force's recommendations. Indeed, action has already started. One of the task force's strengths has been to align with the development of other Government strategies and frameworks, ensuring that they all work together towards improving health and reducing inequalities. There are clear links to the joint policy statement on early years and early intervention, which was published by the Government and COSLA in March, and to the smoking prevention action plan, the alcohol misuse consultation, the drugs strategy and the forthcoming obesity action plan. It is widely agreed that inequalities in health are mainly due to underlying causes and not primarily to what health services themselves do. We heard evidence on that from an international audience in Edinburgh back in April. We also heard from Europe and across the Atlantic that no country has  yet achieved a genuine and effective cross-Government approach to addressing those underlying causes, which are, primarily, children's start in life, adults' low income, lack of employment and poor physical and social environments. The task force embodies that new way of working across Government and across sectors. Together, we have set clear priorities, focused on the health outcomes to be achieved and put real emphasis on delivery. Change can and will happen now through joint delivery at national level and through local authorities and their community planning partners. Scotland's health is improving, but there are stubborn and unacceptable differences between rich and poor. For example, in the figures for healthy life expectancy for men, a 10-year gap exists between the national average and the figure in the most deprived areas. We will not achieve our overall purpose of sustainable economic growth if such gaps persist. In January, we set out the task force's priorities for reducing inequalities in health and wellbeing: children's very early years; reducing the burden imposed by mental illness, and improving mental wellbeing; continuing to tackle the big killer diseases and the direct risk factors for those diseases, such as smoking; and the linked problems, particularly for younger men, of drugs, alcohol and violence. The task force ensured that actions on all those priorities are informed by scientific knowledge of how children's brains develop and how their earliest experiences shape their physical and psychological development. Their interactions and relationships with parents and carers are vital to their future health and their capacity to learn and thrive. Evidence tells us how poverty, deprivation and chronic stress lead to poor health and premature ageing. The task force has been rigorous in using such evidence, which marks out its thinking as different from the thinking behind previous Government strategies in Europe and beyond. Turning round Scotland's health inequalities will take time and will require sustained effort by all the agencies involved. The task force recommended how Government, local authorities and their community planning partners should manage and report on progress in the medium as well as the long term. That will be part of the new relationship between central Government and local government, underpinned by the national performance framework and the single outcome agreement approach. Until now, we have mainly targeted health inequalities that are based on where people live. That is not sufficient, however, to tackle  unacceptable poor health across Scotland—in rural areas as much as in some of the most deprived urban neighbourhoods. The task force has been clear that action is needed across the whole population. Diversity, and who people are, matter as much as where they live. The task force found that an enormous amount of action is already taking place to reduce inequalities in health, funded through the global budgets that are allocated to health boards and local authorities. Those are very significant public sector resources, addressing many of the critical factors that influence health—there is £11.2 billion for health and wellbeing this year, and £11.1 billion for local government. For example, funding is improving people's chances of decent employment, making access to green space easier, anticipating the risks of illness, and supporting people to reduce those risks. Within those global sums, specific amounts contribute directly to tackling health inequalities and their underlying causes. The task force report identifies £1.8 billion over three years to 2010. That includes the fairer Scotland fund, which is used locally to tackle the root causes of poverty and unemployment; more than £120 million to address alcohol misuse, and a similar amount for drug problems; £56 million for improving Scotland's diet and levels of physical activity, and for combating obesity; and £42 million for tobacco control. All those sums are being used to reduce inequalities in health; they will have a positive impact on the health of the next generation. There are also promising initiatives such as keep well, which has given 35,000 people a health check in the most deprived communities in Scotland. We are also investing £97 million to phase out prescription charges in the three years to 2010. That will be of particular help to people who suffer inequalities as the result of a long-term illness. Much of the action that the task force recommended can be achieved within existing public sector budgets. However, it is clear that, too often, our services are not reaching those who need them most. That requires the redesign of public services, from education to social work, so that services work better together to meet their clients' most challenging needs and requirements. The report discusses improving client pathways or routes into, through, between and eventually out of the whole range of services. If clients who are already living with poverty and all the associated problems can be better supported by the public services that they use, that will reduce stress, improve the way in which families function, and lead to better health and wellbeing in the longer term. We will therefore support the task force's proposal for a number of local test sites, in which  clusters of public services will be developed, with a particular focus on improving clients' health and wellbeing. Test sites will address complicated issues such as giving children the best possible start, preventing violent behaviour among young people and improving chances of employment. What will make those test sites unique will be public services working together, with input from their clients and from front-line staff, using evidence and understanding of how clients' interactions with services affect their wellbeing. New Government funding of £4 million in the next three years will support those test sites with information, evidence and continuous improvement techniques. Changes to services will initially be made within the resources that are already available locally. The test sites will, however, explore where further investment may be needed in the longer term to help to shift the emphasis of services, from dealing with the effects of health inequalities to addressing the underlying causes. That will help to support longer-term resource plans, both nationally and locally. We expect to learn a great deal from the test sites and will set up new ways to do that. We are clear that we need to influence service change elsewhere more effectively than has previously been achieved. The community planning approach will continue to give us the overall framework within which the test sites and the learning from those will operate. The task force recommended areas in which specific new action and improvement is needed, within the global resources that I have described. It put its main emphasis on giving children the best possible start in life by improving antenatal services and support for families with very young children. The Government will therefore adopt recommendations to improve intensive support for families that are most at risk of health and other problems. That will start in pregnancy and continue through the school years. With NHS Lothian, we will explore implementation of the nurse-family partnership approach, to give intensive support to young mothers. We will also work with four national health service boards, including Ayrshire and Arran, Forth Valley and Lothian, and their partners, to strengthen school nursing, and the wider school health resource, especially in the most deprived areas. Work has already begun and will accelerate in the autumn. We will provide £7 million of new funding over three years to take forward that important work. Learning in school supports better health. The curriculum for excellence will highlight the importance of health and wellbeing, alongside literacy and numeracy. The task force emphasised encouraging young people to remain in learning and training after the age of 16, to boost their  future chances of employment. That is also being taken forward through curriculum for excellence. The task force identified key links between poverty and poor health and proposed how Government and public services could help to break that cycle. Employment has huge potential to improve people's health and wellbeing. The task force recommended measures to engage more of the business community in the healthy working lives award scheme that supports healthy work and workplaces. The task force wanted more employers to open up job opportunities for people claiming health-related benefits who are able to move into work. The NHS has led the way in doing that, and other public sector employers should follow its approach. Health services such as vocational rehabilitation will work more actively in conjunction with other local organisations that are supporting people into work. The Government will refresh its healthy working lives strategy to take account of the task force's recommendations and Dame Carol Black's report on the health of the working age population. Physical and social environments and services have the potential to improve health and wellbeing. The task force is keen that children and young people should benefit from their environment, through safe and healthy surroundings. As a result, the Government is making £4 million of funding available to the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland's inspiring Scotland programme, to lever in further resources from philanthropic sources to improve play opportunities for children most in need. I referred earlier to increasing inequalities in deaths from drugs, alcohol and violence, particularly among younger men. The task force heard how those risks to health and wellbeing link up with children's early years, family circumstances and the environment in which people live. We are particularly concerned with prevention and early intervention, and in seeing strong leadership for joint working locally. Those aims are reflected in the Government's recent policy statements on drugs and alcohol. Health services can do more to anticipate and prevent health problems. That is why future keep well checks will also identify and then support people with depression and anxiety. The task force report identifies a number of particularly vulnerable groups, and its recommendations will improve their access to health services. For example, the Government will lead the development of a framework for regular health assessments for people with learning disabilities across Scotland. The task force's approach has been to build on the evidence and the good things that are already going on and to look for consensus about new  action that will help with the difficult and complex factors that are responsible for Scotland's health inequalities. The Government will continue to collaborate with local government and a range of organisations in the public, private and third sectors to implement its recommendations. We shall produce an implementation plan by the end of 2008 to turn the recommendations into specific action with milestones and timescales. Producing the plan will not prevent action from going ahead. For example, we want the test sites to be identified this autumn and, as a result of the task force's recommendations, we are making available new resources from health and wellbeing budgets—which I have already detailed—to back the test sites and developments that will be of particular benefit to children. Real progress on reducing Scotland's health inequalities will come about only in the longer term, but we want to be accountable for reporting progress along the way, so the Government will review progress on implementing the task force's recommendations during 2010. The task force will reconvene to examine the review and identify any further action that is needed at that point. Scotland's health inequalities are unacceptable and the Government will not tolerate them. The task force has faced up to the problems and used the best evidence to develop a radical approach that stands a real chance of success. We do not underestimate the scale of the challenge but, if we address it whole-heartedly, we can drive a generational transformation in Scotland's health and wellbeing. The Government accepts the task force's recommendations and looks forward to working with others to put them into practice to make the people of Scotland "Equally Well".

I thank Margaret Curran for those questions. I am very happy to have further debate on this subject—and I accept that the report is fairly lengthy. We will bring forward the action plan, which will detail the implementation, later in the year, after the summer. I am sure that there will be ample opportunity for Margaret Curran to probe the matter further. On the point about the £1.8 billion, page 49 of the task force report shows an extensive breakdown of the funds. They include a great deal of new money that the Government has put in. Much of the drugs strategy and alcohol misuse moneys will be geared towards tackling health inequalities. I am sure that Margaret Curran will appreciate that much of the brief interventions roll-out will impact directly on people who suffer disproportionately from the impact of alcohol misuse. The detail is there for members to see. On the question of health board funding being disaggregated, boards are expected to ensure that the way in which they spend their money in each area is reflective of local needs and takes into account the levels of deprivation in their areas. The cabinet secretary and I probe health boards on that when we conduct annual reviews, to ascertain exactly what the boards are doing to tackle health inequalities. I can assure the member of that. There was widespread consultation with a number of organisations, which I would be happy to list for the member if she wants. I can write to  her with a list of those organisations. Part of the announcement on the obesity action plan covered the £19 million of funding, a good deal of which goes towards nutrition and food support for pregnant women and children under five in the most deprived areas. The member will hear more about that when I launch the obesity action plan in the very near future.

I thank Mary Scanlon for her questions. As I outlined in my statement, and as she will see from the report, the task force's recommendation is that the school-based health resource should be made up not just of school nurses but of other health professionals too—including mental health professionals and physiotherapists—to ensure that the package supports the needs of children in the broadest sense. We have accepted that recommendation. Work is proceeding to test how that model will work. A lot of work has already been done to ensure that the model is tested well, with a view to rolling it out. As far as what works in mental health is concerned, Mary Scanlon will be aware that there have already been a number of developments in respect of access to psychological therapies to reduce reliance on antidepressant prescribing. We know that a disproportionate percentage of people in our more deprived communities are being prescribed antidepressants because of the stress and anxiety that they face due to the underlying causes of their health inequalities and poverty. As I said in my statement, we want to extend the keep well programme, which currently focuses on cardiovascular problems, the associated factors and its underlying causes. We will extend that  focus to include anxiety and depression so that we can pick up those problems earlier in our most deprived communities. Mary Scanlon mentioned remote and rural areas. As I said in my statement, tackling health inequalities does not involve identifying just people who live in deprived communities in urban settings; it also involves picking up smaller pockets of deprivation in rural areas. The well north programme is a good example of work that is designed to do that. More detail on exactly how that will be done will come out in the near future.

I can give Ross Finnie that assurance. He is right to say that joint working is going well in many areas and is delivering benefits to those who receive services. The report, however, will take that work on to a new level. The  learning networks will consider how to redesign services across the board so that they have better reach for the most deprived and vulnerable people and those who suffer the greatest health inequalities. That has not been done before in such a comprehensive and planned way. We will work closely with COSLA to identify the areas in which want to go a step further and are keen to take the work to the next level. That will prove and demonstrate what can be achieved. I hope that I have assured Ross Finnie on that point.

Christine Grahame makes an important point. When I talk about support in the early years, I include the period before the baby is born, so I include support to pregnant women in the period up to the birth and beyond. Age zero to three has been identified as the critical time at which bonds are formed or, if they are not, at which damage is done. That is why we want to take forward the nurse-family partnership—pioneered by Professor David Olds at the University of Colorado—which has worked effectively in America and in some parts of England. It is an intensive programme of home visits to young mothers by highly trained nurses, which aims to improve pregnancy outcomes and child health and development. It is important that it also aims to improve families' economic self-sufficiency by encouraging the aspiration to get into employment, by ensuring that doors are opened and by supporting families in accessing the services that are required to take that forward. Instead of dipping in and out of families' lives at times of crisis, the service is about supporting families from the very early stages and throughout  their lives. Participation in the programme is voluntary—families have to sign up to it—but we believe that there is strong evidence that the approach can work.

In my statement, I talked about other linked strategies, which we have already started. The joint work with COSLA on the early years framework is well advanced. A key focus of that work will be targeting of additional services for zero to three-year-olds. That work is progressing well, and the plan of action will be made available in the autumn. It will fit well into the recommendations that the task force report makes on that front.

I am aware—as the task force was—that there are good examples of local projects and services. Many of them feature in the report. However, the problem has been that a good idea here perhaps never sees the light of day there. Part of the learning networks' job is to consider best practice and what can be maximised to achieve the best outcomes for people and to encourage people to share knowledge and practice throughout Scotland. That is the work that we are doing on the test sites.  Ian McKee also mentioned primary care. We are committed to finding a more equitable basis for core funding of general practice—we have made no secret of that. We will endeavour to continue to work with general practitioners to ensure, for example, that future changes to the GP contract work for, rather than against, practices in deprived areas. I give the member an assurance on that.

I am sure that Rhoda Grant will appreciate that the test sites have not yet been finalised. We want variation in the areas in which we will do the testing. If we are going to have learning networks, we must make sure that the learning from those networks can be spread to other similar areas. What works well in an urban setting might not be the same as what would work well in a more rural area. I refer Rhoda Grant to the answer that I gave to Mary Scanlon. The well north programme looks at the needs of the rural population and applies the principles of keep well and anticipatory care to rural areas, and considers the appropriate way of delivering anticipatory care in such areas. As the detail of the well north programme is rolled out, I hope that Rhoda Grant will welcome it.

We must ensure that our universal services provide the level of support that people require. Surely, after everything I have said about widening health inequalities, every member, no matter which part of the chamber they sit in, will agree that such inequality is not acceptable. That is why we must make sure that our services are redesigned and refocused so that we can begin to address the lifelong inequalities that people suffer in Scotland, here and now. We can do that only by making sure that support goes to where it is most required. That does not mean that people who require support are no longer going to get it. It is  often those who need it most who are least likely to get it. That is not acceptable and we are determined to address it.

As I said earlier, the first thing we want to do is test that the initiative will deliver what we want it to deliver, so it will initially be introduced on a small number of sites to check out the make-up of the health team, the type of work in which it engages and how it relates to staff in the school and other staff in the community. We want to work all that out before we roll out the project. However, we are absolutely committed to ensuring that additional resources go where they are required. That is why the school health resources will initially be focused on our areas of deprivation, where we know school-age children require support. We want a continuum of support from the pregnant mother, to zero to 3 years, through to nursery and on to the school years for the most vulnerable children throughout their lives. We believe that that will lead to better outcomes for them in their teenage and adult years.

The evidence tells us that price is closely linked to consumption: the lower the price, the higher the consumption. That is why we are proposing to tackle deep discounting in the ways we laid out in the consultation earlier this week. We also know that people from our most deprived communities suffer greater alcohol-related harm. They are seven times more likely to die an alcohol-related death. There are many complex issues around comorbidity, but we know that the people who live in the 20 per cent most deprived communities are about six times more likely to be admitted to hospital as a result of alcohol misuse than are people from more affluent  areas. There is a clear link: that is why, if we can get the alcohol strategy right, there will be a disproportionate benefit for our most deprived communities.

I am surprised by what Des McNulty has said, particularly given that Carol Tannahill was an adviser to the task force and gave us much of the evidence on which the report is based. Every single part of the report is relevant to tackling deprivation in the city of Glasgow and the west of Scotland. Without tackling the deep-rooted health inequalities in Glasgow and the west of Scotland, we will fail in our duty to tackle health inequalities. I can assure Des McNulty that a clear priority in tackling health inequalities is to ensure that we tackle inequalities in Glasgow and the west of Scotland.

I hope that James Kelly heard my earlier response to Ian McKee that we are committed to finding a fairer basis for the core funding of general practice. We want to work with  GPs to ensure that future changes to the GP contract work for, rather than against, practices in deprived areas. Let me remind James Kelly that we were not in power when the GP contract was designed, but we are clear that we want to improve it. That is why funding for the new Scottish enhanced services programme—£20 million in 2007-08 and 2008-09—has been specifically targeted at deprived areas, using the Scottish index of multiple deprivation. We have been especially keen to allocate resources to reflect needs in deprived areas, but there is certainly more work to do and we will pursue that vigorously.

I point Elaine Smith to page 22 of the report, which states: "NHS Boards should improve breastfeeding rates in deprived areas and among disadvantaged groups. The Government's new infant nutrition co-ordinator will concentrate efforts on reaching these groups." That is one of the task force recommendations. Breastfeeding is clearly an important aspect of early years intervention and the support that we give to new mothers, particularly young mothers. A lot of good work is already going on in that domain, but there is clearly more to do. Elaine Smith can be assured of our commitment to doing it.

This is certainly an important day for public health in Scotland. It is an opportunity to say a fond farewell to the legislation of 1897, which has undoubtedly served Scotland well for more than 100 years, and an opportunity for Jackson Carlaw—not for the first time—to bring something new to the debate with his run-through of the headlines of that time. It is also an opportunity to herald provisions that will address some of the public health threats of today and tomorrow. I thank all the members who have spoken today—particularly the Liberal Democrats, who have generously given up their closing speech time to allow us to speak for longer, should we want to. I am grateful for that. Once again, I thank both the Health and Sport Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which Jamie Stone has egged us on to mention. I am pleased to note its input into the scrutiny of the bill. I thank the stakeholders, who as I mentioned in my opening speech were very important. I also thank my officials in the bill team. They have perhaps had one or two sleepless nights over the issues, so I put on record my thanks for their hard work. The debate has been useful in clarifying and confirming some of the issues that have been dealt with and flagging up one or two issues to reflect on—I will come to those in a minute. I welcome the constructive spirit that has come from unexpected sources. Margaret Curran may start to like her new, consensual approach—

We never know; stranger things have happened. However, that approach was appropriate for this debate. I welcome the acknowledgement that, although the majority of public health incidents are dealt with without recourse to statutory powers, there is a need for effective legislation to protect the people of Scotland from potentially life-threatening infectious diseases and contamination. I turn to a few points that were made in the debate. Margaret Curran made the important point that a health inequalities agenda is involved because of the prevalence of sunbed parlours in some communities. She mentioned the power of licensing to protect public health. I encourage those in local government with licensing responsibility always to wear their public health hat when deciding on such matters. That is happening more and people are getting better at that. Mary Scanlon made the important point that passing the bill is not the end of the process. It will be followed by important training and communication on implementation of the act. I assure her that we are already focusing on that and that work is being done on qualifications. I will say a bit more about the sunbed provisions in a moment. Ross Finnie made an important point about the burden on us as legislators to get things right, which we all take seriously. The Parliament has worked as it should work to ensure that the bill is as good and workable as it can be.

This is turning into a bit of a love-in and I am blushing.

I know. I thank the member for those kind words, which are appreciated. I am sure that the bill team appreciates them, too. Ken Macintosh made the important point that skin cancer is a particular Scottish problem. He went a bit too close to home for me when he described the people who are most at risk, as I have only to look at the sun for freckles to appear instantly. The public health campaign that will follow the bill is the key. I am sure that he will watch that with interest and I hope that he will be further involved in implementation. Given his involvement to date, that would be most welcome. Richard Simpson made an important point about consumer protection legislation in his intervention, to which I responded briefly. He also referred to that in his closing speech. The Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008 (SI 2008/1277) revoked the Control of Misleading Advertisements Regulations 1988 (SI 1988/915) at the end of last month. The new regulations offer more consumer protection on a range of issues, which include the making of misleading claims, and could help to strengthen the sunbed provisions in the bill. Sunbed operators will have to ensure that balanced information is provided and that consumers are fully aware of the whole picture of the health implications of sunbed use. I hope that I have responded to all the issues that members raised. Christine Grahame started the bill process by describing the bill as worthy but dull. Many provisions in the bill are not as newsworthy as other work in the Parliament, but the same might well have been said of previous crucial public health legislation that transformed our people’s public health. The bill will put in place the required building blocks to take public health protection to another level. Through extensive and detailed scrutiny by all those concerned, the bill has been fine tuned. I am happy to say that it is a much-improved product as a result of that process. We cannot eradicate the risk of public health threats. Although, as Richard Simpson said, doctors in the past might have thought that we might get to a situation in which we no longer have the threat of infectious diseases, unfortunately that will never be the case. We will always have to deal with emerging threats. In this era of the globalisation of trade and travel and the increasing threat of bio-terrorism, it is important that our legislation is as good as it can be and that people are protected. Of course, wherever possible, we should deal with such threats without resorting to legislation. However, we need to ensure that our public health professionals have the tools at their disposal—if necessary, through statutory controls—to deal quickly and effectively with potential threats, in order to reduce or contain the spread of disease or contamination. That is what the bill does, and I commend it to Parliament.

I thank all those who have contributed to this important piece of legislation. First, I thank the previous Administration, which brought forward proposals for consultation in autumn 2006. Secondly, I thank the Health and Sport Committee for its thorough scrutiny of the bill and the committee clerks who worked so hard in support of its members. I hope that the committee members recognise that we have worked hard to address their concerns and comments. We have made a number of amendments. I hope that everyone will agree that we have worked well together to strengthen the bill. Thirdly, I thank the many stakeholders who responded to the original consultation and who provided evidence at stages 1 and 2. Finally, I thank Ken Macintosh for his contribution on the regulation of sunbed use. We are a listening Government, which I am sure has been demonstrated throughout the progress of the bill, and we have been prepared to consider carefully the full range of evidence that has been submitted to us before reaching agreement on the bill that is before Parliament today. I am grateful that all those who contributed to the debate have agreed to the principles of the bill.  To remind us of the significance of the bill, I repeat the words of the World Health Organization, which said in 2007: "New diseases are emerging at an historically unprecedented rate." Worldwide travel is no longer the preserve of the rich and famous. Many Scots are holidaying and working in countries where serious communicable diseases are relatively common and can be brought back to our shores in a matter of hours. We therefore need legislation that gives our public health authorities—the national health service and local authorities—flexible powers to protect the public from dangers to health, while building in safeguards on the use of those powers. The Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill will, if enacted, be a vital tool in protecting our citizens from current and future public health threats. It has the potential to prevent, and prevent the spread of, serious infection and contamination, and thereby to save many lives in the future. In order to do that, the bill contains strong powers. However, we have recognised throughout the bill’s development and parliamentary progress that a balance must be struck between our duty to protect the public and the rights of the individual. Although we were satisfied that the bill, as introduced, achieved that balance, we have strengthened the safeguards for individual rights in a number of respects at stage 2. In particular, we have strengthened the appeals procedures in part 4 of the bill. Other important amendments that have been made relate to the court procedures that are to be used and the need for consultation before making regulations under the bill. I am satisfied that the amendments do not in any way dilute the level of health protection that the legislation affords. I am conscious that part of the responsibility in safeguarding an individual’s rights is to ensure that those who are taking action have the necessary qualifications, experience and expertise to do so. In that regard, the introduction of the concept of health board and local authority "competent persons" is extremely important. I am pleased that our proposals on those qualifications are already out to stakeholder consultation. We will, of course, continue to listen carefully to stakeholders on that and on the content of other regulations that are to be made under the bill. The updating of the statutory nuisance regime in the Environmental Protection Act 1990 as it affects Scotland is well overdue. As a result of the bill, we will have a significantly enhanced regime compared with that in other parts of the United Kingdom. It not only builds on their experiences of introducing insect infestation and artificial light as statutory nuisances but introduces a flexible fixed-penalty regime and a regulation-making power that will enable us to legislate quickly and effectively to address new nuisances that arise in future. The provisions on sunbeds that were inserted by Ken Macintosh’s amendments at stage 2 stimulated debate across all parties and might well do so again today, although I suspect that there is now pretty broad agreement. The provisions in part 8 send a clear health message that sunbed use is dangerous. It is important that we give adults the information to enable them to make an informed and educated choice, and that we protect children. The provisions put us ahead of the rest of the UK, and they strike the right balance between Government intervention and individual responsibility. I am conscious that there are still some outstanding concerns, principally on the safety of sunbed appliances and on how the Health and Safety Executive guidance for sunbed operators can be better enforced. We also need to protect consumers from the misleading information that operators provide on the merits of sunbed use. A number of members believe that the licensing of sunbeds would go a long way to meet those concerns, and I have agreed to consider the matter further when we have had time to gather and fully assess the evidence. However, as Ken Macintosh said at stage 2, we need to be careful not to dilute the message that sunbed use damages health even in premises that meet the highest standards.

The member must be a mind-reader, because I was about to say something about that. As part of our further work in the area, I intend to meet the head of the Health and Safety Executive to explore how its guidance might be strengthened and better enforced. The matter is clearly on reserved territory. Those on the ground might come under local authorities, but when they are carrying out the relevant duties, they are wearing their reserved-matters hat—their health and safety hat. I am also considering the new consumer protection legislation, which might well give us scope to tackle the serious issues on the ground. I listened with great interest to the Health and Sport Committee’s evidence taking on the matter. As I said earlier, it is clear that there are some outstanding issues that we need to address and I look forward to working with the committee further to do that. We need to take time to consider all the evidence and reflect on how the issues can best be addressed before we take further action, and I want to do that in partnership with the Health and Sport Committee. I am confident that the bill will provide our public health professionals in health boards and local authorities with the tools that they need to ensure a high level of health protection for the people of Scotland for many years to come. It will also provide an appropriate level of Government intervention to ensure that our young people are protected from risks to their health from sunbed use and that adults can make properly informed decisions on sunbed use. I therefore commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill be passed.

As I have explained, a local authority can follow a simple process to recover expenses as a civil debt. Murdo Fraser should know all about that, as he was party to the passing of legislation that contained the term "civil debt". It is unfortunate that the drafting of amendment 30 is flawed. I will not make too much of that but, for example, proposed new section 76(5) mentions "expenses under subsection (1)" but does not mention the administrative expenses that a local authority can recover under subsection (2). If amendment 30 were agreed to, it could create confusion about which expenses could be recovered and the procedure for recovery. On the basis of all that, I urge members to reject amendments 29 and 30.

As you know, Presiding Officer, we have some concerns about the amendment. Although our original approach favoured a light touch, we appreciate the sentiments that have just been explained by Mr Finnie and others. We will, therefore, not oppose amendment 46.

Section 102(3) provides that a statutory instrument containing regulations under the act is generally subject to negative procedure, subject to the exceptions that are set out in section 102(4), to which affirmative procedure applies. Section 25(3) enables Scottish ministers by regulation to give such additional powers to investigators as they consider necessary for the purposes of public health investigations. This is an important power, and one under which regulations might need to be made quickly, which is why negative procedure was first proposed. Section 90D(1) enables Scottish ministers by regulation to make provision for sunbeds used for medical purposes. That power will be used only if we need to ensure that medical use of sunbeds remains outwith the scope of the legislation and in case we need to do anything in the future to guard against sunbed operators and manufacturers trying to circumvent the law through the medical exemption route. We recognise that those are broad powers, however, and are, therefore, content that they be made by affirmative procedure, which will afford the Parliament proper scrutiny of the regulations. In urgent situations, amendment 41 will allow us to make regulations under section 25(3) using emergency affirmative procedures, which meets the policy intention. I move amendment 39.  Amendment 39 agreed to.  Amendments 40 and 41 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to.

Schedule 2 provides for changes to section 47 of the National Assistance Act 1948. Later this year, that section will be repealed by the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007, so the provision in schedule 2 is no longer necessary. Amendment 42 removes the amendments to section 47 of the 1948 act. It also makes consequential amendments to other legislation. The repeal of the Public Health (Scotland) Act 1897 has consequences elsewhere in the statute book. Some of the references to the 1897 act were removed at stage 2. Amendment 43 continues the tidying-up process and removes another outstanding reference. I move amendment 42.  Amendment 42 agreed to.

Sections 30, 56, 57 and 77 make provisions to the effect that any dispute concerning a person’s entitlement to compensation, or concerning the amount of compensation payable, is to be determined by a single arbiter appointed by agreement between both parties. [Interruption.]

If agreement cannot be reached, application is to be made to the president of the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to appoint a suitable arbiter. During stage 2 consideration of the bill, further consultation took place with the president of the Lands Tribunal, who expressed the view that, despite there being relevant precedent in legislation, the role proposed was not appropriate for the Lands Tribunal. The Scottish ministers have taken further advice and now consider that it would be appropriate for a sheriff to determine who a suitable arbiter would be in cases of dispute. That decision has the support of the Scottish Court Service. Concerns were expressed at stage 1 that sections 30, 56, 57 and 77 might lack clarity as to which dispute and agreement were being referred to. Amendments 2, 4, 6 and 32 insert the word "such" before the word "agreement", to put the matter beyond doubt. I move amendment 2.  Amendment 2 agreed to.  Amendment 3 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to.

Amendments 45, 22, 23 and 24 are minor amendments to ensure consistent drafting throughout the bill.  Section 98(4) grants wide immunity for disclosures made under section 98. Section 99 gives narrow immunity for the exercise of functions under the bill generally. Amendment 38 removes the potential overlap between sections 98(4) and 99 by excluding section 98 from the provisions to which section 99 applies. The immunity provided by section 98(4) applies only to actions under section 98. For all other matters under the bill, section 99 will apply. Amendment 44 is a technical amendment. The long title of the bill was amended at stage 2 to reflect Kenneth Macintosh’s amendments on sunbeds. Amendment 44 ensures that the long title reflects the bill’s contents following stage 2.  I move amendment 45.  Amendment 45 agreed to.

Amendment 8 will widen the availability of compensation under part 4 to those carers, as defined in the amendment, who incur loss as a result of having to care for a child or other relevant person who is subject to quarantine, exclusion or restriction of activity, whether through complying voluntarily with a health board or being subject to a quarantine exclusion or restriction order. That fulfils the policy intention in the original public health legislation consultation, which received broad support. Members of the Health and Sport Committee might recall that the issue was raised by a number of stakeholders during stage 1. There have been a number of public health incidents in which parents have been reluctant to take time off work to care for their children who are excluded from nursery or school, because they were in casual employment and would suffer financial loss as a result of taking time off. The availability of compensation in such circumstances, where there is a proven loss, will allow those people to stay off work and to adhere to health board advice regarding limiting the spread of infection. Subsection (4) of the new section that amendment 8 will insert sets out the arrangements for resolving cases of dispute over compensation. Those arrangements are in line with other compensation provisions in the bill as amended by members earlier today. However, we acknowledge that further detail might be required about how the compensation arrangements will work in practice, so subsection (5) of the new section will provide Scottish ministers with a regulation-making power to make further provision if required. I move amendment 8.  Amendment 8 agreed to.

Section 57A makes provision for applications to the sheriff to recall quarantine, detention and exceptional detention orders made in the absence of the person to whom the order relates. There are already express provisions in the bill about the effect of appeals in section 34(4A) and section 61. Amendment 9 is necessary to remove any doubt that the orders under section 57A continue to have effect until or unless they are recalled. Amendment 21 is a technical amendment that clarifies section 61 and ensures that where an order appealed against has been extended or modified and the person subject to it appeals against the extension or modification, the order continues as extended or modified in the interim. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.

The amendments in this group are technical amendments. The purpose of amendments 10 to 20 is to ensure that the appropriate range of actions are available to the sheriff, the sheriff principal and the Court of Session following an appeal against certain part 4 orders. Currently, the powers of the sheriff, the sheriff principal and the Court of Session do not fully reflect the fact that not only orders but decisions may be appealed against. Amendments 34 to 37 are technical in nature and ensure consistency in appeal provisions throughout the bill, in light of other amendments that have been made at this stage. I move amendment 10.  Amendment 10 agreed to.  Amendment 11 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to.

Section 74 as currently drafted provides that, when an authorised officer who is entitled to enter premises by virtue of part 5 of the bill considers that there is an emergency, he or she may exercise the power of entry at any time and use reasonable force. However, under part 5, the power of entry available to an authorised officer can be exercised only once a notice has been served on the owner or occupier of the premises. The need to go through that process conflicts with the need to act in cases of emergency. Amendment 25 rectifies the situation by providing that the authorised officer may enter the premises in question in emergency situations, provided that the criteria for entry have been certified by a local authority competent person. Amendments 26 to 28 and 31 are consequential amendments. I move amendment 25.  Amendment 25 agreed to.

The amendments are unnecessary. Amendment 29 would remove the word "civil" from the term "civil debt" in section 76. That term is not new. It is straightforward and clearly understood, and it has been used in other pieces of legislation, most recently in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Act 2006, the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Act 2006, the Business Improvement Districts (Scotland) Regulations 2007, and many more besides. Amendment 29 is therefore unnecessary. Amendment 30 would provide for the court process by which a local authority could recover expenses for action taken under part 5. However, that is already the effect of section 76, which provides the local authority with the right to recover expenses. If there is a dispute about the amount of expenses sought or instalments suggested, recourse may be made to the court because it is clear that the local authority can recover expenses as a civil debt. Rules of court will be made to cover the procedure for that. I envisage that summary application in a sheriff court may be the appropriate route to take. It will allow the sheriff the opportunity to decide what expenses are reasonable, and it will allow appeals against that decision. Leaving such detail to rules will provide a degree of flexibility that would be lost if amendment 30 were agreed to. Our approach is consistent with the rest of the bill, and there is therefore no need for amendment 30.

As members have said, the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill removes payment to registered medical practitioners for notification of certain diseases. Existing legislation specifies 32 notifiable diseases. Most notifications—the figure is approximately 80 per cent—are of food poisoning and chickenpox, neither of which will be notifiable diseases under the bill. During stages 1 and 2 of the bill, only the BMA voiced any concern about the dropping of the fee for notification. In our discussions with public health medicine consultants and other health professionals, the matter was not highlighted as an issue for medical practitioners. Our view is that notification should be undertaken as a matter of course under a registered medical practitioner’s duty of care. We are talking about the notification of serious illnesses that have wider public health implications. I do not believe that members would argue that registered medical practitioners would be unwilling to notify those serious illnesses if they were not paid separately for this duty. I do not believe for a minute that that would be the case. Furthermore, at present, not all general practitioners claim the fees that are currently available for notification. The effect of Mary Scanlon’s amendment would be that only those registered medical practitioners who are contracted by a health board to provide primary care would receive fees for notifying a disease—basically, only GPs. The amendment would introduce disparity between registered medical practitioners who work in different areas of health care but who are equally likely to come into contact with persons with a notifiable disease. In any case, notification by a registered medical practitioner is not voluntary; the bill requires them to do it. The bill also requires laboratory directors to notify specified organisms. No one is suggesting that they should be paid for complying with their duties. Why should some doctors be treated differently? Mary Scanlon raised the issue of support for opposition amendments. As Richard Simpson rightly pointed out, the matter is one not for the Government but the SPCB to resolve. She is right to highlight the significant flaw in the drafting of her amendment. It provides that "the Scottish Ministers may by order" specify the amount of fee that should be paid to medical practitioners and the timescale within which those fees must be paid, but there are no other order-making powers in the bill and therefore there is no provision for the parliamentary procedure that is needed to make such an order under the bill. If amendment 1 were agreed to, any order made would not be subject to parliamentary procedure or scrutiny. On that basis, I ask the chamber to reject amendment 1.

The Scottish Government wants to ensure that people in Scotland with Duchenne or any form of muscular dystrophy get access to services of the highest quality and achieve survival rates that are comparable with the best in other countries. To achieve that aim, we have invested in the Scottish muscle network, which is the form of multidisciplinary working that is best suited to Scottish circumstances, including, of course, our geographical circumstances. Strengthening the network's geographical coverage has been a priority in allocating the resources that we have made available for genetics services. The investment in genetics services will improve the care of those with single gene complex disorders such as Duchenne.

I am aware of the Action Duchenne visit, and I will come along to the meeting to talk to some of the people involved.  On the centre of excellence, the member will be aware that the clinicians who care for those with Duchenne feel that the geography of the country makes a single tertiary model inappropriate for the delivery of care in Scotland. I referred to that in my initial answer. It is for that reason that the clinicians formed the Scottish muscle network. As I said earlier, the Government has used funding for the review of genetics services to strengthen the network's geographic coverage and to enhance multidisciplinary working. Of course, I am happy to take forward discussions with members of Action Duchenne, who I will meet at lunch time.

I thank the Parliament for the helpful and, in the main, constructive way in which it has debated the future of remote and rural health care. The report that stimulated the debate was produced by a working group that the previous Government established, and I am pleased that there continues to be a good deal of consensus among the parties and a shared determination to provide sustainable health care in our rural communities. I shall deal with some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. Richard Simpson made a good point about the way that we express ourselves. Margaret Curran failed to say whether she would have supported NRAC's recommendations. She talked about interrogating the recommendations. I do not think that any member would believe that the cabinet secretary did anything other than interrogate the recommendations—of course she did. To be fair, Richard Simpson was far more reasonable in his approach to NRAC. The same goes for Ross Finnie, who made a constructive speech on a constructive amendment and demonstrated an understanding of the issues involved. To members such as Jeremy Purvis, John Lamont and Christine Grahame, who raised issues about NHS Borders, I say that NRAC will provide an opportunity for issues and detail to be discussed. I am pleased that members throughout the chamber have welcomed the setting up of that committee.

Work has already begun on setting up the group. The details will be announced shortly. Margaret Curran talked about out-of-hours care. The expert group that will be established to consider the funding formula will be able to consider and make recommendations on issues such as the cost of providing out-of-hours services in remote and rural areas.

All of those issues were interrogated by the cabinet secretary. Margaret  Curran has failed to say what she would have done differently. That is the weakness in her argument. She knows as well as every other member that she, too, would have accepted NRAC's recommendations. Mary Scanlon raised an issue about generic support workers. That role is being developed and evaluated by NHS Shetland, and is for communities that have no health or social care at present. I can assure the member that generic support workers will not, therefore, replace health visitors in any way, but they will provide essential care and support where no such support is currently available. We will ensure that members are kept informed of progress. Of course, the terms and conditions will be relevant to agenda for change, which I know Mary Scanlon is concerned about. Rob Gibson made some important points about community involvement in designing models of care. We want communities to be very much involved in the development of their health care services. Helen Eadie raised a number of points. I confirm that the funding for the national programme manager has been provided by the Scottish Government and that the programme manager is now in place. She also raised a constituency case. It is absolutely right and proper for members to raise constituency cases in the chamber—I have done so myself—but, when they do so, it is important that they get the facts correct. Helen Eadie asserted that she had not received a reply from the cabinet secretary after seven weeks. I say to her that the reply to her letter of 12 March was sent to her on 5 April. Helen Eadie must reflect on her comments in the light of that fact.

The case involves important issues, and the board is taking them forward. I do not minimise the concerns that the case raises, but I stress that it is essential that members do not misrepresent the facts. The reply from the cabinet secretary, which I have with me, is a substantial letter that deals with some of the concerns that Helen Eadie raised. She should not have implied that there was a seven-week time lag in the reply, because that is not accurate.  Murdo Fraser raised a number of issues regarding highland Perthshire and Kinloch Rannoch, and I am aware of the similar issues that have been raised by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. As I said to Murdo Fraser, discussions will take place between the Aberfeldy practice and the local community. However, I will respond to him in writing to address some of the detailed concerns that he raised. Nigel Don raised a point that was, perhaps, not addressed as deeply in the debate as it should have been. The challenge of demographic changes must be met, and we need to look ahead in order to do so. He said that telemedicine and telecare had great potential in that regard, and I absolutely agree. At the moment, we are only touching the margins of the potential of telemedicine and telecare, and the particular relevance that they have for maintaining older people safely in their own homes. I saw some of that potential when I visited the Scottish centre for telehealth, and I think that, over the next few years, we will see the potential of such delivery mechanisms as they roll out. The programme of action that we have outlined is designed to bring clarity about the services that people have a right to expect and to give people confidence that the services will be sustained. It is realistic about the challenges that the NHS faces in remote and rural areas, such as the challenges of geography, demographic change, rural deprivation and attracting and retaining the best staff, with the skills that they need to meet the needs and expectations of patients, their families and their carers. The programme is also confident—confident about our ability to support the resilience of rural communities, to realise the benefits of new technologies and to work in new and different ways. The proposals will boost the confidence of patients who live in remote and rural Scotland. We have set out a model of care that can be sustained over the longer term, removed the fear that the axe might drop on our rural general hospitals and turned our backs on the relentless drive towards the centralisation of vital health care services, which was, unfortunately, a hallmark of the previous Administration.

I understand the member's concerns, but does he accept that NHS Tayside has said clearly that it expects, along with the Aberfeldy practice, to engage the local community to address many of the issues that he has raised?

The member has just said that the report referred to the minimum level of service that we would expect. Where there are more comprehensive services, we would, of course, expect them to be retained, just as we expect the obstetrician-led service at Caithness to be retained.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service is carrying out a public consultation exercise as part of its forward strategy review of the services that it provides. A major objective of the review is to increase the donor base in Scotland by 35,000 people—an increase of 20 per cent.

Yes, I agree.  Part of the SNBTS's strategy, in an effort to grow the donor base, is to encourage more workplace donations. I hope that employers will make an important contribution by engaging with the SNBTS and by making it as easy as possible for employees to give blood.

The money that I announced for the hepatitis C strategy—record levels of funding—is completely different funding from the funding that will be used for the hepatitis C inquiry. It is important that that is clear; I am sure that Margaret Curran would not suggest otherwise. I am happy to provide Margaret Curran with any details that she requires on where resources are coming from. However, she can be assured that the resources are there and that they are in no way coming out of money that is going towards the important services for identifying and treating people with hepatitis C.

Acts of violence and abuse against anyone working in a public-facing role are unacceptable. The Scottish Government is continuing to support the campaign for the  protection of public service workers from violence that has been run for the past four years in partnership with the Scottish Trades Union Congress. Responsibility for protecting workers from mental or physical harm in the workplace lies, quite rightly, with the employer, who should carry out a risk assessment for their workplaces and—importantly—put in place measures to ensure that risk of harm to their employees is minimised, including recording and reporting incidents of abuse or assault and their consequences for the victims.

I commend John Park for the work that he has done on the issue. He will be aware that officials from the Scottish centre for healthy working lives are already in discussions with the trade unions and employers in the betting trade on how best to tackle the abuse of workers. I look forward to betting-trade employers taking advantage of the support and assistance that is available to them from the centre, and I would certainly encourage any employers who have not displayed the posters to do so. I am sure that such encouragement can take place in the context of the discussions with the centre.

The unacceptable population health trends that were identified by the report are being addressed by a number of primary care and mental health initiatives including the keep well programme. In addition, the wider determinants of ill health affecting people in West Dunbartonshire  will be addressed through the forthcoming recommendations of the ministerial task force on health inequalities.

Absolutely, which is why we are investing £85 million of new moneys over the next three years in tackling alcohol misuse, specifically with the brief interventions programme, which is an important way of identifying hazardous drinkers that will be delivered through health boards. That will be a significant element of what takes place in Des McNulty's constituency. On the wider issue of alcohol abuse, Des McNulty will be aware that we will shortly launch our long-term strategy for tackling alcohol misuse. It will contain a number of important actions that will help to address the cultural problems that we have in Scotland, which are particularly deep rooted in some parts of the country. I am sure that there will be plenty within that strategy that Des McNulty will welcome.

Those figures are based on workforce planning assessments that take into account all the Government's policy developments. The member will be aware that there are now four specific mental health targets for all NHS boards, which cover attention to reduced levels of antidepressant prescribing and suicide; the latter with an added focus on increased training of front-line care staff. In particular, a lot of good developments in mental health are taking place in Des McNulty's constituency, of which I am sure that he will be aware. The developments are led by a consultant clinical psychologist, who has been appointed to provide a quality service throughout West Dunbartonshire, which I am sure that Mr McNulty—and, I hope, Richard Simpson—welcomes.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of respite in supporting unpaid carers and those with care needs, and in sustaining caring relationships. That is why our concordat with local government includes a commitment to make progress towards an extra 10,000 respite weeks per year. As the member will be aware, it is for Highland Council to determine the type of provision to best meet local needs.

I am aware that Highland Council is considering whether Beachview Lodge could be adapted to provide small group living for those people with learning disabilities who are currently supported outside the area. However, it is important to stress that no decision has yet been taken on the issue. Any plans that are taken forward must be within the context of the policy of "The same as you?" and the changing lives agenda. Consultation events for service users, carers and other stakeholders are planned for June, I understand, and there will also be wider communication around the review. I am sure that as a result of the consultation events, the views of carers and service users will be taken on board.

I expect any local authority to undertake service change in a way that is clear and that offers service users and their carers a full input into the decision-making process. As I said, consultation events have been planned for June, and I expect those to take full account of the views of service users and carers. I agree with Peter Peacock that service change is difficult, but it is sometimes necessary in order to provide services in a better way. However, it must involve the full co-operation of service users and carers.

The Scottish Government is examining each of the single outcome agreements of the 32 local authorities to ensure that they reflect and are robust and ambitious enough to meet the targets and outcomes that have been agreed. I will give particular attention to where respite care sits within Highland Council's single outcome agreement. The important thing is that the outcomes are robust and reflect the needs of local carers and services users. I also expect the single outcome agreements to be discussed fully with those who receive services in those areas—that would be good practice on the part of local authorities.

It is the responsibility of the nurse who is in charge of a ward to ensure that all patients are assisted in eating their meals. The current arrangements include the assessment of patients on their admission to hospital to determine their nutritional needs, including assistance with meals. A care plan is developed for those who need one, which is implemented and evaluated to ensure that any changes in the patient's condition are taken into account and acted on. The Scottish Government is developing national catering and nutrition standards, which will be launched over the summer.

The development of the new national catering and nutrition standards followed a review by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland in 2005-06 into standards for food, fluid and nutritional care in hospitals, which recommended that the quality of nutritional care in hospitals be improved. A monitoring tool is being developed that will be tested in three national health service boards from July to September, prior to being rolled out to all NHS boards. It will measure boards' compliance with the new national catering and nutrition standards and assess patients' experience of their nutritional care, which will include assistance with their meals. We will therefore be able to get a picture of the improvements that are taking place, and take appropriate action if they are not taking place quickly enough.

Patients' needs should be assessed when they come into hospital, and any change in their condition should be monitored to determine how able or otherwise they are to feed themselves and what assistance they require. I am confident that the standards that I have described will ensure that all patients, including those who have Parkinson's disease, get the support and assistance that they require. We will monitor the situation very closely indeed.

We have provided record levels of support to local authorities for their responsibilities, including the commissioning of care services for older people. Our concordat with local government includes a shared commitment to work to improve the quality of care in care homes. Decisions about the levels and provision of care services in local areas are ultimately the responsibility of local authorities and their planning and commissioning partners.

I understand that Argyll and Bute Council is currently reviewing its care home provision, including the development of progressive care centres and more integrated care home services to help more people to remain in their own home and to reduce the risk of people who live in care homes having to move if their needs increase. Clearly, much of that links back to the action plan that came out of last year's Social Work Inspection Agency report, on which Argyll and Bute Council has since taken action. On the Eader Glinn care home, the director of community services has publicly stated that no final decision has been taken to close or dispose of any council-operated care home, and that the future of Eader Glinn is being considered as part of the council's wider plans to which I referred. I certainly hope that the council will keep in touch with the member about any developments and plans as they are taken forward.

We have made tackling alcohol misuse a priority for NHS boards through the introduction of a new target on delivering alcohol brief interventions. We have also agreed a national indicator on reducing alcohol-related hospital admissions as part of the national performance framework agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We are investing significantly increased resources to help achieve those targets—from £10 million in 2007-08 to almost £25 million in 2008-09—and that money will be routed through NHS boards. NHS boards and local authorities work together at a local level through the alcohol and drug action teams to identify local priorities and commission and fund local services.

Of course alcohol and drug action teams will have latitude to meet the local needs of their population. However, the policy context and direction that we have set is clear that many people who would be classified as hazardous drinkers might not see themselves as such, and that when they access the health service for other reasons the opportunity should be taken to address their hazardous drinking. That has support across the chamber. Around that, alcohol and drug action teams will be able to tackle other areas within their remits, particularly with regard to greatest need, and of course they will have the opportunity to help those who require additional support.

I am grateful to members of all parties for their engagement with this important area. I sense that there is consensus around the chamber that what we are doing is a positive step forward. I will respond to a number of issues that have been raised. In his opening speech, Richard Simpson asked how many users were involved in the development of the plan. I can tell him that around 20 users were actively involved in the stakeholder group that fed into the plan's development. Richard Simpson and Mary Scanlon asked about the timescale for the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline. The SIGN guideline is already in place; it is the standards that are to be developed by 2010. That is the earliest point by which that can be done, as QIS has a heavy workload. Nevertheless, the standards are one of QIS's priorities and it is factoring that work in as quickly as it can. We will keep that under scrutiny. Richard Simpson also talked about the roles of the MCNs, which will include representatives from primary care, pharmacy and social care. He was keen to hear how the co-ordination will happen. He also mentioned the role of STRADA, which I confirm will be involved in the education and training elements of the plan. Richard Simpson asked about transmission of hepatitis C from overseas. I am sure that he has noted that one of the actions is to determine the prevalence of hep C among people in the Pakistani community in Scotland, who will have acquired their infection, in the main, in Pakistan. Pakistan is one of the countries with the highest prevalence of hepatitis C in the world. There are various reasons for that, one of which involves the previous childhood immunisation procedures, which, unfortunately, led to the spread of the condition. People have not found out that they have the disease until later in life—if at all—so it is important that we target the Pakistani community with testing, treatment and support. Mary Scanlon asked how the action plan relates to the drugs strategy. As she will know, the strategy has not yet been published, but I assure her that the approach that is taken in the strategy will be fully dovetailed with, and complementary to, the action plan. When the strategy is published,  she will see that the action plan is fully referenced in it. David Whitton asked whether we can speed up the work in prisons. Given that that was one of the actions that were not achieved under the first phase, I understand his concern. I recognise the seriousness of the situation in prisons. His point was well made and we will certainly consider the scope for injecting more urgency into those actions as we take them forward with the Scottish Prison Service. Ian McKee talked about methadone treatment. We acknowledge the importance of methadone in reducing injecting and therefore in potentially reducing hepatitis C transmission. Our ambition is that, with the action plan, things will be better in the future. People with hepatitis C will be diagnosed quickly through a trained and knowledgeable NHS that is supported by effective and efficient diagnostic services. Those who have the disease will be quickly referred to specialist services that will be able to provide all the information that is required and to assess suitability for treatment. Where treatment is recommended, it will commence quickly and be supported throughout, and the service will link into other services such as addictions, mental health and local authority services. There will be care and support services throughout the country to provide non-medical support to those with the condition. All that will be supported by a national awareness-raising campaign for both the public and professionals to ensure that people know what hepatitis C is, what the risks are, what the symptoms are and where to go for help. In short, the hepatitis C phase II action plan will fundamentally improve the services in Scotland for those with the disease. As the Minister for Public Health, I made it clear at the outset that this is an important public health issue for Scotland. I sense that there is broad support from members around the chamber for what is proposed in the phase II action plan, and I am sure that those who are suffering from the disease or working in the field will be grateful for that. A number of issues on which we will be able to keep members informed about our progress have been raised during the debate. I am happy to undertake to ensure that members are kept informed of progress. I look forward to sharing that progress with them over the coming months and years.

I am grateful to be here to open this debate on our plans to tackle hepatitis C over the next three years with the second phase of the hepatitis C action plan. No one here would argue with the first part of the motion: the fact that hepatitis C is a significant public health issue for Scotland. Health Protection Scotland recently estimated that almost 50,000 people in Scotland have been infected with the hepatitis C virus—around 1 per cent of the population. That is about twice the level of estimates in the other United Kingdom countries, suggesting that the disease is a particular problem for us in Scotland. Although that may seem a relatively small number of people, hepatitis C is a serious and long-lasting condition that can often go undiagnosed. It has been referred to as the silent epidemic because those who are infected can live for years without knowing that they are infected, even if they are showing symptoms. Hepatitis C places a heavy burden on the national health service and is a significant blight on the lives of those who are affected. With the second phase of the action plan, we are not only acting to address the serious needs of those who are currently suffering from the infection, but putting in place a set of services and a strategic approach to prevention to limit and, we hope, halt the spread of the condition to others. In that way, our investment in the action plan is an investment for the future—one that, in the longer term, will deliver benefits to individuals throughout the country and significant savings to the NHS. Hepatitis C is a disease that is commonly associated with injecting drug use and it is true that the vast majority of those who are infected are current or former injecting drug users. However, a significant proportion of individuals with the disease—particularly those who are beginning to seek treatment—have long since moved away from chaotic lifestyles and have reintegrated into society as productive members of the community. The disease can be a destabilising and debilitating presence and it is our duty to ensure that such individuals receive the support and treatment that they require to continue their recovery and maintain their role in society. There are also a small number of people who have been infected with the virus through infected  blood products or other medical interventions. It is our duty to ensure that those individuals receive the best possible care, treatment and support to enable them to clear or to manage their condition. In 2006, the previous Administration published the phase I "Hepatitis C Action Plan for Scotland". In addition to seeking to improve practices and services throughout the country, much of the work of that action plan was to gather evidence to inform the development of the second, much more substantial phase of action. The product of that work—the phase II action plan—was launched on 19 May in Dundee and I was pleased to be there. Most members will have had a chance to consider the plan and I hope that there is broad agreement around the chamber that it is a bold one. It is certainly not short of either vision or ambition. It sets out 34 challenging but achievable actions for NHS boards and others in an attempt to deliver what could perhaps best be described as an industrial-scale intervention to tackle hepatitis C. A plan of such vision and ambition needs our support, which is why the Scottish Government has made more than £43 million of funding available over three years. We are investing funds now to reduce the longer-term burden on the NHS and on the people of Scotland from hepatitis C. A significant strand of the activity within the plan, which is supported by £28 million, is about improving the testing, treatment, care and support services for those who are infected with the disease. We are setting ourselves the target of quadrupling within three years the number of people treated annually for the disease. Instead of treating 500 people every year, we will treat 2,000 or more people every year. We estimate that, if we can maintain that level of service over the next two decades, 5,200 cases of hepatitis C-related cirrhosis, including 2,700 cases with liver failure, will be prevented over the next two decades. That will not only change the lives of the people who are affected and their families, but create a significant saving in NHS resources. It is worth considering the costs to the NHS of some hepatitis C-related conditions. It costs approximately £10,000 a year to manage someone with hepatitis C-related liver failure; approximately £8,500 a year to manage someone with hepatitis C-related cancer; and approximately £40,000 to give a person who is infected with hepatitis C a liver transplant. If we can successfully diagnose and treat a greater number of hepatitis C-infected people, we can reduce those significant costs to the health service. That is why quadrupling the number of people in treatment is such an important element of the plan.  To treat effectively those who are infected, however, we need to be able to identify them, and we are not yet good enough at testing for or diagnosing hepatitis C. It is an insidious condition, the symptoms of which are common to a wide range of other conditions. It can be difficult to spot, by doctors as well as by those who are affected. Health Protection Scotland estimated that 38,000 people are chronically infected with hepatitis C. Of those, only 38 per cent have been diagnosed, only 20 per cent have ever attended specialist clinical services for chronic hepatitis C and only 5 per cent have received the antiviral therapy that has the potential to cure them. That is why we need to invest in testing and diagnosis, in awareness raising for health professionals and the public, and in professional training for those who are most able to spot and diagnose the condition. The phase II action plan seeks to do all those things. The plan also acknowledges the social care needs of those who are suffering from hepatitis C, through actions that are aimed at improving links between clinical, addiction and mental health services, and through improvements to the range of support services that are provided by voluntary and non-governmental organisations. I am sure that members will agree that social care and support is just as important as medical treatment. We all know that the success of any treatment—particularly in the case of a difficult treatment such as antiviral therapy for hepatitis C—depends on the motivation of the patient, the support available to them and their ability to deal with other underlying conditions such as addiction and mental health problems. The action plan does not, however, seek simply to improve the way in which we identify and deal with those who are infected with the disease. It also recognises the importance of activity to prevent people, as far as possible, from becoming infected in the first place. We will develop guidelines on needle exchanges and seek to improve access to exchange services throughout Scotland to ensure that, as far as possible, drug misusers have access to clean and sterile injecting equipment. With Learning and Teaching Scotland, we will produce educational materials on hepatitis C that can be used in schools and other educational establishments as part of broader educational activity around blood-borne viruses. We will also develop educational materials that are aimed specifically at injecting drug users: the group that is most likely to be exposed to blood-borne viruses. All that activity will be supported by £8 million of the money that is available for the hepatitis C action plan. That money will be provided to NHS boards and will be in addition to  the existing blood-borne virus prevention funding of around £9 million a year. Underpinning all the good work on testing, treatment, care and support, and prevention, the action plan will introduce more robust monitoring and surveillance systems to allow us to better understand the scale of the hepatitis C problem in Scotland, to monitor progress in tackling the disease and changes in epidemiology, and to measure our progress in taking the plan forward. That will give us good-quality data so that in three years' time we will have a clear idea of how the landscape has changed, what impact the action plan has had and where further action is required. As I said, this is an ambitious and testing agenda, but I believe that the NHS in Scotland, in its 60 th anniversary year, is capable of delivering it. This is the NHS at its very best. I will say a word about the way in which the plan has been developed. A wide range of people, led by Health Protection Scotland, have been involved in developing the proposals. There has been a stakeholder event at which everyone had a vote on the proposed actions and a group of stakeholders has been discussing the pros and cons of the different proposed actions. In its ambition and scope, it is a plan to be proud of. In the way in which it was developed by the NHS and others, the plan is an example of best practice in public policy development. On that theme, I will take this opportunity to thank publicly the key people who have steered the process and worked so hard to get us here today. I thank Professor David Goldberg from Health Protection Scotland, who deserves much of the credit for steering the process; Dr John Dillon from NHS Tayside, who deserves credit for leading the testing, treatment, care and support working group; Professor Avril Taylor, who led the prevention working group; George Howie of NHS Health Scotland who led the education, training and awareness raising working group; and Dr Syed Ahmed of NHS Greater Glasgow, who led the executive leads working group. I also thank Brian Adam, who is convener of the parliamentary working group on hepatitis C, and the various members of the working group over the years. The group played a key role in shining a light on the issue of hepatitis C some years ago and leading us to where we are today. The group has continued to take an interest in the progress that has been made and I hope that the action plan has its support. I am happy to accept both amendments. They are constructive and they add to the Government's motion. The action plan is a watermark document in tackling hepatitis C in Scotland. With the plan, we are leading the way in the UK—if not in  Europe—in tackling hepatitis C. I hope that all members support the plan and that, like me, they look forward to the great strides that we will make in treatment, testing, care and prevention in the next three years. I move, That the Parliament recognises the leading role that Scotland is taking in tackling hepatitis C as a significant public health issue; acknowledges the launch of the Scottish Government Hepatitis C Phase II Action Plan, backed by funding of £43 million, on 19 May 2008 as a significant step forward in seeking to prevent hepatitis C and in delivering testing, treatment, support and care services to those affected by the disease, and considers that this will enable NHS boards and others identified in the plan to deliver on the actions set out to improve hepatitis C services for patients and others in Scotland.

I am pleased to announce the publication today of our new action plan, which sets out a longer-term strategic approach to smoking prevention activity in Scotland. Although we will continue to do all that we can to help smokers to quit, the plan contains an ambitious programme of specific measures to discourage children and young people from starting to smoke and becoming regular smokers. A generation after the health risks associated with smoking were demonstrated beyond dispute, smoking remains one of the principal causes of illness and premature death in Scotland. It is still linked to 13,000 deaths—and many more hospital admissions—each year. Apart from the human tragedy that those statistics represent, there is also a considerable resultant economic burden. The annual cost of hospital care alone is estimated at more than £200 million and of lost productivity at £450 million. Smoking also disproportionately affects those who are already disadvantaged by poverty and is a major contributor to health and premature mortality inequalities. As a result, tackling smoking-related harm lies at the heart of our health improvement and health inequalities drive. In recent years, of course, significant progress has been made in reducing the cultural acceptability of smoking, including the bold and decisive legislative action taken by this Parliament in introducing the smoking ban and increasing the age of sale for tobacco from 16 to 18. While the decline in population smoking in recent years is welcome, we must continue with firm action to reduce smoking's prevalence even further. Although we have already committed to continued investment in smoking cessation services, we also want to focus on preventing smoking uptake by children and young people. Let me, if I may, remind members why a focus on children and young people is so vital. Smoking is dangerous at any age, but in this case the statistics are stark. Eighty per cent of smokers start in their teens. Moreover, the younger that people start, the more likely they are to smoke for  longer and to die early as a result. Worst of all, someone who starts smoking at 15 is three times more likely to die of cancer than someone who starts in their mid-20s. I am sure that members will agree that those are compelling reasons for shifting the focus more clearly towards smoking prevention. In a nutshell, we want to do everything we can to denormalise smoking within society in Scotland to help our young people in particular to choose not to smoke. Our proposals are in line with the Scottish Government's desire, as set out in its economic strategy, to create a more successful country with opportunities for all to flourish. The proposals that are set out in "Scotland's Future is Smoke-free: A Smoking Prevention Action Plan", which is published today, were developed in consultation with the ministerial working group on tobacco control. I chair that group, and I am grateful for its members' advice and support. I am grateful also to Dr Laurence Gruer and other members of the expert smoking prevention working group, whose recommendations form the basis of the measures in the action plan. The group thoroughly investigated the issues and, importantly, has provided a strong evidence base for our proposed action. Of course, its recommendations were subject to widespread consultation. I am grateful to all of those who took part in the consultation, including young people who fed in views through focus groups and a Young Scot online survey. The crucial point is that, although individuals and organisations might take issue with particular recommendations, the consultation results were overwhelmingly positive on the need for a longer-term strategic approach to smoking prevention. They also gave the Scottish Government a strong mandate to act decisively to stop a new generation of young Scots from becoming addicted to tobacco. The challenge is to make cigarettes and other tobacco products less affordable, less accessible and less attractive to children and young people. Of course, that cannot be achieved by the Scottish Government alone: ownership and action are required from a wide range of individuals and organisations, including national health service boards, local authorities, third sector bodies and the business sector. What do we propose? We propose to deliver a co-ordinated programme of measures that respond to all the factors that influence behaviour. The plan sets out action in five broad areas. First, we propose to educate and to promote healthy lifestyles through measures that make clear to children and young people the risks that are  associated with smoking and which do everything possible to counter the idea that there is any link between smoking and glamour, celebrity, maturity and independence. Actions that we will take in that regard include the promotion of an all-encompassing approach to health and wellbeing in Scottish schools, which will be fostered through health-promoting schools, the curriculum for excellence and improvements in substance misuse education in schools; more effective engagement with young people in non-school settings, such as in universities and further education colleges; and engagement with members of harder-to-reach groups, such as people who are not in employment, education or training, or those who are in occupations or settings in which smoking levels are higher than average. We will also ensure that tobacco issues are addressed fully in the new health improvement social marketing strategy to discourage smoking uptake and promote healthy, smoke-free lifestyles. Secondly, we propose to reduce the attractiveness of cigarettes through measures that will counter positive images of cigarettes in the media and at points of sale, which will reduce the opportunities for children and young people to be exposed to smoking. All such measures are important, but the one that I expect to have the greatest impact is our proposal to introduce legislative controls to further restrict the display of tobacco products at points of sale. Even though tobacco advertising was banned in 2002, there are growing concerns that prominent and public displays of cigarettes and other tobacco products in shops and at other points of sale are undermining our wider tobacco control efforts to denormalise smoking by shifting cultural perceptions of smoking and discouraging young people from starting to smoke in the first place. Children and young people have been found to be far more receptive to tobacco advertising than are adults. The evidence is clear: young people who are exposed to tobacco advertising and promotion are more likely to take up smoking. There is also evidence that displays stimulate impulse purchases among people who did not intend to buy cigarettes and, importantly, among smokers who are trying to give up. Giving cigarettes pride of place in shops—a position that is much sought after in product placement terms—sits uncomfortably with our ambition to create a climate in which everything possible is done to dissuade people, particularly children and young people, from smoking. I know that sections of the retail sector will be concerned about restrictions on displays, which it fears will impact adversely on businesses. However, it is clear that point-of-sale display is being used as a promotional tool. Protecting children and young people from the impact of  tobacco must be paramount. There are occasions when benefiting the public health of the nation must take precedence, and this is such an occasion. As we move forward with the legislative process, I will engage fully with retailers on the proposal. International experience has shown that the implementation of tobacco display bans has not had a dramatic impact on local businesses. For example, following a ban on displays in one of the Canadian provinces, no shops were forced to close. Moreover, experience suggests that the cost of refit is largely borne by the tobacco wholesalers that supply tobacco products to the retail chains. The important point is that the removal of displays changes public perceptions of smoking. Thirdly, we propose to reduce the availability of cigarettes by stepping up enforcement of tobacco sales law to ensure that cigarettes are not sold to minors and to prevent access to smuggled or counterfeit cigarettes. It is clear that, despite what the law says, underage young people have little difficulty accessing cigarettes if they want them, therefore we will pursue a two-pronged approach that involves more effective enforcement of the law by local authorities, which will be secured by introducing an enhanced tobacco sales enforcement programme coupled with increased emphasis on proof of age, and a review and update of tobacco sales law to introduce tobacco licensing and new sanctions, such as cautions and fixed-penalty notices for breaches of the law. We will also examine minimum pack sizes and sales from vending machines as part of the legislative review. This update of tobacco sales law is long overdue. Currently, the provisions governing tobacco sales are contained in the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Act 1937, which was last subject to a major review in 1991. There are, of course, a number of possible licensing options, and in developing detailed legislative proposals we will examine them closely in consultation with key stakeholders, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Scottish local authorities and retailers. My preference is for an approach that falls somewhere between the positive scheme favoured by Christine Grahame in her member's bill proposals and a negative licensing system that would bite only if retailers were found to be selling to underage young people. We are attracted to an approach that allows tobacco retailers to be clearly identified—which will enable trading standards officers and others to offer advice and support to them to avoid illegal sales—that offers a proportionate response to the problem, is administratively simple and places the minimum burden on business. The fourth area involves measures to reduce the  affordability of cigarettes, which means ensuring that cigarette prices are sufficiently high to discourage children and young people from smoking. The price of tobacco products is one of the most important factors in determining consumption, therefore taxation policy is one of the main tools for preventing tobacco consumption. Of course, the availability of cheaper smuggled tobacco products—both cigarettes and loose tobacco—sold from vans at open-air markets and by other means in communities across Scotland, undermines fiscal policies that are aimed at reducing tobacco consumption. In addition to keeping pressure on the United Kingdom Government to ensure that tobacco duty remains sufficiently high, a protocol is being developed between Scottish trading standards services and HM Revenue and Customs on a collaborative approach to reduce the impact of those illicit products on Scottish communities. Such partnership working is important. Smuggled tobacco is more likely to be sold in deprived areas and it is increasingly targeted at children, so smuggling appears to have a disproportionate impact on young people in those areas and to be a factor in perpetuating health inequalities. It is vital, too, that the action that we propose to tighten up illegal sales from legitimate business is matched by firm action on illicit tobacco sales. As part of the review and update of tobacco sales law, we will examine the question of minimum pack sizes. We know, for example, that young people are three to four times more price sensitive than adults, so as part of the legislative review we will consider the relationship between packs of 10 cigarettes and tobacco consumption, which I mentioned earlier. The final area of the action plan describes how we will deliver, resource and measure progress. Much of the action in the plan will be delivered using existing resources, but in some cases there may be a requirement to refocus or prioritise efforts, for example in social marketing and communications activity. We will continue to make substantial specific funding available for tobacco control. An additional £9 million will be made available over the next three years to boost delivery of actions in the plan and bring the total specific funding for tobacco control to £42 million from 2008-09 to 2010-11. That is in addition to the £2 million of annual funding that is allocated to tobacco control in national health service boards' unified budgets. The new £9 million is intended to support local delivery of the action plan, and £4.5 million will be allocated to NHS boards to enable then to co-ordinate action locally to underpin the proposed measures and to ensure that they are embedded in local tobacco control programmes. A similar  amount will be allocated to local authorities to enable them to step up enforcement activity. We have also pledged to continue to support the activities of the voluntary sector—ASH Scotland's partnership action on tobacco and health, and the Scottish tobacco control alliance—to allow it to contribute fully to the plan's delivery. In recognition of the actions proposed in the plan and to drive delivery, we have set new targets for 13 and 15-year-olds and introduced a new target for 16 to 24-year-olds. We will also establish a research and evaluation framework to assess impact. In my statement I have provided a brief overview of our proposals. Our proposed programme is ambitious. Although I am sure that it will be welcomed as a whole, I am conscious that members might take issue with some elements of it. In particular, some members might question the need for further legislative action on tobacco. Nevertheless, given the devastation—I use the word advisedly—that tobacco has wreaked on the Scottish people, causing nearly 700,000 premature deaths during the past 50 years, we owe it to Scotland and to the Scottish people to take firm and decisive action to prevent damage to future generations. There are times when the public health benefits of a policy must be Government's overriding concern, and this is just such a time. The perceived benefits to society of preventing young people from taking up smoking supersede any minimal costs that might be imposed on Scottish tobacco retailers. I am sure that no-one in the Parliament takes issue with our desire to denormalise smoking in Scotland and to save our young people from the misery and distress of wholly preventable cancer and heart disease. By passing historic laws to ban smoking in public places in 2005, the Parliament showed that it was prepared to act collectively and courageously in the interests of public health. I call upon the Parliament to do so again by supporting the Scottish Government in our further endeavours to secure a healthier, smoke-free future for Scotland.

I thank Richard Simpson for his supportive comments. The disparity between boys' and girls' smoking levels is a reason for the new more specific targets, which will help us to monitor progress on that front. On funding for enforcement, an additional £4.5 million for local authorities will be allocated under the terms of the concordat between the Scottish Government and local government. We are in the process of agreeing a set of outcomes with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Scottish local authorities and the Society of Chief Officers of Trading Standards in Scotland, which will ensure a consistent approach to enforcement. Test purchasing programmes will be part of that. I will tell Dr Simpson about outcome measures that we are considering. We are, for example, considering an increased target for enforcement activity at retail level under which 10 per cent of  tobacco retailers would be subject to test purchasing, with that figure increasing to 15 per cent by 2011. The targets that we expect local authorities to deliver under the terms of the concordat are specific and, of course, authorities are very keen to deliver. In putting together the proposals, we had a close working relationship with COSLA, whose member authorities are very much signed up to the process. On the smoking cessation budget, I say again to Richard Simpson, for the sake of clarity, that the Government is investing £33 million over the next three years. That compares to £27 million over the previous comprehensive spending review period, so the budget increase is £6 million. We want to use the resource to target people better, including young people. Thus far, the experience of delivering smoking cessation activity to groups, particularly young people in more deprived communities, has not been good. We want to get that right. I also say to Richard Simpson that, as part of our agreements with the community pharmacy sector, we are looking to extend access to smoking cessation support and to complement the wider range of smoking cessation services that health boards provide to help smokers to successfully stop smoking. We are working with community pharmacists across Scotland to provide a national smoking cessation service as part of the public health service element of the new contract. All that adds up to good input into smoking cessation.

I confirm our belief that parents have a critical role—of course we want to involve them. As part of our emphasis on denormalisation of smoking, we need to involve parents. They need to set themselves up as role models for their children and to not smoke in front of them. We must try to put across messages such as that, which we will do as part of our social marketing campaign. I turn to the concerns of small retailers in respect of the safety and potential theft of stock. We will discuss the detail of implementation with retailers, including the procedures that should be put in place, such as storing stock below the counter or installation of screens. There are international examples of that, including in Ireland where retailers are required to store tobacco products below the counter. In Nova Scotia, it has been done, but slightly differently. There are international examples on the best way forward. The point of principle is this: we will do this. We will of course involve retailers in discussion about the details of measures that are to be introduced and we will take on board the issues that small retailers have raised. On vending machines, we want to look at the evidence base on what is best. Should we remove vending machines entirely or have token-operated machines? A number of options are available to us. We will take action: we are simply deciding on the type of action that we should take. We want to look at the evidence in more detail before we decide on the most appropriate route.

I say to Ross Finnie that there will be no delay. We will legislate at the earliest legislative opportunity, which is likely to be in 2009-10. There is no question of our having to gather evidence on the principle of our proposals. However, various options exist in respect of the details of how we progress with implementation. The licensing system to which I pointed would in essence be a system that would require people who sell tobacco products to register. Trading standards officers would thereby have a system and a list to work with to ensure that retailers were complying. If, for example, a retailer was found to be selling tobacco products to underage people, the retailer would be removed from the register and would no longer be able to sell those products. That goes some way beyond a traditional negative licensing system, but it does not go as far as a positive system. I believe that that strikes the right balance, although the proposal will be subject to more discussion as the legislative process continues.

The debate on Christine Grahame's member's bill proposal has been useful and has helped to bring to the surface many of the licensing issues. It will certainly help us in developing our legislative proposals. I reiterate that my concern is to come up with a system that meets our need to know who the retailers are and to ensure that the law is adhered to. Of course, a registration system requires people to register, although it does not require them to receive or apply for a licence, as Christine Grahame has been advocating. The proposal goes some way towards creating a system in which we would know who the retailers are. The list can then be monitored and worked with by trading standards officers. On the new penalty system that we wish to introduce, we would want to give trading standards officers a bigger toolbox of sanctions, including the power to issue cautions and fixed-penalty notices, which could be used against those who would flout  the law. Retailers could, under a registration system, lose the right to sell if they were to breach the law by selling to underage people, for example. That would be a good package of measures to ensure that swift action could be taken against those who flout the law.

I will take the last question first. The new targets focus very much on smoking rates among girls and boys so that we can monitor the success of targeting in smoking cessation plans for girls and whether the message is getting across to girls in the same way as it is to boys. We know that the rate of smoking among boys is falling more quickly than it is among girls, which is the reason for the new targets. On the question about deprived areas, the answer is, of course, yes. Under the new smoking cessation targets for young people, we want to get to the people who are harder to reach. We will test new smoking cessation measures in harder-to-reach communities, and we will particularly target young people. We will ensure that measures for communities in which there is greatest need in terms of reducing smoking levels are adequately resourced, so that those needs can be met. On the debate that Margaret Curran calls for, it is not my fault that the discussion this afternoon has been curtailed. I am happy, however, to bring forward the terms of a debate after the summer recess. There will, throughout the legislative process, be plenty of opportunity to discuss the matter, for ample scrutiny and to debate many of the issues.

I absolutely agree that those are crucial elements. The overarching aim is to change the image of smoking and to denormalise smoking. Improvements in substance misuse education will be very important. A lot of work is going on to make such education more relevant to young people and to ensure that we target young people who are not in employment, education or training, who are the hardest to reach. We will be considering more imaginative ways of doing that in order to achieve a better reach through the policy.

I am happy to do that. We can explore some of those matters in the debate that I am happy to bring forward after the summer recess. I am clear that the debate will not be on the principle of whether we should introduce the measures that I have set out: the question is about how we will do it. There are options on vending machines: we could ban them outright or restrict their use through use of tokens. Those are legitimate areas for debate on implementation of what we want to achieve, and I am happy to have that debate.

The restrictions will absolutely apply in the same way to supermarkets as they will to other retailers. As I said, £4.5 million in additional resources is going to local authorities over the next three years. That equates to a minimum of one new trading standards officer per local authority. Obviously, given the breakdown of the resources, the larger local authorities will have many more than that, but there will be a minimum of one additional officer per local authority. The work that they will carry out with the health boards will be important. The input from community nurses and work with  parents and children will all be joined up as part of the way in which we will implement our proposals.

We have been engaging with retailers and getting their views. Retailers also sit on the working group that came up with the proposals. There has been a vigorous debate on some of the proposals, and the retail sector supports a lot of the stuff in the plan, although perhaps not every item. For example, it is keen on the action that we want to take on tobacco smuggling, which undermines legitimate tobacco sales. Although retailers support elements of the plan, it is important that we engage them further on the detail of implementation, but not on the principle, which has been agreed.

I am certainly willing to give that point further consideration as we implement the detail in legislative proposals.

We are considering the outcomes at the moment. One of the outcomes that we are working on is to reduce the percentage of retailers who sell cigarettes to persons under 18, and the target that is being discussed is to reduce it to 10 per cent by 2011. The issue features strongly in the outcomes that are being discussed with COSLA at the moment.

Today's debate confirms that the free personal care policy continues to have strong support in the Parliament and that there is a shared desire to ensure that it operates effectively. People now receive for free the care that they would previously have had to pay for. That applies not only to people whose care is entirely arranged  by a local authority but to those who arrange their own care, with support for only the free personal and nursing care element organised by a council. The Scottish Government is committed to addressing the issues that Lord Sutherland's report highlights. As a result, we will meet the additional £40 million per year funding shortfall from 2009-10 that Lord Sutherland has identified, take forward specific action to improve local and national information systems at national and local levels to ensure greater transparency in future costs associated with the policy and—as the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing stated in her opening remarks—renew our efforts to improve public information and understanding of the policy. We will clarify the legislation and guidance on cross-boundary placements, work with COSLA to ensure an effective performance framework for long-term care services for older people within the single outcome agreement approach and introduce legislation to clarify once and for all the issue of food preparation.

We meet COSLA regularly. I have to say, though, that Margaret Curran has a brass neck coming to the chamber to demand funding for local authorities for this financial year when, year after year, the Administration of which she was a member did not give them even an inflation increase. I think that that shows a little bit of weakness. For the first time in all those years, local authorities have received an inflation increase—and we have given it to them. We have agreed the need for a wider set of joint work streams to review demographic pressures and other practical issues that will have an impact on the current and future demand and cost of care. That work must start now, ahead of the next five-year review that has been recommended by Lord Sutherland and to which many members have referred. As the cabinet secretary noted, a number of well-documented problems with the policy need to be fixed. Current difficulties of interpretation and variability have emphasised the need for more clarity and consistency in what people can expect. Lord Sutherland concludes that such difficulties have, to a degree, overshadowed the policy's success and continue to undermine its operation. Our job is to fix those problems and, with local government's assistance, we will do so.  I agree with Margaret Curran on one thing: the need, as Sutherland has recommended, to reassess all the funding streams. However, I must take issue with her on another: had she read the motion, she would have realised that its focus—and that of the debate—is the attendance allowance. Given her failure to deal with it when she was part of the previous Administration—let alone set up a review to address the issues that we are discussing today—she has no credibility on the funding issue she tried to raise. Mary Scanlon seems to have a bit of a hang-up about "pursue vigorously". The phrase means what it says and it is what the people of Scotland would expect us to do on their behalf to retrieve the resources. To be helpful, I will quote the words of Malcolm Chisholm when he was the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care: "Let no one be in any doubt that we are pressing the case strongly for resource transfer."— [ Official Report , 27 September 2001; c 2875.]  I do not see much difference between "pressing the case strongly" and "pursue vigorously". Far be it from me to ponder on words, but I suggest to the Tories that there is little difference between Malcolm Chisholm's approach in 2001 and the approach that we want their support for today.

Absolutely. It is only 10 per cent of total spending on elderly people, but we must put the right policies in place to ensure that we sustain them into the future. We will do that. Ross Finnie made a considered speech. He hit the nail on the head when he pointed out that Labour is trying to hide behind the Wanless report, which explicitly rejects free personal care and well and truly exposes Labour's position. I will elaborate on that point in response to Richard Simpson's comments. Not only is Labour's position exposed on that ground, pages 9 and 20 of the UK Government's consultation on the reform of social care in England state that any changes to benefits "that may emerge will not affect existing benefit recipients". It explicitly rules out any effect on attendance allowance.

Irene Oldfather made a considered speech and I recognise her long-term interest in the issue. Entitlement is key and it is important that public understanding is assisted by simple and clear information, particularly for people with dementia and their carers. I totally accept the need for that and will take the matter forward, as I indicated to her at lunch time at the cross-party group on dementia. I recognise that Michael Matheson draws on his experience in the care sector. He usefully reminded us of Lord Lipsey's minority report and the way that it followed through to the UK Government's political position over free personal care. The Sutherland review found that, although the UK Government followed the letter of the current law, "It is clearly contrary to equity that entitlement to AA has stopped for those in care homes in Scotland, while it continues for those residing in care homes elsewhere in the UK." Attendance allowance is a UK state benefit for individuals throughout the UK. It is a contribution towards personal care costs and, as such, should cover those services for individuals in Scotland too. That money rightly belongs to Scotland and with the Parliament's support we will seek to recover it—not through any back-door pretendy words that hide behind an issue that has no bearing on the matter whatsoever, but through taking up an explicit, united position that we want those resources back for the elderly people of Scotland. If members do not support our motion, they will be exposed for their position.

Will the member give way?

The Scottish public health network is carrying out the assessment of needs of people living with chronic fatigue syndrome and ME. Although the network undertakes its work programme independently of the Scottish Government, I understand that good progress is being made on this important piece of work.

First of all, I think that we should wait for the Scottish public health network's report, which should be completed by July. We also need to listen to what people with ME and chronic fatigue syndrome say about their own priorities and what they want to be done. To that end, on 23 June, prior to the report's finalisation, there will be an event to which stakeholders and members of the public will be invited and at which they will be able to give their views. If what John Scott has proposed emerges as a priority, the Government will certainly consider it.

I thank Nanette Milne for securing this important debate and for making a strong point at the start of her speech. I also thank her for giving me the opportunity to comment on the concerns of service users and alternative and augmentative communication professionals about the current provision of AAC services, which impinge on social and education services as well as health services. I am grateful for being allowed access to the findings of the survey that was undertaken by the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, Capability Scotland and augmentative communication in practice. I welcome the speech and language therapists who are in the public gallery tonight. The survey indicates good practice in Lothian, Fife, Highland and Ayrshire and Arran, as Kenny Gibson noted. I would welcome other NHS boards reaching similar levels of good practice in collaboration with local authorities. It is for NHS boards, working together with local authority services, to ensure that alternative and augmentative communication aids are available that best meet the needs of their local communities. That also requires appropriately trained staff who are able to provide the service to all those who need that level of support. The Scottish Government is committed to equality of opportunity for all, and our work on disability equality is inclusive of all conditions and impairments. We are currently funding the communication forum Scotland to deliver a project that aims to improve and support civic participation among people with communication support needs in Scotland. A key product of the project is a toolkit that provides practical advice, guidance and resources to policy makers at all levels of government and across all public and other sector agencies, supporting effective engagement with people with communication support needs in  Scotland. The toolkit was formally launched yesterday at a communication forum Scotland event, "Talk for Scotland", and was centrally funded from the £60,000 that was given by the Government to the civic partnership network. Although I acknowledge that there may be room for improvement, I will outline some examples of the good work that is currently being delivered in NHS Scotland. NHS Scotland provides a range of AAC services, including the communication aids for language and learning centre, which is known as the CALL centre. The CALL centre is a national service that was set up for children and which is funded centrally by the education and training branch of the Scottish Government. NHS Scotland also provides the Scottish centre of technology for the communication impaired, which is based in the Southern general hospital in Glasgow and works to an outreach model. With the exception of NHS Fife, NHS Lothian, NHS Orkney and NHS Shetland, NHS boards contribute to the Glasgow centre and the boards contract into the services that are provided from Glasgow. NHS Orkney and NHS Shetland have contracts for children with the CALL centre. NHS Lothian and NHS Fife both have successful integrated models of service delivery in place. NHS Lothian has a service for all ages that is jointly funded by health, education and social care services. It provides joint assessment and the loan of communication aids to service users, sourcing equipment for permanent use when required. The Fife assessment centre for communication through technology has AAC policies for all schools in the area and the service is jointly funded by health, education and social care services. In Grampian, the city of Aberdeen has a service that supports pupils in schools, which is funded by the local authority's education department. That includes part-time speech therapy provision for children who require communication aids. In Ayrshire and Arran, speech therapy services are provided by NHS Scotland to cover AAC needs. There is a lot of good practice out there, but we need that good practice to be provided elsewhere.

I will come to potential solutions in a moment. In 2004, the previous Administration launched the sensory impairment action plan, which was targeted primarily at local authorities and contained recommendations on the community  care needs of adults with a sensory impairment. The action plan was produced in consultation with voluntary organisations. Under the action plan, there has been joint working between voluntary organisations that represent those with a sensory impairment and the Scottish Government. I want that partnership working to continue, with the aim of further improving services to this client group. In April last year, guidance was issued to Scottish local authorities to raise awareness of the services available and to provide for a more person-centred approach. Provision was made for the need to assess and meet any sensory impairment requirements, including any particular communication requirements. Communication training for front-line community care staff is included in the action plan, and training material has been developed and piloted. The work of the sensory impairment action plan steering group will shortly come to an end, but members of the group and Scottish Government officials will continue to work together to help to deliver services to those who have a sensory impairment. In "Better Health, Better Care", the Scottish Government committed itself to providing more responsive and better-quality care for people with disabilities, with a particular focus on improving access, communication and respect for individuals. Fair for all—disability has also published national guidance on improving access and removing the barriers that face people who access NHS services. The Scottish Government supports the principle of independent living and wants to see action to deliver that. On that point, I can advise that we will shortly announce our plans to take that work forward. In doing so, we will of course work closely with disabled people and their representative organisations. On where we go from here, I have a meeting next week—as Nanette Milne mentioned—with the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. In advance of that meeting, I will look at the DVD outlining the royal college's concerns, some of which are also contained in the briefing. At that meeting, I want to set out a course of action on how we can begin to address some of the shortcomings. In my discussions with the royal college, I intend to include many of the suggestions that have been made in the course of this evening's debate. I assure members that we will look at how we take forward the many important issues that have been raised this evening. I will be happy to give Parliament an update on progress in due course.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate. She has a long and consistent record on the issue. The health and safety of workers everywhere, particularly in Scotland, is important to us. I join other members in paying tribute to the STUC, which continues to ensure that the subject is of the highest priority for us as politicians. I acknowledge its role, as well as that of Des McNulty, in the legislation for people who suffer from mesothelioma, in connection with pleural plaques. The STUC was without doubt crucial in that, and we in the Government have been happy to respond and progress the necessary legislation. No one should go to their workplace and come home again running the risk of becoming ill or suffering serious or even fatal injury. We are committed to improving Scotland's occupational health and safety record and to minimising as far as possible the risks to workers in the workplace. As members have said, there are a number of statistics that show that the overall fatal injury rate in Scotland is generally higher than the UK's. However, it is true to say that figures do not tell the whole story, and do not reflect the extent of workplace risks. We accept that. Research indicates that the difference in the rates can largely be explained by occupational and other characteristics of the workplace. In construction, for example, Scotland's workforce is made up of a greater proportion of manual workers compared to managers and clerical staff than England's is. I would like to outline some of the action that we are taking to improve Scotland's health and safety record. As members will be aware, in March this year the "Scottish Action Plan on Health & Safety" was published. It aims to co-ordinate action to reduce work-related injury and ill health between the UK and Scottish Governments, with business, workers representatives and professionals. The Health and Safety Commission and the Health and Safety Executive are supporting its implementation through a stakeholder body called the partnership on health and safety in Scotland—PHASS. The action plan committed £1.2 million in 2007-08 to improve the health and safety of Scottish workers and the public. It was published in March 2007 as a joint Scottish Government-PHASS document. The Scottish Government continues to support the activities that were initiated under the plan. The plan identifies a range of actions, with timescales, to be delivered by the Scottish Government and by key partners including local authorities, trade unions, employers and regulators.  The commitments for action in the plan, include: expanding advisory services on health and safety for employers and employees through the existing advisory service of the Scottish centre for healthy working lives, with particular emphasis on reaching small and medium-sized enterprises; developing and promoting worker involvement in workplace health and safety, in co-operation with the STUC; extending the provision of specific information and guidance on the protection of public service workers; undertaking research to link existing data sources, for example on work-related ill health, community health profiles and deprivation indices, to inform evidence; and disseminating sector-specific guidance on fire safety. The Scottish centre for healthy working lives is a centre of excellence on health and work that was established by the Scottish Government in 2005. It provides an occupational health and safety advisory service via a website and telephone line for all employers and employees, and health and safety advisers provide free site visits to small and medium-sized enterprises. I assure Mary Mulligan that this Government is as committed to the future of that centre as was the previous Administration. On corporate homicide, the STUC has consistently pressed for separate Scottish legislation on corporate homicide, and worked closely with Karen Gillon on her member's bill in the previous session. I understand that their priorities are the creation of an offence for individual directors who contribute to a death, and the creation of a wider range of penalties. The UK Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007, which came into force on 6 April, creates a new offence of corporate homicide in Scotland. An organisation will be guilty of the new offence if the way in which its activities are managed or organised causes a death and amounts to a gross breach of a relevant duty of care to the deceased. A substantial part of the breach must have involved the way activities were managed by senior management. Although the act does not create a new offence for individual directors who contribute to deaths, they can be charged with culpable homicide or with other offences under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. I appreciate what Cathy Jamieson and Christina McKelvie said in the debate, but the immediate priority should be to ensure that the new legislation is implemented effectively in Scotland. Karen Gillon referred to people caving in to the establishment. I am not sure whether by "establishment", she meant the UK Government. Her remarks struck a slightly sour note, because we have made it clear that, if legislation were found to be wanting, we would consider what  further steps should be taken. I am happy to give that commitment again today.

Of course, such legislation would not be necessary if the UK Government had got it right in the first place. However, we will consider what has to happen beyond the existing legislation if it is found to be wanting. Patricia Ferguson made some important comments on the Stockline inquiry. I assure her that I will speak to my colleague Kenny MacAskill about the issues that she raised. They are important. A number of calls were made for international workers memorial day to be officially recognised. It is important to note that the previous Labour and Lib Dem Administration resisted such calls over the past eight years, and the same calls have been resisted at UK Government level. Our Government takes a similar view. It is more important to focus on the action that we take to improve health and safety in the workplace. That should be our focus. I am delighted that a range of events took place throughout Scotland during the past week to commemorate those who have died as a result of accidents at work. As I said earlier, the best way for the Scottish Government to commemorate those people is to continue to show its commitment to improving occupational health and safety. I am pleased to do that on behalf of the Government this evening.  Meeting closed at 18:06.

It was your own Government.

The final decision on which substitute treatment to prescribe rests with the individual practitioner, in liaison with the client and based on the client's specific health needs.

On 12 March 2007, Suboxone was accepted for use as a substitute treatment for opioid drug dependence in NHS Scotland, within a framework of medical, social and psychological treatment. Around 500 patients throughout Scotland are currently being treated with Suboxone. Ultimately, of course, it is a matter for the clinician, because whether the treatment is appropriate is a clinical decision. Within the drugs strategy that the member referred to, we are taking forward a strategy that is based on recovery from whatever drug is being used to help someone come off their opiate-based drug dependence.

We will, of course, continue to monitor the use of Suboxone and the statistics that will follow on. I have outlined the number of patients who are already being treated with Suboxone, and we will keep an eye on how the situation develops. I am aware that a new consultant has recently been appointed in Fife and is prescribing Suboxone as an alternative treatment for drug misuse. I am happy to take up Tricia Marwick's offer to visit the local drug project that she mentioned, and I will make arrangements to do so.

I am certainly aware of that research and await with interest the final report, which I understand will be published later this year.

I have discussed the issue with my officials and colleagues from the Scottish Association of Alcohol and Drug Action Teams, and we are developing a pilot study that we aim to carry out in at least one Scottish institution. We are very much interested in learning from the University of the West of Scotland's experiences and are grateful for its input and knowledge, which has helped us to develop some of the detail of the pilot. No decision has yet been made about its location, but I will certainly keep the member informed of progress.

Recently published Scottish Government guidance for commissioners of services for people with autism spectrum disorder aims to assist local identification, diagnosis and management and emphasises the importance of local authorities and health boards working in partnership to meet the local population's needs.

The Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability has carried out a considerable amount of work on developing national data standards for people with learning disabilities and  autism spectrum conditions. Over the next year, the eSAY project will continue to work with health and social care partners to roll out the collection of information across Scotland. I hope that the member will be reassured to learn that improvements in information gathering should lead to more robust service planning to ensure that services meet the needs of people with autism spectrum conditions.

The Scottish Government will continue to support initiatives to develop managed clinical  networks when there are tangible benefits for patients. It is for health boards and local authorities to identify the need for such networks on the basis of their pressures and priorities.

The national reference group is an important part of the structure of autism services in Scotland. We have provided funding for a number of organisations, including the Scottish autism service network, which provides a national overview of the services that are available. We are interested in hearing from local partners who might wish to develop managed clinical networks for autism. It might be possible to make available pump-priming funding for such networks in their early stages, if local partners desire to develop them. I reiterate that decisions on the matter are based on the availability of clear evidence that adopting such an approach would have tangible benefits for people who would use those services. I am keen for such services to be developed, and we look forward to finding out whether suitable bids are made.

NHS Highland is planning or has in progress a number of developments to increase access to national health service dental services in nine areas across Highland. By establishing a new dental school in Aberdeen, we hope to retain a high number of dental graduates outwith the central belt.

I am always happy to meet members and their constituents if it will help to move matters forward. NHS Highland is working very hard to increase its salaried dental service,  with additional surgeries planned for Thurso, Tain, Dingwall, Invergordon, Kyle, Portree, Inverness, Nairn and Grantown. There are 23 additional surgeries coming on stream and another eight or nine in the pipeline. I suggest to the member that they will go a long way towards tackling the waiting list, which is of concern to his constituents and to the Government. That is why we support NHS Highland in its initiative.

The Scottish Government has provided £2,014,386 to NHS Grampian and £1,816,885 to NHS Tayside specifically for the provision of alcohol treatment and support services and for the delivery of brief interventions. It is for health boards, local drug and alcohol action teams and other partners to commission services in line with local need. Some £94 million has also been made available over the next three years within the justice portfolio for tackling drug misuse throughout Scotland. The majority of those resources will be allocated to health boards to provide drug treatment and rehabilitation services.

As the member noted, NHS Grampian has agree to fund the shortfall to keep the centre open for four months while an existing review of the facility is completed. That is part of a general examination of the facilities and arrangements that are in place for dealing with drunk and incapable individuals throughout Scotland, to establish what works effectively and offers value for money. The Scottish Government will commission an evaluation and identify a range  of solutions to address the challenges that are presented by different locations and events. Members should be under no illusion about the Government's determination to tackle the problem of alcohol in our society and to ensure that appropriate services are in place to help people who require them.

The Scottish Ambulance Service is the subject of continuous review and performance management by the Scottish Government. The process involves the weekly reporting of information on category A performance and on other key operational indicators. All national health service boards are subject to a public annual review, which provides an opportunity for the Scottish Government to scrutinise, challenge and hold the board to account.

Of course we very much value the work of our ambulance service. The Scottish Ambulance Service has been allocated £183.4 million for 2008-09, which represents a significant increase on previous years. For that resource, we expect the service to invest. In the north, 141 more front-line staff—they are very hard working—have been taken on in recent years. The policy is that accident and emergency ambulances should be double crewed, with at least one crew member being a paramedic, apart from exceptional circumstances such as short-notice sickness absence or leave in which cover cannot be secured. We are working hard with the Scottish Ambulance Service, through the performance support team that has been allocated by the health directorates, to ensure that we drive forward continuous service improvement, especially in relation to category A performance. We will continue to do that.

Of course, I am always willing to consider cases that are raised in the chamber, by Jamie Stone or anyone else. I will do that. Wherever possible, call handlers and managers of emergency medical dispatch centres dispatch the emergency ambulance resource that will best meet the needs of the patient, based on an assessment of the information that is provided by the caller. In that way, the service always seeks to avoid dispatching a single-manned resource to an incident when the primary need is for an ambulance-supported transfer to hospital. As I said, I am very willing to look at the cases that Jamie Stone has raised. We expect the Scottish Ambulance Service also to examine any incidents that have been raised. If Jamie Stone has not already done so, I ask him to pass on his information to the service.

As I said, the Scottish Ambulance Service has been allocated an increase in resource of 78 per cent on the resource that it had back in 2001-02. As I also said, the service has invested in the north, with 141 more front-line staff being taken on in recent years. I am of course willing to hear more from Rob Gibson on the matter. If he wishes to write to me about his specific concerns, I will get back to him.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing met the board of the Scottish Ambulance Service on 30 January 2008. A range of issues was discussed. In addition, the cabinet secretary and I meet all national health service  board chairs regularly. We did so most recently on 25 February.

Volunteer drivers are of course important and valued by the Scottish Ambulance Service. The service has recently reviewed the mileage allowance as part of its annual budget-setting process and has said that it has no plans to increase the rate payable. However, I am aware of the concerns raised by Rhoda Grant and other members about the issue and I have asked that the Scottish Ambulance Service look again at the matter.

We are well aware of the issues that the member raises. We have been in communication with Kevin Doran, the chief executive of the Scottish Ambulance Service, about the case. As the member pointed out, we are awaiting a full report. When we get it, I will be happy to write to the member with our response to the concerns that he raises.

I am happy to raise the issue of patient transfers with the Scottish Ambulance Service. It is one of the issues that is discussed regularly with the service. I am happy to take forward the concerns that Christine Grahame has raised. She might like to write to me about them in more detail.

I thank members for their contributions to today's debate, which has been very constructive indeed. The level of debate on the issues that the bill covers emphasises the importance of health protection in Scotland, which, as Minister for Public Health, I warmly welcome. Members have acknowledged that there is a need for up-to-date and effective legislation to protect the people of Scotland from potentially life-threatening infectious diseases and contamination. That our public health and environmental health professionals have worked so effectively within a legislative framework that is based on the public health threats of the 19 th century is a tribute to their professionalism. Of course, the majority of public health incidents are dealt with without recourse to statutory powers. That is to be welcomed. It is acknowledged that public health threats cannot always be predicted and that it is necessary for any legislation in this area to be flexible enough to deal effectively with new and emerging conditions. Although it is uncomfortable for us to consider the fact that individuals might not co-operate with health professionals at the time of a public health incident, we require powers to deal with such a situation if and when it arises.

The issue would involve an assessment of the public health risk posed by the person at the time, which would of course take into account all such factors. The bill provides health boards and local authorities with appropriate powers to protect public health and the community at large, but it contains safeguards that ensure minimum impact on, and access to justice for, the individual—a point that several members have made. The more restrictive provisions of the bill should be used only when no other action will achieve the public health objective. Any sheriff will need to be clear that there is, or may be, a significant risk to public health before they grant an order. We expect the  powers requiring a sheriff's order to be used very rarely. A number of issues of detail that the Health and Sport Committee raised are still under consideration. As I have made clear, we will make appropriate amendments at stage 2 if necessary. Margaret Curran spoke about health risk states, and suggested that the definition is too wide. I reiterate the importance of retaining flexibility in monitoring new illnesses and conditions, in line with our European and international health obligations. Comprehensive guidance will be provided to registered medical practitioners on health risk states and the duty to notify, and on how arrangements will work in practice. I hope that that goes some way towards reassuring the member. Margaret Curran also spoke about "Any other clinically significant pathogen found in blood". The expert working group that developed the list of notifiable organisms that is provided in schedule 1 considered that it would be wise to include that phrase to enable public health professionals to be alerted to any new threats. I acknowledge, however, that the committee and stakeholders identified that wording as an important issue. I recognise that the description is wide and that it could include organisms that it was never intended should be reported. I have listened to the concerns of the committee and stakeholders and I plan to lodge amendments at stage 2 to remove that phrase from the list of notifiable organisms. Ross Finnie, Rhoda Grant and other members mentioned the issue of explanations not needing to be given in certain circumstances. On the vast majority of occasions, and in line with health professionals' general duty of care, they will be able to give a full explanation of the action to be taken and, which is important for the person who is posing a significant risk to public health, an explanation of why it is to be taken. In its scrutiny of the bill, the Health and Sport Committee acknowledged that that might not be possible in exceptional circumstances—for example when the infectiousness of a disease is such that the affected person is unconscious and therefore unable to receive such information. I am content that, in such circumstances, such an explanation should be given as soon as is practical thereafter. I am sure that that would happen even without a legislative requirement to that effect, but in the light of the concerns that have been raised we will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to ensure that there is clarity on that issue. Rhoda Grant said that clarification is necessary of the fixed penalty notice scheme that is dealt with in part 9. We are aware that such clarification is required, and appropriate amendments will be  lodged at stage 2. I hope that that gives her the reassurance that she requires. Michael Matheson and Richard Simpson said that strong guidance is required on the joint public health protection plans. I accept that recommendation and will ensure that we progress it appropriately. Michael Matheson and others mentioned drafting issues. I will not get into a legal debate about what is or is not competent in Scots law. Suffice to say that we have accepted that the summary application procedure is not the most appropriate procedure to use in the bill and that we will lodge suitable amendments at stage 2. We have made that extremely clear. I said in my opening speech that I would use my closing speech to say a few words about the proposed provisions to regulate sunbed use. We have had a good debate on the issue, and I am pleased to note that, in the main, members are supportive of the proposals that have been agreed between the Scottish Government and Kenneth Macintosh. I believe that we have struck the right balance between regulation by Government, particularly to protect young people from the health impacts of sunbed use, and an individual's personal responsibility to make choices that minimise the risk to their health. If Parliament agrees to include those provisions in the bill, Scotland will take a leading role in the introduction of health protection measures against the inappropriate use of sunbeds. The process that we have gone through on sunbeds is a demonstration of how well the Scottish Government can work with members of the Parliament on issues of mutual concern. I thank Kenneth MacIntosh for his work and co-operation on the issue. We cannot eradicate the risk of public health threats. Whenever possible, we deal with them without resorting to legislation, but we need to ensure that our public health professionals have at their disposal—if necessary through statutory controls—the tools to deal quickly and effectively with potential threats so that they can reduce the spread of disease or contain it. That is the principal aim of the bill. We will continue to take into account the views of the committee and others as we proceed with the bill and seek to bring its measures into effect. Finally, I again thank members for their comments.

Does the member appreciate that the Presiding Officer deems whether a bill is ECHR compliant? The Presiding Officer deemed the bill to be ECHR compliant.

Would Mary Scanlon acknowledge that, at the moment, 80 per cent of the current payments relate to the notification of chickenpox and food poisoning, which are no longer notifiable? That means that there will be a lighter workload, rather than a heavier one, which is why we feel that our position on the fee is appropriate.

The Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill is a vital piece of legislation. Principally, it is about the protection of the public health from infectious diseases and contamination. Current legislation dates back to 1889 and is no longer fit for purpose if we are to ensure the best level of health protection from current public health threats for the people of Scotland. The key proposals underpinning the bill were developed and consulted on by the previous Administration, and I acknowledge its contribution. We have added to the proposals in one important respect. Part 8 of the bill contains a power for ministers to ensure that sunbed users are given accurate information about the risks of sunbed use. We have worked closely with Kenneth Macintosh on provisions to give further protection to sunbed users that he will bring forward at stage 2. I will say a little more about the issue in my closing remarks, but I leave it to Mr Macintosh to outline the proposals during the debate. It is important to put the bill's key provisions into context. Infections cause more than a quarter of all illnesses in the world and a fifth of all deaths. They still account for more than 10 per cent of deaths in the United Kingdom. In 2007, the World Health Organization said that new infections or diseases are emerging at an historically unprecedented rate. Old threats, such as tuberculosis, are re-emerging, and many strains are now multidrug resistant. In addition, the world faces greater than ever risks from chemical, biological or radiological contamination, whether caused by accident or by criminal action. The fairly recent incident of anthrax in the Borders is evidence of the fact that Scotland is not immune from those threats. Globalisation of travel and trade mean that, potentially, diseases that were formerly restricted to far-flung corners of the world could reach us in a matter of hours. Legislation needs to be proportionate to the risks that are posed. In the vast majority of cases, people who are infected or contaminated take voluntary measures to reduce the risk to other individuals. However, it has long been recognised that legislation is necessary for the circumstances in which they do not do so, or those in which public authorities need to step in to apply  protective measures for the community at large. The few who do not accept advice or do not take voluntary action have the potential to undermine measures to limit the spread of a serious and potentially catastrophic epidemic. Civil contingencies legislation is in place and could be used in more serious public health situations, but the emergency powers for which that legislation provides are wide ranging, powerful and designed for use only in extreme circumstances. The bill will bridge the gap between voluntary compliance with public health measures and the use of more extreme emergency legislation. We recognise that a balance needs to be struck between our duty to protect the public and the rights of the individual. We believe that that balance is achieved in the bill, which is fully compliant with the European convention on human rights. The bill is large and complex. I will not touch on all the proposals that it contains, but I will say a little about what I consider to be its key provisions. I will address issues raised by other members in my closing remarks. The bill clarifies the roles and responsibilities of Scottish ministers, health boards and local authorities for public health purposes. That will require a limited transfer of responsibility from local authorities to health boards in relation to action against individuals who pose a public health risk and do not accept advice or take measures voluntarily. The changes are about ensuring accountability for actions taken. The bill will in no way reduce the good partnership working on health protection that already takes place between health boards and local authorities, which I acknowledge. In fact, that partnership working will be further enhanced by a specific duty of co-operation between health boards, local authorities and other relevant interests, as set out in part 1. There is also a requirement for health boards and local authorities to designate "competent persons" to undertake the functions that are assigned to them under the bill. It is extremely important that we ensure that those charged with responsibilities that might entail some restriction of an individual's liberty or an action that affects a person's property have the professional expertise to do so and the full confidence of the public. We also need to ensure that we fully utilise the skills of public health professionals, whatever their background, provided that they can demonstrate that they have the necessary skills and expertise. There has been broad support for the concept of competent persons although, naturally, there has also been a great deal of debate among health professionals on what the qualifications and skills of competent persons might be. The proposed qualifications, which have been drawn up by an  expert working group, will be contained in regulations that we will issue shortly for consultation. I have informed the Health and Sport Committee of the proposed qualifications, so they are in the public domain. Before it reaches a final decision, the Government will continue to listen carefully to the views of all stakeholders on the issue. Part 2 of the bill updates our current arrangements for the notification of diseases and health risk states by registered medical practitioners and the notification of organisms by laboratories. Those arrangements are the first line of defence in protecting public health and will enable health boards to identify the risk, assess it, and, when necessary, provide a response to potential public health incidents and outbreaks at the earliest possible opportunity. Although it is supportive of the principles of notification, the Health and Sport Committee has asked us to look again at a number of issues of detail. Those are currently under consideration and, if necessary, we will lodge amendments at stage 2. We are mindful of the requirements of the Data Protection Act 1998 and the advice of the Scottish Information Commissioner's office on the use of personal information. We are satisfied that the requirements for notification purposes in part 2 and information sharing more generally to investigate a public health incident under the bill are in line with our statutory obligations. Part 3 of the bill sets out the powers of those investigating public health incidents. Part 5 outlines the powers and functions of local authorities to prevent the spread of infectious disease or contamination in respect of premises. All those powers are designed to deal with gaps in current hazard or workplace-specific legislation. The majority of public health incidents are—and will continue to be—investigated without the need for recourse to statutory powers. Individuals are usually only too willing to help find the source of infection or contamination and prevent its spread. When required, food safety or health and safety at work legislation, for example, can be used. However, such legislation is not relevant to all public health incidents. We have, therefore, listened to our public health and environmental health colleagues, who advise that the powers in the bill will provide a useful backstop to ensure the protection of public health in a number of scenarios. The committee was concerned that there should be greater clarity in the relationship between the provisions on the appointment of public health investigators and those on the designation of health board and local authority competent persons. I will reflect further on the issue before stage 2. We also recognise the committee's  concerns on the court procedures that will be used under these provisions and under other parts of the bill. We intend at stage 2 to lodge amendments—to which the Law Society of Scotland has agreed in principle—to address the committee's concerns. Part 4 sets out the powers and functions that are available to health boards. It is fully acknowledged that these are strong powers, but they can be used only in strictly defined circumstances, when the person concerned poses a significant risk to public health. There is concern about what constitutes "a significant risk to public health", but it is important that we retain an element of flexibility to deal with new and emerging public health conditions. To be more prescriptive would jeopardise our ability to identify and respond to new illnesses and conditions where the causative agent is not known. For example, in the early stages of the severe acute respiratory syndrome—SARS—epidemic a few years ago, we had a totally new disease that could not be identified, but which required urgent public health action. The World Health Organization recognises the need for action in such circumstances. New international health regulations that seek to prevent and protect against the international spread of disease have moved away from actions that are required for specific diseases to those that are concerned with disease in the more general sense, including infection and contamination. I refer to diseases that present, or could present, significant harm to humans. It is also important to note that the majority of the powers under part 4 already exist and have not been abused. The bill updates and enhances existing powers, taking into account the establishment of the national health service and modern-day public health threats. However, I recognise the concerns of the Health and Sport Committee in a number of areas, and I will reflect on them before stage 2. The Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill is essential to the current and future protection of the people of Scotland from infectious disease and contamination. The provisions are common in legislation throughout Europe and other countries worldwide. I am pleased that the Health and Sport Committee, after a comprehensive scrutiny of the bill's provisions, has recommended to the Parliament that the general principles of the bill be agreed to. I have also considered carefully the views of the committee on a number of issues of detail, and I will respond to them as positively as I can, consistent with the fundamental principles of the bill. On that basis, I hope that the measures  that are contained in the bill can move to the next stage of consideration with broad support. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill.

It is for national health service boards to provide alternative and augmentative communication aids that best meet the needs of their local populations, in partnership with education services, social services and other service providers, as necessary.

I am aware of the concerns that Brian Adam raises. I have agreed to meet the alternative and augmentative communication services campaign group on 12 May to discuss its concerns, including those raised by the member, and to examine what steps can be taken to improve the services.

The debate is an important lead-in to next month's epilepsy awareness week. I congratulate Hugh O'Donnell, and not just because this is his first members' business debate—more important, he does us all a service by giving us this opportunity to discuss the topic of epilepsy nurse specialists, the importance of which is demonstrated by the number of members who have stayed for the debate. That is the focus of the motion, but I will also use my speech to deal with some of the general aspects of services for people with epilepsy that the motion covers. As has been said, around 40,000 people in Scotland live with some form of epilepsy. In 2004-05, the cost of epilepsy to the NHS was in the region of £38 million a year, which was probably an underestimate. The goal of everyone with epilepsy is of course to be free of seizures, but, sadly, about three people in 10 continue to have seizures in spite of the medication that they get. The motion is right to draw attention to the fact that up to three people in every 10 are misdiagnosed. The motion highlights the need for person-centred care that is delivered as locally as possible, with access to a specialist when necessary. In that respect, epilepsy is no different from any other long-term condition. However, given that epilepsy is such a complex condition, the greatest need is usually to get rapid access to a neurologist for a definitive diagnosis. The SIGN guideline says that people should not have to wait longer than two weeks for an appointment at a first seizure clinic.  The importance of ready access to specialist advice is one of the points that are made clearly in Audit Scotland's report on managing long-term conditions, which was published last August. Epilepsy was one of two conditions that Audit Scotland looked into in some detail. The report draws on the outcome of several focus groups involving people with epilepsy. That makes it a valuable source of advice on the sort of services that people with epilepsy are looking for. It refers to evidence that a lack of specialist knowledge of epilepsy in the community can lead to people not receiving the right treatment. Alasdair Allan's personal experience highlights that point well. We need to ensure that services for people with epilepsy are integrated fully across primary care and care in hospital and that they are provided by a multidisciplinary team. That is the sort of issue that will be addressed in the work that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is doing in developing clinical standards for neurological conditions. One part of those standards will be generic and will deal with issues around access to specialist neurological advice. The other part will deal with a number of specific conditions, of which epilepsy is one. The SIGN guidelines provide a strong evidence base on which to draw. Mary Scanlon raised the issue of the SIGN guidelines. I assure her that once the standards have been developed, local services will be assessed against them. We will therefore have a tool with which to measure health boards' performance. On-going reviews are covered by the epilepsy element of the quality and outcomes framework of the general medical services contract. We should use that leverage to ensure that what we want to happen is happening. The draft standards should be ready for consultation in the autumn and should be published next year. They offer us a good opportunity to consider the details of the multidisciplinary team that should be providing services. That includes the important role of the epilepsy specialist nurse. As the Audit Scotland report points out, epilepsy nurse specialists can help bridge the gap created by the limited number of consultant neurologists, especially those who specialise in epilepsy. The motion sets out eloquently the range of benefits that epilepsy nurse specialists can bring, to which members throughout the chamber have referred. Above all, we know how much people with epilepsy value the support that they offer. Work on the epilepsy standards is still at a comparatively early stage. I want to ensure that NHS QIS is aware of the terms of today's motion, that it takes forward the issues that members have raised and that it takes account of the comments  on the role of epilepsy nurse specialists in particular. Where services need to be integrated between primary and secondary care and delivered by a multidisciplinary team, the answer is often to think about developing a managed clinical network approach, as Hugh O'Donnell said. The Scottish Government and Epilepsy Scotland, to which I pay tribute, have been working on such an approach for some time. There has been considerable success, but I hope that the epilepsy standards will encourage the spread of managed clinical networks. I am thinking particularly of the boards in south-east Scotland, where we would like to see a revival of the epilepsy managed clinical network that used to exist there. Those networks also have an important role to play in designing services so that people meet the 18-week target for referral from general practitioner to an appointment with a specialist. In our approach to the management of long-term conditions, a cardinal principle is that we should be dealing with the totality of people's needs. The Audit Scotland report makes the telling point that many people with epilepsy, especially as they get older, will be living with other, non-related conditions. In 2004-05, each patient who was admitted to hospital with epilepsy had nearly four other conditions. We must ensure that the services we provide are able to pick up and deal with those other conditions.  We know from Epilepsy Scotland that many people with epilepsy also have learning disabilities—as many as 24,000 people may be living with both. People with learning disabilities commonly experience lifelong severe and multiple seizures, in spite of taking several anti-convulsant drugs. They are the highest users of emergency hospital admissions, and they face significant health risks. We are very aware of that. We are also aware of the important role for nurses who specialise in the combination of epilepsy and learning disability in providing those integrated services for that group of people. I hope that I have made it clear that the Scottish Government supports the terms of the motion and agrees that its aims are consistent with the approach in "Better Health, Better Care". I assure members that we will give priority to the policy when we produce a long-term conditions delivery plan later this year. We will set out in more detail how we will take that forward, and I will discuss with NHS QIS the relevant issues that have been raised this evening. There is an opportunity to ensure that those issues are reflected in the standards that will be published later in the year.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

I have listened with interest to this constructive, stimulating and wide-ranging debate, which has served as a stark reminder that the Scottish Government and the NHS have a range of complex issues to tackle. I will respond to as many of the issues that have been raised as I can. First, I want to underline some of the key points on our commitment to tackling HAI that the cabinet secretary outlined. The publication of the Scottish point prevalence survey came when we were new to government, but we reacted swiftly and made it clear that we simply would not tolerate a situation in which 9.5 per cent of patients in our acute hospitals suffer from some form of health care associated  infection, with some of our elderly patients caught up in a seemingly endless cycle of infection and treatment. Our investment of £54 million over three years is 260 per cent higher than the previous budget. It is a thorough and more robust HAI programme, which will bring about a number of benefits and make huge inroads into reducing the estimated £180 million that it costs the NHS in Scotland every year to treat patients with health care associated infections. We have set a number of challenging targets for NHS boards to deliver on, not least the target to achieve a 30 per cent reduction in S aureus blood infections by 2010. The target of reaching at least 90 per cent hand hygiene compliance by November 2008 is another major challenge for boards, but we have made it clear that they will be given all the help that they need from infection control managers, local health board hand hygiene co-ordinators and Health Protection Scotland. Our £7 million MRSA screening programme, which will be implemented by pathfinder boards next year, will take us a step further towards ensuring that each and every pre-admission patient is not unnecessarily exposed to an avoidable infection. We are convinced that, taken together, the measures in our coherent HAI delivery plan will make huge inroads into achieving our long-term goal of substantially reducing the rate of HAI in Scotland. The debate has raised a number of interesting points, to which I have listened carefully. I will do my best to respond to them and I apologise if I do not cover them all. Margaret Curran and, I think, Rhoda Grant referred to the training of cleanliness champions. I remind members that all undergraduate nurses and doctors undergo cleanliness champion training. Nearly 4,500 have now completed that training programme. Mary Scanlon, Michael Matheson and, I think, Helen Eadie mentioned MRSA being recorded on death certificates. Our quality control measure of MRSA instance is the national surveillance programme for blood infections. Those data give us a hard measure of the problem, whereas ascribing the cause of death can often be a subjective judgment. Having said that, I recognise the concerns that have been raised in the debate and we will consider the issue further. Ross Finnie talked about the need to measure all HAIs, not just MRSA. We know from the point prevalence survey that MRSA and MSSA are a good proxy for HAI rates in general. It is not necessary to measure all types to know that we are winning the fight against infection. Helen Eadie asked us to revisit the Quality Improvement Scotland review of NHS boards' HAI  policies. QIS has just published a revised set of HAI standards, against which boards will be assessed in 2009. Michael Matheson spoke about the design of hospitals contributing to infections. We acknowledge that, and we have national guidance on hospital construction specifically for reducing infection risks. We are considering specifying single-room provision in hospitals, which, in future, will have many more en suite single rooms—up to 100 per cent where appropriate. The existing estate is more challenging, and we need to make progress on that. Michael Matheson also talked about getting across the message about good hand hygiene to patients and visitors. A lot of work has gone into that. We had the six-week television and radio campaign at the beginning of the year, and a new campaign—aimed at members of the public who visit hospitals—is scheduled to begin later this year. That marks a shift in emphasis, which I am sure that many members, having raised the matter in the debate, will welcome. Sandra White spoke about targeted hospital cleaning. As was indicated in the cabinet secretary's speech, the cleaning monitoring tool is being revised to ensure that improved, modern and rigorous standards apply in all NHS board areas. Jackson Carlaw and Nanette Milne spoke about the nurse in charge—the matron, as I think Jackson Carlaw said. We are concluding a fundamental review of the role of the ward sister and charge nurse, which we will publish in the spring. That review makes it clear that the central responsibility of the ward sister lies in compliance with standards. I hope that that reassures those members. Much of our new delivery plan will bring about quick results and improve patient care straight away. Care bundles will bring significant benefits to patients, who will receive consistent provision of care in many areas of hospital practice. However, there are other issues that we will not be able to solve so quickly. For example, it will take until 2010 for health boards to achieve our target of a 30 per cent reduction in S aureus blood infections, and it will be April 2009 before the national MRSA screening programme can be rolled out. If we are to deliver our ultimate goal of a safer, cleaner and more efficient health service, I ask for members' patience. There are no quick or easy solutions, and we need everyone to play their part. We want to get it absolutely right, so that everyone in Scotland can once again be proud of our NHS and the service that it provides. We have set out our stall today, and a huge amount of action will take place over the coming  months and years to tackle HAI. We aim to bring about significant change in attitudes and behaviour across the NHS, and we will make a number of changes to the way in which services are delivered, so that patients can once again be confident that they will be safe and cared for while they are in hospital. We are instilling a sense of pride, progress and direction. However, as the cabinet secretary and I have both said, action on HAI must be taken over the longer term and across a wide range of fronts if we are to succeed. It is clear from today's debate that HAI is an issue on which there is wide, cross-party support, as well as broad engagement from a wide variety of agencies, which are actively and enthusiastically tackling the problem. With the Parliament's support, the Scottish Government and the multi-agency HAI task force will do all that they can to reduce the rate of infections in our hospitals and other health care environments. I thank all members who contributed to this important debate.

I have regular meetings with representatives of local authorities, the NHS and other partners to discuss how together we can further develop innovative, personalised support for individuals. Most recently, my officials met in control Scotland to discuss how that organisation can contribute to this important agenda.

I am aware of developments in Aberdeen. I can inform the member that, between 2006 and the present, in control Scotland has received funding from the Scottish Government to support the personalisation of services. Together with other self-directed support stakeholders, in control will participate in a round-table event in May, which will develop the strategy with the aim of increasing radically the uptake of self-directed support. I am happy to keep the member informed of those developments. It would perhaps be best to have a meeting after the event in May.

As Margaret Curran well knows, mental health remains a key priority for the Government and for health boards in partnership with local authorities. That is why we now have four health, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—targets on mental health, which will give a sense of priority to local partners who are delivering a very good service in mental health.  We are developing the plan for the next three years, which will be very much about localised services for mental health. I would have thought that the member would want to welcome that.

The particular needs of those dentists and their patients will be taken into account when the chief dental officer for Scotland convenes a group to set realistic and achievable timescales for compliance with the recommendations in the Glennie report.

I gently remind John Farquhar Munro that it was the previous Administration that established the review group that led to the recommendations in the Glennie report. The Government will take a pragmatic approach to achieve best practice in infection control, while recognising the challenges for rural dental practices that the member referred to.  In October last year, I announced £5 million of funding to help dental practitioners to address decontamination issues. I have also asked the chief dental officer to lead on the delivery of a dental premises strategy for Scotland. Further funding will be considered in light of the outcome of that strategy. In a letter dated 29 February, the chief dental officer explained that the December 2009 target date for all practices to comply with the requirements of upgrading on decontamination is under review. She also advised that she is to reconvene the dental sub-group of the Glennie group to develop an updated action plan to provide realistic and achievable timescales, which will take account of a premises strategy. I would have thought that members on the Labour benches would take the issue more seriously than appears to be the case. It is important to reassure patients about infection control and to acknowledge the challenges faced by rural dentists. It is a pity that Labour members do not seem to appreciate that.

We have rolled out test purchasing of alcohol to crack down on retailers that sell alcohol to young people who are under 18. By the end of March, all police forces will have live test purchasing operations. However, we must get better at diverting young people from misusing alcohol in the first place. The curriculum for excellence will ensure that all young people are aware of the implications of the use and abuse of alcohol and become confident individuals who can make the right choices.

As the member is probably aware, the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 creates wider offences, including those of selling alcohol to a child anywhere and of purchasing alcohol on a child's behalf, and, for a child, the offence of buying or attempting to buy alcohol anywhere. In line with the seriousness of selling alcohol to children, penalties have been raised from a £1,000 fine to a £5,000 fine, a three-month jail sentence  or both. The act will come into force in September next year. The issue is serious. Far too many adults are too willing to buy alcohol for those who are underage. If they are caught, they will feel the full force of the law. We need to get better at using intelligence to catch such individuals and we will examine additional measures to achieve that.

That issue is important. First, we need to get across the message that such behaviour is dangerous. We have only to look at the statistics to see how many fatal road accidents are linked to alcohol and drug misuse. Communication and education among young people are needed. We will take that forward in the review of substance misuse education in our schools. We have established a steering group to consider how we can improve young people's education on substance misuse, so that they are aware of the dangers, including the danger of using a vehicle when under the influence. We must also ensure that when any young person is caught acting in that manner, they are dealt with swiftly and severely.

We are willing to consider any ideas that could help us to identify such people. Of course, intelligence gathering is part of the solution and we need to examine how we can assist the police in that. For example, the use of closed-circuit television has helped with capturing the image of someone who has purchased alcohol and handed it over to young people. However, I am willing, as I am sure the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is, to examine any measures that may help us to support our police forces.

I thank members for their contributions to a very constructive debate and I reassure them, as the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing did earlier, that those contributions will help us to decide on the form of independent scrutiny that will be applied to proposals for major changes in local NHS services. As the cabinet secretary stated, she will make an announcement on the detail of the process next month—she gave an assurance to Margaret Curran on that. That will allow us time to reflect on the points that members have made today—to which I will return—and the valuable lessons that are to be learned from the recent independent scrutiny panels in Ayrshire, Lanarkshire and Clyde. I have heard members on all sides of the chamber agree that NHS boards must work with local people and communities to rebuild the public's confidence in developing service improvements. The cabinet secretary set out some of the key messages that have emerged from our consultation and which have been echoed in the debate. Boards must present clear evidence-based arguments about the need for service change before they develop options—a point that I raised in my intervention on Richard Simpson. Boards must proactively engage local people at the earliest possible stage of the change process and work with them to develop proposals for service improvement. It will be important that they be guided by a general presumption against centralisation. The starting point for decisions on delivery of health services has to be that the NHS is a public service: a service that is used for and is, of course, paid for by the public—a mutual NHS. Boards must take full account of local circumstances in reaching decisions about service improvement, and must seek and take on board the views of local people. Independent scrutiny will provide a way to improve existing processes to ensure that comprehensive information and advice are available to inform public debate. However, boards should inform and engage with local communities day to day, and proposals for service change should, as far as possible, emerge naturally from such engagement with the communities that they serve. Today's debate has included discussion of the recent examples of independent scrutiny panels in Ayrshire, Lanarkshire and Clyde, and consideration of some of the wider issues concerning national planning of health services in Scotland and how independent scrutiny will work in the future. I will reflect on and respond to some of the issues that members have raised. Margaret Curran asked for clarity on what "major service  change" means. Mary Scanlon and other members asked similar questions. As the cabinet secretary said, the Scottish health council is developing a tool to help to define major change, which has to take account of the fact that a major service change might be different in a remote and rural area than it would be in an urban setting. The decision will ultimately rest with ministers and their judgment. It is already the case, as the cabinet secretary said, that some decisions come to ministers and some do not. That is not a new concept. There will always be an element of judgment, but the important—and new—thing is that we are introducing independent scrutiny into that process.

Yes, of course. That is part of what the Scottish health council is working on. Ultimately, such decisions will always be subjective. We can lay out the criteria that lead to a decision, but they will always be subjective and will differ depending on the setting. We will require such flexibility. Margaret Curran also asked how the presumption against centralisation links in to the independent scrutiny process. A clear policy context to that is set out in "Better Health, Better Care", within whose principles health boards should operate when they propose service changes. They do not operate in a policy vacuum. Ross Finnie talked about plans that are drawn up by executive directors and supported by non-executive directors, the implications for how boards operate, and the possibility of their being challenged. Changes are required to the ways in which boards operate, of course, and lessons have to be learned. Everybody accepts that. Health boards and others should take steps to improve the ways in which they go about their business, and that is happening already. Direct elections are part of that improvement, but they are about more than that: they are about better governance more generally. The independent scrutiny process will quality assure the evidence that is to be presented, just as the Scottish health council quality assures the consultation process. The aim of that approach is to rebuild, improve and build up the public's trust in the health service. Malcolm Chisholm asked what would happen if a board ignored a panel's comments. It is important that the cabinet secretary would consider that as part of her deliberations, given that the final decision is to be made by her. However, we do not expect that to happen. I am sure that health boards want to improve their reputations. They would not want to run counter to the general direction of public feeling—or  Government feeling—on a matter. I am positive that boards will take on board panels' comments. Mary Scanlon asked about funding of the independent scrutiny panels. I reassure her that we will, of course, fund their work. I hope that I have responded to some of the key points that were made and the key questions that were asked during the debate, but I return to the principles and process for a moment. We believe that independent scrutiny should, as far as possible, fit with existing board processes in order to avoid delays and extra bureaucracy in implementing necessary change. Richard Simpson made the point that we should avoid extra bureaucracy. The independent scrutiny panel will begin to gather information and evidence and assess options at the option-development stage of change. Because scrutiny will begin early, it should not add significantly to the resources or timescales that will be required to consider and implement service changes. Feedback from the Scottish health council confirms that, if the public are able to contribute fully to the development of options and are to be satisfied that the full range of viable options is being considered, that is likely to lead to effective involvement and consultation, and trust will be established and maintained. When health boards propose major changes to valued local services, it is their responsibility to make a clear case for change that is backed up with robust evidence, and to engage effectively with local communities in doing so. There will be cases in which, although public opinion opposes change, there are grounds for making it. As the cabinet secretary said, we will not shirk tough decisions. However, in order to get to that point in a way that builds as much public confidence as possible, we must have a consultation process in which the public have faith. Independent scrutiny is a key component of that. The Scottish health council will continue to be responsible for quality assuring the public engagement and involvement processes that NHS boards follow.

Costs are always part of the evidence that boards put forward. They will be scrutinised in the independent process. Along with clinical evidence, financial information is part of the important evidence that has to be scrutinised. The Scottish health council does not have any direct responsibility for assessing the information  and evidence that will be provided in support of the case for service change. The council has supported the recent examples of independent scrutiny by providing a central secretariat. Feedback suggests that the secretariat role is crucial in providing high-quality administrative support to panels. In briefly reflecting on the experiences of the first two independent scrutiny panels, we have learned that small panels of independent experts can quickly get to grips with complex NHS service issues and provide informed commentary on board proposals and the evidence that underpins them. We can see the merit in the view that was expressed by many people during the consultation that, in appropriate cases, such focused commentary by a small panel of independent experts will help to provide the public with the relevant information and confidence to engage in meaningful consultation about the choices that are being offered and changes that are being proposed. The work of the recent panels clearly shows that independent scrutiny can and does work. Our guidance on informing, engaging and consulting the public in developing health and community care services, and the Scottish health council's role in ensuring that boards comply with it, will mean that services are developed with the people, not for the people. That approach will mean that services are changed only for the better. Today's debate has added to our recent consultation on the future of independent scrutiny, and I thank members for their constructive contributions. We look forward to making an announcement on the process next month.

Does Dr Simpson accept that that is exactly what we are suggesting? I think that the cabinet secretary laid that out quite clearly.

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on raising such an important issue, and welcome his constituents to the gallery. I wish their daughter well. I thank those who have spoken for their thoughtful speeches. I confirm that we have already published guidance that specifically highlights the role of general practitioners and primary carers in the care of those with eating disorders and the management of eating disorders. I will return to that matter later. I also confirm that NHS Scotland  has practitioners who are expert in eating disorder care. It is notoriously difficult to calculate the exact number of people with eating disorders, given the likely numbers of those who do not seek help. That may be why the figure on the BBC website that Kenny Gibson cited is so high. We know that there are around 3,000 presentations of people with eating disorders in primary care annually, and that there are around 300 hospital admissions. That is a significant number of people. We are raising awareness and working on reducing stigma to reach as many people as possible. It is important that services respond and meet the needs of all those who are affected, their carers and their families. No person who requires to be admitted to a hospital will be denied admittance. All decisions on care are taken by clinicians, and they have no artificial target weights in mind. Weight is an indicator, of course, but care decisions are based on the whole person's need in every case. What happened in Kenny Gibson's constituency case should not have happened. I have listened to the genuine concerns that have been expressed, and accept we have more to do to achieve all that we want to achieve for those in need. That said, NHS boards and partners are making real progress with enhanced and improved services, which include a new NHS eating disorder in-patient service, which I shall say more about shortly. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has published clear, evidence-based guidance for all health care professionals on the management and treatment of eating disorders. That guidance recognises that the first point of contact for the majority of people with an eating disorder is the primary care team. A dedicated chapter on the role of the GP and the primary care team is included in the guidance. The importance of the earliest possible intervention and support for people with eating disorders is also emphasised. Kenny Gibson spoke about that. Such attention fits entirely with our published commitment to increased access to expanded psychological therapy services, the importance of which we recognise. All professionals should look at all times for any signs that suggest a disorder. That is routine for GPs, but it is important that that is done in other settings. Mary Scanlon made the point that signs of a problem can be spotted in schools. However, we should ensure that not only school nurses, but teachers, dentists and other health professionals are looking out for signs that suggest a disorder and that they are confident about what they are looking for. Wider observation has a part to play in early detection and referral. The guidance was extensively distributed, including to all GP practices. It was followed last  year by a linked patient guide that emphasised the role of GPs and contained specific advice for patients. It included specific advice for children, younger adults and families. That guide was distributed to all GP practices and more widely. I want to offer a clear assurance about the expertise of consultants, GPs, nurses and other staff. Although perhaps they are too modest to identify themselves as such, there are consultant psychiatrists expert in eating disorder care who work day in, day out with and for NHS Scotland. I will name but one. Dr Harry Millar is lead clinician for the north of Scotland eating disorder managed care network. He was also influential in the creation of the new NHS in-patient unit and service that is to open this year at the Royal Cornhill hospital in Aberdeen. Furthermore, every NHS consultant psychiatrist, including those who work in adolescent services, is trained to manage people with eating disorders as part of the key core competencies to be achieved in their training programme. Continued attention is also given to ensuring that skills meet needs throughout consultants' continuing professional development.

I understand that it is just for the north-east, but the lessons from it should be learned elsewhere, which is what we always want with managed clinical networks. The idea is that those skills and that expertise should be rolled out to other areas. I will consider what lessons can be learned from the work that is being done in the north-east and whether—to answer Christine Grahame's question about the Borders—we should develop managed care and clinical networks in other areas of Scotland. I will follow that up. GPs and their practice teams assess their education and training requirements on an on-going basis in response to the needs of patients, as they should. NHS boards, local specialist and community health teams, NHS Education for Scotland, the faculties of the Royal College of General Practitioners and the deaneries all play their part. NHS Education for Scotland is taking the matter further with its plans to develop new eating disorder education and training resources. I hope that that offers some reassurance on the on-going and available expertise, training and education.

Kenny Gibson raises an important point. I would be willing to undertake a review of the uptake of and knowledge of the guidelines and to enter into discussions with the Royal College of General Practitioners about what other support might be offered. I am happy to take that forward from the debate this evening. The vast majority of care for those with eating disorders is provided in community settings through primary care and community teams, including social work services and the voluntary sector, with access to hospital when it is required. To deliver the best care, we recognise the worth and value of all partners, which means working and contracting with independent providers. To that end, we are discussing appropriate arrangements on national price, priority and quality with the independent providers for the care that they provide. That is what Kenny Gibson called for, and I hope that he is reassured on that point. I mentioned new NHS eating disorder services in Scotland. I am delighted that work is already under way to establish the north of Scotland regional in-patient service at the Aberdeen Royal Cornhill hospital, which is due to open this year. The 10 new in-patient beds will form part of the north of Scotland eating disorder network. This new NHS provision is a significant development and offers a clear signal of the Scottish Government's and NHS Scotland's commitment to best care. I am sure that there will be lessons to be learned from that development. By the end of the year, NHS Scotland will have access to approaching 60 specialist eating disorder in-patient beds and will fit within the spectrum of care to which I have referred. The new NHS facility, service and approach are matched by the ambition and provision shown in other areas and by other partners. For example, NHS Lothian has a well-established eating disorders community support service, which provides the right support and interventions at the right time. NHS Greater Glasgow has a new community-based service that provides comprehensive, holistic care to those who have an eating disorder. The best local approaches are  maintained and informed by multirepresentative eating disorder regional care networks. Those services are particularly important resources for children and adolescents throughout Scotland. Adolescent psychiatry is where the majority of individuals with an eating disorder will be seen, and we are committed to increasing the number of specialist NHS adolescent mental health in-patient beds from 44 to 56 by 2010. We are also, of course, continuing to raise awareness and to reduce the stigma of eating disorders. The see me campaign to eliminate stigma and discrimination adopted an image of a lady wearing a necklace that implies that she is anorexic, with the aim of encouraging people to see the person, not the label. That theme is continued in our more recent campaigns. There is more progress than I can mention in the time available to me but, in closing, I assure members again that we do not underestimate the need for further change. We have published clear, concise, current guidance for practitioners and patients and will welcome any advice on reinforcing that further. I have indicated to Kenneth Gibson that we will review the uptake of and knowledge of that guidance. We will continue to work with NHS boards and their partners to deliver better led, managed, organised and co-ordinated eating disorder services across the public and independent sector.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

It is for each NHS board to plan and organise maternity care provision to meet local need and ensure that informed choice and a variety of care options is available to all women. We expect all NHS boards to ensure that all women receive the best available evidence-based care when and where it is required.

The member will be aware that from the outset of the "Right for Fife" review in 2001-02, NHS Fife has always planned to provide a community maternity unit in Queen Margaret hospital. The timetable for providing the unit depends largely on the transfer of other services between Victoria hospital in Kirkcaldy and Queen Margaret hospital. I know that the board remains committed to providing the unit within the timetable for its general hospitals and maternity project. We expect it to do so within the budget that it has been allocated. I am aware that the member has been kept informed of the developments that have been taking place.

The member raises an important point. We would always expect such risk factors to be taken into account in the allocation of midwives, particularly in more deprived  communities, where there is greater need. I am certainly happy to write to the member to provide more detail on that.

All local authority and NHS partnerships are committed to eliminating all delays over six weeks by April 2008. We expect partnerships to continue to work together to ensure that that target is met.

Once we have eliminated the delays, I want to see zero delays every day, not just on census day. I have certainly made that clear and I expect all partnerships to work together and put in place plans that will ensure that the zero target is sustained. From what I can see, that is happening locally. Yes there are seasonal fluctuations, which are a challenge in keeping the figure at zero, but from what I have seen of the local plans I am assured that plans are being put in place to avoid unnecessary hospital admission and for upstream services, which can help to ensure that we maintain the figure at zero. I assure the member that I will keep a very close eye on the matter.

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate. I assure her that I will of course take cognisance of what has been said and of members' views. The issue is important and sometimes very difficult for all those who have cause to access NHS wheelchair and seating services, as members have outlined, and who  have waited too long for high-quality services throughout Scotland that meet their needs in participating fully in society. I understand the frustration that has been expressed. Successive Administrations have promised much and delivered little improvement in the past 25 years. Reviews of rehabilitation technology services that were undertaken in 1982 and 1997 identified many of the same issues as are still with us today, including the need for the number of satellite services to be increased to bring services closer to patients; for improvements to patient transport arrangements; for efficiency savings in refurbishment procedures; for clearer definitions of the service's parameters; and for more integration with other service providers. In opposition, we welcomed the previous Executive's independent review and the report "Moving Forward: Review of NHS Wheelchair and Seating Services in Scotland". That review was a direct result of the petition to Parliament in December 2004 by the late Margaret Scott of the Scottish wheelchair forum, whose daughter is disabled, which urged the then Executive to "resolve the current critical problems in the provision of wheelchairs and specialist seating services within the NHS ... through a review, which in consultation with users, will address minimum standards, the scope of equipment provided and the delivery of services." The provision of wheelchair and seating services is a complex activity that impinges on social, housing and education services, as well as health services. A major challenge for all the stakeholders will be to establish an effective mechanism to achieve real change for the benefit of service users. A further challenge will be to target areas in which changes will benefit the greatest number of users and carers, within a reasonable timescale and in ways that are cost effective to the NHS and its partners, while improving waiting times and providing services that continue to meet users' and carers' needs in the shorter term. The disability equality duty, which came into force in December 2006, obliges public bodies, including the Government, proactively to identify and eliminate discrimination against disabled people and to promote positive attitudes to disabled people and their participation in public life. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities came into force in 2007. We know what we have to do. I reassure Jackson Carlaw that the review report is not gathering dust—far from it. As the review recommended, a project board has been established. The board's membership is wide and includes user and carer representation, which is  important, as well as rehab technology professionals, service providers and equality representatives. The board is taking the work forward.

I am coming to that. I realise that people who use the services now want real progress. Service providers are considering and implementing several recommendations of the wheelchair review, including the introduction of satellite clinics in the west of Scotland and in Tayside, which relates to recommendation 4; the introduction of self-referral by all five wheelchair and seating centres, to enable users to have their equipment requirements reviewed, which relates to recommendation 8; and the introduction of planned preventive maintenance in the NHS Highland area and in the west of Scotland for powered chairs, which relates to recommendation 32. The project team will produce an action plan by December for my approval. Members should be under no illusion that there is any room for slippage in that regard—I reassure Johann Lamont on that point. The action plan will identify the recommendations that best meet the needs of the users and carers and which are achievable, measurable—Jackie Baillie mentioned that—and the most effective use of resources. We must get this right; we do not want to be back here again. That is why a three-month period for consulting all those with an interest in wheelchair and seating services has been built into the timeline for delivery of the action plan. Following the outcome of the comprehensive spending review, over the next three years £16 million of additional funds will be allocated to the modernisation and redesigning of NHS wheelchair and seating services in Scotland. I think that, in the current financial climate, that is a fair settlement for a very important issue. However, the additional resources will be released only following the Scottish Government's approval of robust, fully costed business cases from each of the five wheelchair centres in Scotland and taking into account the terms of the action plan. I hope that members are reassured that we will ensure that the money is spent on the right things in the right places. I know that Trish Godman takes a keen interest in the Quarriers village near Bridge of Weir, which is a charity that supports both adults and children with disabilities. WESTMARC provides wheelchair and seating services to Quarriers. It is in direct  contact with Quarriers and is familiar with the issues of access to attendant-controlled powered wheelchairs and the safe use of manual wheelchairs by young adults at Quarriers. WESTMARC provides powered wheelchairs to people who meet the national eligibility criteria, and many young adults at Quarriers and similar facilities need wheelchairs due to their lack of mobility. As Trish Godman will acknowledge, this is not just about resources. WESTMARC clearly has a responsibility to assess the needs of young adults who are affiliated to Quarriers and to provide and maintain suitable equipment for them. In some instances, challenging behaviour and its management have to be taken into account and will influence the equipment that can be provided. There can sometimes be conflicting aims, but it is clear that at all times safety considerations must be paramount. The wheelchair project team will work with service managers in conducting a review of the national eligibility criteria for powered wheelchairs. I hope that that addresses Trish Godman's concerns in that regard. It is imperative that NHS boards support the modernisation of wheelchair and seating services by providing adequate funding to the services on an annual basis as well as the additional resources from the spending review. The Scottish Government is determined to drive forward the modernisation and redesigning of Scotland's wheelchair and seating services, underpinned by robust funding arrangements, for the benefit of all users and carers. I hope that that reassures all members who have taken part in the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

The debate has shown the Parliament at its best. Members have dealt with a sensitive and difficult issue constructively and on a cross-party basis. Of course, organ donation is not a party political issue, as many members have pointed out. The position that people take on it depends on their personal views and beliefs. I confirm that, for that reason, members of the SNP will have a free vote on the matter. We took that into account when we had the debate designated as a subject debate, and I think that our decision has played a part in stimulating high-quality speeches, because—rightly—people have felt free to express their views. As the cabinet secretary said in her opening speech, we had three main aims in organising the debate: to underline our commitment to increase the organ donation rate in Scotland by implementing the recommendations of the task force's first report; to draw attention to today's launch of the most high-profile advertising and publicity campaign on the subject that has ever been undertaken in Scotland—I hope that Jackson Carlaw will change his view on that as the campaign develops; and to give members an opportunity to debate the risks and benefits of moving to an opt-out system. Members have raised a number of points to which I wish to respond. Mary Scanlon mentioned the need to clarify the legal position on non-heart-beating donation. As she knows, when a person has given authorisation for organ donation there is no conflict; the 2006 act provides that such express wishes will be fulfilled. We will develop advice for the Scottish Intensive Care Society on the legal position regarding non-heart-beating donation when no wishes have been expressed. I hope that that addresses some of Mary Scanlon's concerns. Mary Scanlon and Ian McKee talked about the increased prevalence of diabetes and said that we must tackle it, to reduce the need for kidney transplants. I absolutely agree, which is why we are doing work on type 2 diabetes in particular. Some of our health improvement measures are geared towards that issue.  George Foulkes made an important point about language. I prefer to talk about an opt-out system, which better reflects what we mean. We need to be in a position in which we do not presume anything, as George Foulkes made clear. He also made an important point about the need for safeguards in an opt-out system, to guarantee rights. He talked about the need to increase minority ethnic donors. Ian McKee and, I think, Richard Simpson made the same point. We acknowledge that important issue and we will ask the Scottish transplant group to consider how we can ensure that there is an increase in donations from ethnic minority communities in Scotland.

As well as working with the Scottish Intensive Care Society, we will of course talk to colleagues at Westminster about the matter. Claire Baker talked about the need to keep in mind baby and child donation, which is an important point. She will be aware that the 2006 act allows children under 12 to donate organs after death. Of course, in such cases authorisation must be given by the person who has parental rights and responsibilities. I support Michael Matheson's comments about the important work that Kidney Kids Scotland does. We expect our services to support children who undergo kidney dialysis, and their families, on travel and accommodation issues. I hope that that provides some reassurance. An opt-out system is the next phase and was the key issue that we considered in the debate. As I said in reply to the members' business debate on organ donation that George Foulkes secured, I am sympathetic to such an approach, but, like many members, I acknowledge the concerns that arise. Mike Rumbles said that we should not take away choice. We do not want to take away choice; we want to change how choice is exercised. The soft opt-out system would still allow families the final say. Richard Simpson suggested that there might be an issue in that regard. I want families always to have the final say, even when a person expressly wished to be a donor, because to expect health staff to push forward with organ donation against a family's wishes would be to put staff in an invidious position—we would not go there.

Yes, but the issue is one of culture change; the question that the family is asked needs to be changed. We need to ask, "Do you object?" Making that change would deal with the clear concern that members across the chamber have expressed. Families find the point at which the question is put the most difficult of all. That is the underlying reason for the high refusal rate. I will say a bit more about that in a minute. The questions that we need to ask ourselves have been well rehearsed. Would a move to opt-out deal completely with the shortage of donor organs? Can we move to that position without alienating public support for transplantation or undermining the very high degree of support that it currently enjoys? Before we move forward, we must have the answers to those questions. Of course, those questions address the sorts of issues that the organ donation task force is looking at across the UK. It is arranging events in several parts of the country, including one in Edinburgh at some point in May. We want to ensure that as many people as possible get the chance to attend the event. The task force will also look at other ways of allowing people to make their views known. The cabinet secretary will discuss those issues with the chair of the task force next month. Margaret Curran, Roseanna Cunningham and other members mentioned the crucial role of relatives. Everyone agrees that, irrespective of whether people opt in or opt out, the process must be made as easy as possible for relatives. Without their co-operation, donation cannot take place because all the information that health professionals need, to be sure that no harm will come to potential recipients, will not be made available. As many members have said, relative refusal rates are over 40 per cent. Whichever system we adopt in future, reducing that refusal rate will be a key factor in its success.

I accept that that is the legal position, but the reality is that health professionals who work at the front line will never override the wishes of the family. That is just not going to happen. We should not expect health professionals to be put into such a position. When relatives know that their loved one wanted to donate, they usually consider it their duty to ensure that those wishes are fulfilled. The key factor is therefore to ensure that people who want to donate their organs after death tell their loved ones what their wishes are. It may not be a very easy subject to bring up in conversation, but it is much harder for the family to have to decide, at the very moment that the loved one is no longer able to tell them directly, what a loved one's wishes may have been. Many members have mentioned that, and it is why our advertising and publicity campaign stresses that people should put their name on the organ donor register, given that it is recognised as the way forward at the moment. Doing that also encourages people to tell their nearest relatives what their wishes are. Not only does that count as authorisation under the act, but families are in no doubt about what they are to do should the circumstances arise. That enables them to take the initiative, which makes the whole process much easier for everyone concerned. We are committed to implementing, for Scotland and with the other countries in the UK, the recommendations in the task force's first report. The task force believes that doing so will make a major difference in as short a time as a year or 18 months. We very much hope that that belief is fulfilled and we are determined that Scotland should play its part in making it happen. We look forward to engaging the Parliament in the process as we go forward.

We have had a constructive and stimulating debate and I thank members of all parties for taking part. We have debated a topic that is of crucial importance to the NHS and to the public and patients who use NHS services, as many members have said. As the cabinet secretary said, the Government is committed to improving public and community involvement with NHS area boards. We will bring about improvements in the context of our mutual NHS, of which the public and staff are regarded as partners and co-owners. We will launch a consultation on a patients' rights bill by May this year. As the cabinet secretary said, that will allow us to engage with the people of Scotland to develop a charter of mutual rights. We will shortly announce how we will take independent scrutiny forward as an integral part of how the NHS develops proposals for major service change. We will develop a participation standard and we will require boards to produce an annual ownership report with the people whom they serve.  We accept that some NHS boards are doing a good job in fostering and encouraging community involvement—Richard Simpson talked about that—but there is room for improvement, as many, if not all, members said. Many communities still do not feel that their voices are being heard and listened to, particularly when major proposals for service change are considered by their local health board. Given the contributions to the debate from Christine Grahame, Elaine Smith and other members, I judge that that concern is widely shared. We can build on and enhance the current processes and mechanisms to help to achieve greater community involvement. We have heard many positive suggestions about how greater involvement could be delivered, to which we will give our fullest consideration. Simply improving the current mechanisms will not go far enough to allay the deeply felt public concern that community involvement is not good enough. The introduction of an element of direct elections to NHS boards will make a significant difference. As the cabinet secretary said, we do not consider improvements to current mechanisms and direct elections to be mutually exclusive and we are committed to taking both forward. I listened carefully to the constructive and thoughtful contributions that members made to the debate on direct elections. We are in the middle of an extensive and substantial consultation on the matter. We sent more than 1,500 copies of the consultation document to the widest possible range of national and local bodies across the length and breadth of Scotland. We are holding open consultative meetings at the invitation of many bodies, so that we can seek out all relevant views. This debate is an important and integral part of the consultation process, which will take account of the views of colleagues from all parties.

Of course we will do that, and we encourage people from the area to contribute to the consultation. As we are in the middle of a consultation, members will not expect me to give definitive answers to all the points they have raised, but I will mention some points. Margaret Curran asked that the involvement of the Parliament should continue as the debate moves forward. I am happy to give her an assurance on that point. Given the agreement that change is required and the breadth of views on the matter, it is important that  we build on the debate to reach as much of a consensus as possible on how to take the issue forward. We are keen to take the opportunity to involve the Parliament in the debate. Ross Finnie expressed concern, which Jamie Stone followed up, that the presence of a directly elected element on local boards might lead to power struggles with local authorities. I am not convinced about that. What is important is the way in which local authorities and health boards relate to each other and work together, not how their governance arrangements are put together. In some areas of Scotland, health boards and local authorities have worked together very well; in other areas, the situation needs to improve. That is how things stand under the current arrangements. We need to reconsider that relationship and joint working, but that does not relate to how the health boards have their governance arrangements in place. Nevertheless, Ross Finnie made some interesting points. Bill Butler and Gil Paterson made the point that difficult decisions will still have to be made with directly elected health boards. No one is arguing otherwise. The important point is that the ownership of the decisions will be different—more transparent and accountable. Peter Peacock made the point that, sometimes, even by people in elected positions, difficult decisions are made that are unpopular with the public. That would be the case with directly elected health board members as well—it would be naive for anyone to think otherwise—but that does not detract from the fact that transparency and accountability are important to the process, and people must feel that they have someone to challenge about the decision that has been made. At the moment, that is missing from health boards. It is clear that there are some fundamental issues that need to be addressed: the people who would stand for election; whether there should be a political element; the impacts of elections on boards' governance; and accountability to ministers—a point that was well made by Helen Eadie, who talked about how New Zealand has handled that issue. Of course we will consider the New Zealand experience and other international experience. We recognise the need to ensure that directly elected members are properly equipped to undertake the job when they work with other board members who have expert knowledge. Richard Simpson made an important point about how we can ensure that there are a range of voices around the table, representing all backgrounds. The weaker voices need to be heard, not just those of the strong and those who have a firm view. That will be a difficult balance to achieve—it is difficult to achieve it in local government—but it is  something that we will need to work at. We must encourage people to come forward and we must support them in having their voices heard, so that they see themselves as having something to offer in this context. These are serious issues and the Government will give them serious consideration. I am heartened by the number of positive and constructive views that have been expressed today on the merits of direct elections and the positive impact that colleagues feel they would have on community involvement with NHS boards. The debate has focused on a subject that we all agree is crucial to the NHS and the communities it serves. I thank all members for their contributions and look forward to further debate on the issue.

I visited the Aberdeen dental institute on Tuesday and received a full briefing from NHS Grampian and other key stakeholders on the new Aberdeen dental school development. Excellent progress is being made that will enable this challenging task to be achieved. On completion, the dental institute, including the dental school, will represent a unique and high-quality facility that will provide comprehensive oral and dental services and put Grampian in an excellent position to train, recruit and retain dental professionals.

I am well aware of the pressures in the north-east, which have existed for quite some time and which we are determined to resolve. I remind the member that the dental bursary scheme—which is the lever for NHS commitment of up to five years—will be available to Aberdeen students. In the other dental schools, 70 per cent of students have taken up that bursary, which is encouraging. Other financial incentives are in place, including the vocational training allowance of up to £6,000 and a golden hello payment of up to £20,000 over two years if graduates join the dental list within three months of completing their vocational training. The establishment of the core facilities for the new dental school in Aberdeen will be followed by the creation of an educational network across the north of Scotland to provide outreach experience for dental students. Outreach for the Aberdeen dental students will, in the first instance, be within Grampian, with proposed centres in Elgin and  Peterhead. Outreach will develop further as the dental school matures, to engage more widely with facilities across the Highlands and Islands health boards in the north of Scotland. The benefit of such facilities and of other capital dental projects should encourage students who will study in Aberdeen to remain in the north-east after qualification.

I can see that Mike Rumbles is still sooking his sour grapes, which comes as little surprise, given that we are delivering something that he singularly failed to deliver when he was in government. I will make it clear—the Aberdeen dental school will be a full dental school and a centre of excellence for the north-east of Scotland. Professor Mike Greaves and his team at the University of Aberdeen are doing a wonderful and powerful job in getting the Aberdeen dental school up and running for the next academic session of 2008. It is disappointing that we are hearing negative comments from Mike Rumbles and some of his colleagues that undermine the reputation of the Aberdeen dental school before it is even open. Such comments are received very badly by those at Aberdeen University, particularly when they are trying to recruit the best staff for the Aberdeen dental school—

I suggest to Mr Rumbles that, rather than carping from the sidelines—

I suggest that Mr Rumbles actually gets behind the Aberdeen dental school, as the rest of the population is doing.

A number of measures, introduced as part of the dental action plan, are aimed at improving oral health. In addition, I launched a school-based service for children on 3 December.

The issue in Glasgow is not so much the distribution of NHS dentists as deprivation and people not accessing the dentists who are available often enough in the way that they require to. That is why we have an on-going programme—which will be extended—that includes childsmile practice, which is operating in a number of community health partnership areas. The programme will be rolled out to the remaining CHP areas in due course. Childsmile and childsmile school will commence in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area in 2009-10. They are concerned with early intervention and ensuring that, by giving the oral health of the next generation as good a start as possible, we prevent some of the dental decay of which there is unfortunately too much among the adult population. A lot is happening, and I am happy to write to the member with more detail on the plans.

It was a pleasure to visit Methilhill primary school. The staff there are working hard with dental nurses to roll out the project. Childsmile school carries on the good work of childsmile nursery and childsmile practice. It includes fluoride varnish and, later on in school, fissure sealants, which is good preventive work. The boards that have got childsmile school early are in NHS Borders, NHS Fife and NHS Tayside. In addition, the programme will be rolled out to a number of other boards in 2008-09, and then to the rest of the boards in 2009-10. I guarantee that childsmile school will be available over time to all children within the deprived areas that the programme targets.

A national working group has been established to develop a long-term strategic framework for the promotion of physical activity in primary care, which will include exercise on referral. The working group is taking forward its work in three phases. The first phase, which is almost complete, is the preparation of guidance to raise awareness of physical activity with health professionals working in primary care. The further phases will concern the development of measurement and screening tools and the identification of effective interventions. The group will draw on evaluations of other primary care initiatives in which exercise on referral has been practised—for example, the keep well and have a heart Paisley projects—as well as other pilot programmes.

Margo MacDonald is aware that we have doubled the budget for physical activity, which will be £4 million a year for the next spending review period, so the money is in the budget. In addition, we will publish the joint obesity  action plan in the spring, which will outline how we intend to spend the £56 million that we have made available to pull together the food and health, physical activity and other strategies to maintain a healthy weight. However, we need to consider the mechanics of prescribing exercise—it is not that we do not want to do it or that the money is not available. I am happy to write to Margo MacDonald with more detail on the timescale.

The Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs advises health ministers throughout the United Kingdom on the blood donation eligibility criteria, which are under constant review.

The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service, along with other UK blood services, bases its blood donor selection criteria on the best scientific and clinical advice available. I suggest to Mr Finnie that it is crucial that we follow that advice. If the advice changes, we will listen. However, we must follow the best scientific and clinical advice that is available to us, which is exactly what we are doing.

The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network is developing a clinical guideline on Parkinson's disease, which will focus on diagnosis and drug treatment. Publication of the guideline is expected in the autumn of next year. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is developing clinical standards for neurological conditions. I understand that there will be specific standards for Parkinson's disease. Together, those two initiatives will lead to improvements throughout Scotland in supporting people living with Parkinson's disease, their families and their carers.

I understand how highly Parkinson's disease nurse specialists are valued by people with the disease. The number of specialist nurses has increased in recent years. I am pleased that recently, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde took on another 3.5 whole-time equivalent Parkinson's disease nurse specialists. That sets a good example to all national health service boards. Another such example is the work of NHS Dumfries and Galloway on developing with the Parkinson's Disease Society a nurse specialist post. Other health boards are looking to do likewise. I encourage all boards to take a lead from boards that are developing nurse specialist posts.

I am not aware of any such contact, but I will follow up the matter and find out what progress is being made. As I mentioned, the NHS QIS neurological standards that are being developed provide us with an opportunity to consider the role of Parkinson's disease nurse specialists. I am happy to have further discussions with NHS Borders and the member on how to take forward the proposal.

The fact that NHS QIS is developing the clinical standards for neurological conditions shows that progress is being made in that direction. However, I am happy to write to the member with more specific details in answer to his question.

The "Framework for maternity services in Scotland" describes the schedule of routine care that all pregnant women should receive. Integral to that is routine examination to ensure maternal and foetal well-being and to identify any deviations from the normal, including low amniotic fluid.

A woman should have continuous risk assessment throughout her pregnancy, which should take into account the risk status, which might change over time. Consideration should be given to the fact that a woman can move between levels of care throughout a pregnancy. The level of care that is given should reflect that and should be managed under local guidelines and referral arrangements. A risk assessment should be repeated towards the end of a pregnancy, to provide up-to-date information to allow a woman and her carers to reassess plans for childbirth. Given the concerns that Elaine Smith has raised, I am happy to look into whether more rigorous detection and prevention measures are required. I will come back to her on that.

I welcome the debate. I hope that the powerful speeches from throughout the chamber will set the tone for the wider debate that is necessary in Scotland on the vital issue of organ donation, which potentially affects us all. The motion refers to the importance of raising awareness of organ donation, and I could not agree more. We have used opportunities, such as the British transplant games in Edinburgh last summer, to do just that. We are also preparing a further advertising and publicity campaign, based on last year's award-winning approach. The campaign's focus will be on getting people to put their names on the NHS organ donor register.  As was pointed out earlier, that registration counts as a form of written authorisation under the Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006. Authorisation means that people's wishes should be respected after their death. Where those wishes are recorded, the relatives are spared the need to make a decision about donation at what is already an appallingly difficult time for them. The campaign will also stress the need for people to tell their relatives about their decision. Relatives need to know whether someone has left written authorisation. Under the 2006 act, telling one's relatives could also count as a form of verbal authorisation. While we are on the subject of the 2006 act, I will reflect on a couple of comments about the passage of that act two years ago. I was a member of the Health Committee and I took part in the deliberations on the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill, which—as was rightly pointed out—happened against the backdrop of the breach of trust in the Alder Hey scandal and the lack of trust that it left behind. The important question now is whether time has moved on and we can maintain the trust that the public have in our donations system in moving to another system. We must take the public with us if we are to make the change. This debate and other debates that we have had on organ donation are fundamentally important in getting people to join the organ donor register in the meantime. Our consideration of the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill was a spur to me to join the register. It is interesting that Christine Grahame has signed up to the register because of this debate. I suspect that many hundreds—I hope thousands—of other people will do likewise, because of the fact that we are having this discussion. Despite the debates and campaigns, there is still a severe shortage of donor organs. Although 29 per cent of Scottish people have put their names on the organ donor register, Scotland has the poorest donation rate in the UK, which makes it one of the worst in the European Union. We clearly need to do more, as the motion states. The UK organ donation task force has just produced a report claiming that a 50 per cent increase in organ donation is possible over five years if the barriers to donation under the existing arrangements are removed. Its recommendations include increasing the number of donor co-ordinators, developing dedicated organ retrieval teams and mainstreaming organ donation by developing local strategies and champions. That would get us closer to the Spanish system, which achieves the best donation rates in Europe. The Spanish approach has been exported successfully to Italy and elsewhere, so why not to Scotland?

People on both sides of the donation debate agree about that. The recommendations of the task force that I have just listed are important, and we strongly back them. We have said that we will contribute the resources that are needed to establish the organ donation organisation. The Scottish transplant group has been asked to begin work on implementation immediately. No matter where we go from here, that is taken as read. We will proceed and we will take on board the important developments that I believe will deliver significant change. We need to reach a conclusion on whether changing to a system of presumed consent would achieve an even greater increase than the one that the task force has predicted. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said when launching the task force's first report, the issue is very sensitive and views are firmly held. My own view—which is that we should move to a system of presumed consent—has changed since our debate two years ago, partly due to my having spoken to people at the event to which Jamie Hepburn referred and to many others. That is my personal view. We must recognise that others have different views. We need to examine thoroughly all the risks and benefits, many of which have been rehearsed in this evening's debate. The debate about presumed consent is effective at raising awareness of the whole organ donation issue. Where do we go from here? The task force has been asked to take forward the debate throughout the UK. It is setting up a number of expert working groups to consider the practical issues, clinical practice, legal issues, ethical issues, cultural matters and the social marketing and media aspects. The membership of each working group will be UK-wide, and the intention is to hold a number of stakeholder events, including one in Scotland. The evidence is not always clear-cut. There is a feeling that donation rates depend at least as much on the transplantation infrastructure—which Mike Rumbles talked about—as they do on the underlying legislative basis. I understand that the task force is concerned that its work is seen as taking forward a foregone conclusion. It believes that it is not helpful to polarise the debate as a black-and-white choice between opting in and opting out. It wants to consider issues of consent in general and to  recommend what is best in the UK and Scottish context. It will submit its report by the summer. I hope, therefore, that George Foulkes and others will allow the task force the time that it needs to complete its work. That way, we can all take a measured look at the issue, in full possession of the information that we need. I am sure that, if we take forward the debate with the tone that has been evident this evening, we will reach the right conclusion for Scotland.  Meeting closed at 18:05.

The only cracks that are appearing are between the Labour front bench and the Labour back bench. That is true on many issues. Independent scrutiny is just one of them, and it has been welcomed by many Labour back benchers. Some good speeches have been made today and some pertinent issues have been addressed. Ian McKee analysed the challenges of dealing with health inequalities, as did Ross Finnie. A difficulty arises when we improve the health of the general population but the gap widens between the better-off and the least well-off. That is a challenge for every Government. Jackson Carlaw supported independent scrutiny, which is very welcome. He also gave us some food for thought on men's health.

No—not at the moment. The debate also contained some rather ill-informed comments, to which I will return later. This Government's ambition for a healthier Scotland requires us to focus on the challenge of reducing health inequalities. Our health services have to be fair for all and sensitive to the needs of the people whom they serve. The services have to reach out to communities that might otherwise be excluded. We have to work in partnership to tackle  inequalities in the broadest sense and enable people to sustain their health over the longer term. That is why we are investing £300 million. I will repeat that: we are investing an additional £300 million over the next three years for health improvement. For anyone to say that that is not a significant investment is quite incredible. The ministerial task force that I have the privilege of leading is engaged in important work on which it will report to the Cabinet in May 2008. The progress report that we have published today reflects the focus that our work places on the early years of a child's life; on the economic, social and health burden that is imposed by mental illness, which I know is an important issue for Mary Scanlon; on the big killers such as cardiovascular disease and cancer; and on the problems that are caused by drugs and alcohol, which include their links to violence among young men. I encourage members to look at the progress report. There will be much work to do as we come up with practical ideas on how to build up the resilience and capacity among individuals, families and communities so that we can improve their health and reduce factors in the physical and social environments that would otherwise perpetuate inequalities. That will be a big challenge for us; it is a challenge on which I am privileged to be leading. Pages of "Better Health, Better Care" very much build on the Kerr principles and show the benefits of co-ordinated action across Government. We will make progress on that. We want a mutual service in which patients, carers and staff are recognised as owners with all the rights and responsibilities that that brings: a voice in the boardroom, a voice in the treatment room, the chance to be a partner in the design and delivery of care, the right to be treated with respect and, in turn, the responsibility to respect the service that is being provided. The further rollout of the keep well initiative represents a significant increase in the provision of primary care in our most deprived communities, and is a genuine attempt to identify and treat preventable ill health in those areas. We will shortly extend our approach to anticipatory care to remote and rural areas, with the launch of the well north programme, which I know will be of interest to many members. I will turn to some of the speeches. I say to Margaret Curran in all sincerity that hers was, for a number of reasons, one of the most negative and ill-informed speeches I have heard from her. Not for the first time, she contradicted many of her back benchers—more, in fact, than she does the SNP. She has to get more on top of her brief.

I will let you in in a minute, Margaret. I shall answer some of the specific things that she said. On smoking, I say to Margaret Curran and Richard Simpson that we are investing £11 million over the next three years to take forward the five-year action plan on tobacco control—something that has been warmly welcomed by ASH Scotland and many others. On the healthy living centres, I ask Margaret Curran to reflect for a moment on how many occasions when she was a minister did she intervene to save local projects directly. That will be an interesting one to analyse. I was told on frequent occasions that it was down to local funders to resolve such issues, whether they be health boards or local authorities. Unlike the previous Administration, we have met the healthy living centre alliance and we have given a commitment to consider the options for sustainability of their projects—far more than your Administration would ever have done, Margaret. I will let you in on that point.

Thank you—

I say to Margaret Curran that I have no recollection of her Administration ever saving any project for which Big Lottery funding had ended. You have no track record on that whatever. Unlike your performance, this Government is prepared to consider the future of healthy living centres, which is why we have already met the healthy living centre alliance to discuss the options—something your Administration would never have done. I turn to some important points that Mary Scanlon made, and will pick her up on one point. She mentioned GP contracts and negotiations. The BMA briefing that I have—it may be a different one to the one Mary Scanlon has—states: "The BMA's Scottish General Practitioners Committee has been involved in discussions with the Scottish Government on the issues of flexible access to GP services in Scotland." Those discussions have been very constructive and we intend to take them forward. I say to Helen Eadie—not for the first time—that we expect all local partners, in Fife and elsewhere, to meet the delayed discharge target of six weeks this year. Of course, we expect that to happen in all locations.

It will happen in Fife—despite Helen Eadie's scaremongering—as it will happen everywhere else.

I reassure Elaine Smith that the infant feeding co-ordinator job is advertised. Interviews will take place by the end of February. I am sure that she will welcome that.

Will the member give way?

When Mary Scanlon asked me about that previously, I told her that we are developing a school-based health resource, which will include school nurses. She has an interest in mental health, so does she recognise that other staff may be required to back up that health resource in schools?

Will the member take an intervention?

Community health initiatives, such as healthy living centres, can play a vital role in complementing public services through effective approaches to improving people's health in hard-to-reach communities. The Scottish Government provides funding to health boards and local government to support local services such as healthy living centres, in line with local needs and priorities.

Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing met healthy living centre alliance representatives, among whom was a general practitioner from Islay who set out very well the case that the member has just outlined. We are considering further options for ensuring that the healthy living centres' good work can be sustained, but I stress the point that I made in my first response that we give resources to health boards and local government to develop at a local level the very services that the member has highlighted.

As I said earlier, the future funding of healthy living centres is a matter primarily for local health boards and local authorities. That said, on 25 November last year, the cabinet secretary wrote to all territorial health board chairs, asking them to consider the importance of community health initiatives in their area—whether urban or rural—and the support that can be offered to ensure that valued activities for health improvement in the community are continued. I reiterate that we met representatives of the healthy living centre alliance last week and that we are considering further options to ensure that that good work continues.

I believe that current fire safety measures in Scottish hospitals are already highly effective. Indeed, that view is supported by the level of fire incidents reported recently to the Scottish Government as a requirement of the health directorates' fire safety policy for NHS Scotland. However, I accept the need to maintain a high level of vigilance. In order to keep fire safety issues under continual review, the NHS Scotland fire safety advisory group meets quarterly to address policy and guidance issues and to consider any emerging issues in the United Kingdom health care sector.

I am aware of the concerns that the member raises. A group comprising the  contractors, fire safety and building experts and representatives from Central Scotland Fire and Rescue Service is reviewing fire safety design in each area of the new Larbert hospital. Final decisions on the installation of automatic fire suppression systems have not been made as yet—the process of appraisal and review is on-going. So far, it has led to automatic fire suppression systems being planned for specific areas that have been deemed to be high risk—for example, the data communication rooms and kitchen extractor hoods. I have asked to be kept informed of the progress that is made and will ensure that the local member is kept up to date.

We are delivering a wide range of actions to support people in achieving and maintaining a healthy weight, including implementation of the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Act 2007. Over the next three years, we will be investing a further £14.7 million—in addition to increased spending on healthy eating and physical activity—to tackle obesity. Government and other sectors all have key roles in creating environments that make it easier for people to be more active in their everyday lives and to make healthier choices in what they eat.

I think that that goes without saying, Mary. We will bring forward an obesity action plan in the near future. On the issue of adults, which Mary Scanlon raised in her question, our thinking is around the roll-out of the counterweight programme, which is an effective programme that is delivered nationally through general practitioners and adult treatment services. At the moment, it is focused on the keep well areas, but we want to take it forward on a national basis. We are also considering how we can take advantage of workplace-based weight monitoring and engage employers to play their part in making such services available to their employees. I assure Mary Scanlon that we are determined to make progress in tackling obesity, which is one of our major public health challenges. I look forward to sharing more information with her and other members when we publish the action plan in due course.

I agree with Aileen Campbell that the possible loss of £184 million to Scottish good causes as a result of the transfer, for which Scottish Labour MPs voted, will not help to tackle obesity or, more generally, health inequalities in our society. It will certainly not help the weak, dispossessed and vulnerable in our society.

Margaret Curran will be aware that more than £100 million a year of additional funding is going into health improvement measures due to the Scottish National Party Government's budget. Of course, a lot of the resources will be focused on tackling health inequalities. The Government is giving great priority to that area, which is why I chair the task force on tackling health inequalities. We are considering what additional measures we should put in place to take the agenda forward. We are also considering how to bring together the strands of food and health, physical activity, the obesity action plan and the local co-ordinators to create a more coherent policy to tackle obesity in our society. As I said in my answer to the previous question, obesity is one of the major public health challenges in Scotland.

"All Our Futures: Planning for a Scotland with an Ageing Population" sets out a framework for supporting older people to live life to the full. A healthy and active life is central to that. A range of measures are in place to promote good physical and mental health and active lifestyles among older people, including community walking initiatives for older people, such as the paths to health walking programme.

The Government would never want to undermine older people's health and well-being. Although that matter is for the local authority, we expect local authorities and health boards to take account of the recommendations of "All Our Futures" when they develop leisure and other services for older people, and to ensure that those services are accessible and affordable.

That is a bit rich of Cathie Craigie, given that pensioners' council tax  increased by 60 per cent under the good auspices of the Labour Party when it was in government. Rather than talking a good game like the Labour Party, this Government will actually deliver a good deal for our pensioners by freezing the council tax and, of course, by moving towards a local income tax, which will be of enormous benefit to older people and pensioners.

I thank Des McNulty and congratulate him on securing the debate. I pay tribute to the many people who have been involved in the campaign to highlight the issues that are faced by the St Margaret of Scotland hospice. I am grateful to those who are present in the public gallery tonight for their commitment. The presence of so many people from across the chamber and the level of the debate reflect the attachment that we have to the services that are provided to those who are vulnerable and who have particularly complex needs as they near the end of their lives. I know from the correspondence that I deal with, and from the recent presentation to the Public Petitions Committee, the level of support that exists among all those who are involved with St Margaret's. Des McNulty's motion calls on us to recognise the work of St Margaret's and the strong support that the organisation has. I thank all those who are involved in the provision of palliative and end-of-life care for the fantastic job that they do. In direct response to Des McNulty's request, the cabinet secretary is indeed visiting St Margaret's in the next couple of weeks to see at first hand the care that is provided there. I pay tribute to the hospice movement in Scotland more generally, because it is right that we recognise the special ethos of that movement and the values that hospices put into play, and their independence in doing that. We will continue to work closely with the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care and the Scottish hospices forum. St Margaret's is, perhaps, unique as an organisation, given the nature of the services that it provides. It clearly seeks to use its resources and skills in the best way that it can to meet patients' needs. Of course, as an independent organisation, it is for the board of St Margaret's to determine how it is run. We need to recognise that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, in conjunction with its key partners and stakeholders, is responsible for planning and providing NHS services in ways that most appropriately meet the  needs of the populations that it serves. In doing so, it needs to work together with its partners, stakeholders and providers to ensure the best possible standards of care.

It is important that we recognise that the hospice is not, in itself, directly affected by the changes. We are talking about the indirect impact, because of the overall funding and the way in which St Margaret's runs its services with the one fund. There is, therefore, an indirect impact from the decision; I will come back to that in a minute. The balance of care report, which has been referred to, was a review of the demand for, and the use of, different types of institutional care for older people. I am pleased to note that, although it was intended to repeat the review of that by the end of 2008, it has been agreed that the NHS continuing care section will be completed earlier than that. That will involve updating the information on the demand for continuing care, and looking at admission rates and length of stay alongside projected population changes—some of the information that members have questioned during the debate. That will allow the projected bed numbers to be revised in the light of any changes in demand and length of stay since 2004-05, which was when a lot of that work was done—four years ago. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde aims to complete that work by the end of next month. I believe that that will provide a fresh opportunity for all key interests to find a way forward within the strategic approach that has been adopted. I have given a very clear message to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde that I expect it to redouble its efforts to reassure and encourage St Margaret's back to the table and into further discussions about future provision. Scotland's health care challenges require us to continue to shift the balance of care towards community-based services. However, we need to recognise too that, for some people with particularly complex needs, it will be necessary to ensure the availability of the most appropriate services in the right setting with the best support. That is just as important for families and carers, too. Care of the frail elderly and care for those with palliative care and end-of-life needs are, perhaps,  areas that most appropriately reflect our values for the NHS and for society more widely. Implementing the action plan for "Better Health, Better Care" provides us with an opportunity to reflect our core values in the planning and provision of services for those who are most vulnerable in our society. As Minister for Public Health, that is what I expect from NHS boards and all those who are involved in providing services. I reiterate that I look to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and the board of St Margaret's, as a provider of services to the NHS, to work together so that the local communities receive services in accordance with their needs. They can be assured that we will give every encouragement to ensure that that happens.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

In June this year, the Scottish Government published guidance for local authorities and their community planning partners on developing local strategies to address street prostitution. The guidance emphasised the importance of meeting the health care needs of those who are involved in prostitution. The Scottish Government also provided one-off funding of £1 million to assist four city local authorities in developing their response to street prostitution.

No reliable evidence suggests  that legislation that targets people who create the demand for prostitution increases the risk to those who are involved in prostitution or that prostitution tolerance zones mitigate that risk. The Scottish Government's guidance on prostitution emphasises the importance of ensuring that those involved in prostitution feel able to report crimes that are committed against them and that they are treated with respect and sensitivity when they do so. The guidance recommends the use of a police liaison officer to build relations with those involved in street prostitution and to pass on information about known dangerous offenders. The Scottish Government has no current plans to reconvene the expert group on prostitution.

I welcome Liam McArthur's motion and the opportunity to discuss the Scottish Ambulance Service's air ambulance service, and particularly the way in which it provides services to the people of the Orkney islands. Although I accept that improvements can always be made, we should take pride in our air ambulance service, which is the only publicly funded air ambulance service in the UK and is one of the most advanced services in the world. Despite the cases that Liam McArthur raised, to which I will come in a moment, the service provides a high-quality, safe and responsive service, day in, day out, across Scotland. The service that we are debating has been delivering on its performance standards across the NHS board areas. I will highlight some of those standards. Last year, the average response time to calls in life-threatening situations was 9.5 minutes, compared with the Scottish average of 8.9 minutes. The performance against the time factor that is agreed with the referring clinician improved from 83 per cent in 2004 to 91 per cent in 2007. To put that in context, in 2007, the air ambulance did not meet the agreed time factor on three occasions: two missions from Stronsay were six minutes outside the agreed two-hour time band and a mission from Westray was five hours outside it. In the latter case, the helicopter was delayed due to the weather, and although the ambulance service offered the coastguard aircraft, it was declined, because the patient was stable. As Liam McArthur rightly said, the new chief executive of the Scottish Ambulance Service, Mr Doran, said that he will look into the circumstances of the case. We need to address the lessons that arise from the handling of all air ambulance service incidents. As I said in my intervention, it is crucial that we have clarity about the nature of the response that is required and the need for continuing communication about the service that is provided.

I always take seriously any such concerns, whether they come from the public or clinicians and other health professionals. I am more than happy for Mr Doran to examine those data along with the other issues that he is considering. I suggest that occasions on which the advice from air traffic control is that the weather is below the minimum safe operating standard and the decision is taken to postpone a mission until the weather has improved or not to carry it out should not be challenged lightly, no matter where an aircraft is based. Members have mentioned GPs' concerns and the assertion that they are being pressured into agreeing to more relaxed evacuation times than they consider desirable. It seems, however, that GPs are requesting that more patients be responded to within shorter timescales, and that the ambulance service has responded to such requests. The air ambulance service controller is responsible for making the best use of the air resources that are available, against the background of the competing demands that may exist at any given time from clinicians throughout Scotland. Ultimately, however, we should remember that it must be the clinician who is caring for the patient at the scene who determines the timeframe for the air ambulance evacuation that will best meet the patient's needs. If the clinician believes that the patient requires to be transported more quickly than the air ambulance service can undertake—whether due to the weather or other pressures—the option exists for their request to be upgraded and for the Ministry of Defence, coastguard or, in some cases, a lifeboat to be called on to carry out the mission instead.

I will come on to that, but weather is important—the same situation could occur with a locally based aircraft. The Scottish Government is not complacent. We know how important it is to secure public confidence in service provision throughout Scotland, and in particular in remote and rural  areas such as the Orkney islands. Liam McArthur made that point well, and I agree with it. I know that Mr McArthur recently met Kevin Doran and that Mr Doran is keen to work with Mr McArthur and the people of Orkney more generally to try to address their concerns about service provision. I welcome Mr Doran's commitment to sit down with Orkney GPs and other relevant stakeholders to go over the service records for all the 41 inter-island ambulance service missions that have been carried out since the beginning of April. That engagement is critical if we are to find a way through the claims and counterclaims about the performance of the service in Orkney. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I regard public confidence as an indicator of the quality of service provision. The prospect of service change can be unsettling, and it requires to be handled with great sensitivity. I am aware of the current uncertainty of communities in the outer isles of Orkney as the health board develops its creating sustainable services programme. However, I assure Mr McArthur and his constituents that the Scottish Government, NHS Orkney, Orkney Islands Council and the Scottish Ambulance Service all recognise the critical interdependence between local clinical service delivery and the transport infrastructure. The considerations in the creating sustainable services programme will require all those partners and the local communities to work closely together to ensure that any proposed service change can be supported by sustainable and affordable transport services that will guarantee patients access to unscheduled care services when required. The air ambulance service currently carries out around 50 non-emergency patient transfers each year from the outer isles of Orkney. Liam McArthur has talked about his desire for an Orkney-based aircraft to be reintroduced. I re-emphasise that, at present, when those missions cannot be carried out by the air ambulance service-contracted aircraft, back-up measures exist. I do not dispute the fact that many of those missions could be carried out by a dedicated aircraft based on mainland Orkney, but nearly all of them are carried out by the ambulance service's EC135 helicopter within the agreed performance standards, therefore I have some difficulty in seeing what benefit an additional back-up aircraft would bring to those missions. That said, I look forward to the chief executive's review of the 41 missions from the outer islands.

I invite members to take account of the fact that, of the 16 populated islands that we are talking about—and if we exclude South Ronaldsay—only six have landing strips or other landing provision for a lightweight fixed-wing aircraft such as the Islander. We should remember that the remainder depend on a helicopter response or, in some circumstances, a lifeboat response. The EC135 and the MOD and coastguard helicopters do not require a landing strip and can therefore access several islands that the Islander cannot reach. I look forward to progressing the issues with the Scottish Ambulance Service's chief executive. He has made a commitment to consult more widely and to examine all the incidents and the data to which Liam McArthur referred. I hope that, in the spirit of co-operation, we can all move forward from that.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

Does the member acknowledge—this has been part of the correspondence that we have had on this case—that one of the important issues was the lack of communication of the facts of the case and about how urgent it was? Does he further acknowledge that it is absolutely crucial that communication between all parties in such cases be as good as it can be?

I will avoid any involvement in the competition over who has planted the most trees. Planting trees is not my strong point, although I have a Christmas tree that will be planted in the garden after Christmas—I hope that that counts. The importance of spaces and places as contexts for promoting general health and physical activity is generally accepted. We have discussed the specific environments of woodlands and green spaces and the role that they can play in promoting health and positive well-being. That is particularly important in Scotland because, as everyone knows, we have a rather disappointing health record, which has been exacerbated by the part that has been played by environments that we have either created or neglected. By "neglected", I mean that we have a wonderful natural resource within reach that is often not used. Foresight UK's recent report on tackling obesity made it clear that the causes of obesity are extremely complex—they encompass biology and behaviour, but those factors are set in a cultural, social and environmental framework. [ Interruption. ]

Foresight noted that our behaviour plays an important part in weight gain, but that that behaviour is constrained and shaped by today's obeso-, obesogenic, environment. [ Applause. ] Roll on Christmas. We all recognise that obesity is an increasing problem and that it poses a serious threat to health. That is why we are making tackling the problem, particularly early in life, a high priority.  Today's debate allows us to highlight the fact that although we can continue to try to treat obesity, one of our greatest challenges is to reshape the obesogenic environment. We are making progress through the strategies on diet and physical activity that contribute to children and adults achieving and maintaining a healthy weight. Over the next three years, they will be supported by the provision of an additional £11.5 million. We have spent decades making our lives more convenient, which has often meant making them more sedentary and more car bound, with less outdoor activity. Only recently have we begun to heed the calls that such developments have brought unintended consequences, which have been seen most clearly in rising levels of obesity, particularly among our children. I want to take this opportunity to reflect on the ways in which we can support people to change their behaviour. We know that too many of us are not active enough to maintain a healthy life. Scotland's physical activity strategy, "Let's Make Scotland More Active", was published in 2003 and is supported by a funded programme of activities that are aimed mainly at children and young people. Through the spending review, we have doubled that funding, with the result that a total of £12 million will be available over the next three years. Of course, encouraging people to be more active in their everyday lives spans far beyond individual initiatives. We know that people are more likely to be active as part of their everyday lives in informal outdoor settings. If children and young people learn and play in woods and green spaces at a young age, they will be more likely to be active in them as adults.

Rather than seeing that as a crucial element of Labour's amendment, I see it as a manufactured dispute that is part of the conspiracy theory that seems to be permeating the Labour Party these days. Many important points have been made, for example by Joe FitzPatrick, about the connection between mental health and well-being and the use of woodland and green spaces. There are significant psychological benefits to be gained from engagement with what have been called therapeutic landscapes. The cross-cutting nature of the work that we are  doing is important, too. The Minister for Environment told us about the contribution to that of the work of the Forestry Commission, the development of whose corporate strategy has been influenced by the national physical activity strategy. That is another example of cross-cutting government, on which this Government is focused. I say to David Whitton that there are no plans to sell off a quarter of Scotland's forest land. Perhaps he should stop scaremongering about that. Woodland and green spaces offer relatively inexpensive opportunities for people to become physically active and are truly inclusive only if barriers to using them are minimised. Access is not just about proximity. Some communities feel that woodland and green spaces are not for them, which is an issue. I say to Johann Lamont that the enhanced role for local government will strengthen the role of community partnerships in delivering in our more deprived communities the developments that we all want to happen. I agree with Robin Harper that we need to ensure that parents feel that green spaces are safe. I take the point that he made about risk taking and I will reflect on his comments. I hope that members of all parties in the Parliament will accept the motion in the spirit in which it was intended.

We will ensure that those who need antidepressants will continue to receive them while we invest in alternatives that increase choice for clinicians and service users through improved access to evidence-based interventions, including psychological therapies. We continue our aim to reduce the annual rate of increase to zero by 2009-10, and will put in place the required support framework to achieve a 10 per cent reduction in an appropriate timeframe.

I do not agree that mental health will fall off the edge because we will ensure that it is a top priority for health boards and their partners in local government. The member might be interested to know that our forward direction for mental health improvement, moving towards a mentally flourishing Scotland, is currently out for consultation. I look forward to receiving responses to the proposals that have been made, including, I hope, suggestions from the member. We will consider the most appropriate timeframe for the 10 per cent reduction in the context of that consultation. I can assure Robert Brown that with record levels of investment in the health service, mental health will continue to receive the high priority that it has had to date. I am sure that that will reassure the member.

We are working up a model that will deal with the increase in the health care resource in schools. It will include other professionals because, although we recognise that school nurses are some of the key professionals, there are other professionals—particularly those involved in mental health—who we want to bring into the health care resource base in our schools. We will be able to provide further details in the new year as that model is worked up.

We have confidence that our local authority partners see mental health as a priority, as we do. They have demonstrated that. Why would they not invest the additional resources that are required, in addition to the work that they have done so far, when they also see mental health as a priority? They will work alongside their health partners to deliver these important services. I obviously have more confidence in our local authority colleagues than the member has.

A revised Scottish dental access initiative was introduced earlier this year to encourage the establishment of new NHS dental practices and the expansion of existing ones. It builds on a range of existing measures to recruit and retain dentists in the NHS. I launched a school-based preventive service in Fife on 3 December 2007, and good progress is being made towards the establishment of a third dental school, in Aberdeen. We will work to continue to increase the dental workforce and to improve dental facilities.

There is a difference between the Scottish National Party Government and the Liberal Democrats—the Liberal Democrats might have campaigned for a third dental school, but we are delivering a third dental school. That is a sizeable difference. We are very concerned about the level of registrations and deregistrations. The member will be aware that a major expansion in facilities is coming on stream, particularly during the next year. He will be aware of the new Dumfries dental centre that is scheduled to open in his constituency in late January. That centre will provide an outreach training facility for dental undergraduates and dental therapists. In addition, the salaried service wing of the new centre will  operate with extended hours, and four dental officers will be employed there—initially to provide general dental services. The community dental service will also relocate to the new centre. I am sure the member will appreciate that that will be a major step forward in his constituency.

As I said earlier, the school-based dental service was launched successfully in Fife this week. It will focus on the most deprived communities. We will roll the service out to Tayside in the new year, and then to the Borders and to Ayrshire and Arran. We will focus on the communities with the highest levels of deprivation to ensure that we give our children the best oral health start in life.

Alasdair Morgan will be aware that we already offer substantial allowances to attract dentists to deprived communities and rural areas. We recognise the problems and will lay out in the action plan that will be published shortly some additional measures that we believe will help to address the issue he raises.

We encourage all boards to support early diagnosis of osteoporosis by ensuring that there is ready access to dual energy X-ray absorptiometry—DEXA—scanning. That is in line with Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—SIGN—guidelines and the audit that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland published in 2005. In addition, NHS Ayrshire and Arran intends to take up the option of choosing falls and bone health under the Scottish enhanced services programme for primary care, which will mean that falls co-ordinators will be appointed in each community health partnership area to improve awareness of the incidence of falls and address bone health as a health improvement issue.

I join Cathy Jamieson in congratulating the Cumnock osteoporosis support group on its hard work. I suggest that she write to me giving me the full details of the issues in Ayrshire and Arran. I will certainly make it my business to get back to her with full and detailed answers to her questions.

Richard Simpson is correct. However, boards have been encouraged to improve access to DEXA scanning, especially in the light of the results from the audit that NHS QIS published in 2005, which I mentioned, and good progress has been made. Only one mainland board—Forth Valley NHS Board—does not provide a DEXA scanning service, as Richard Simpson said. I will certainly follow up that matter with that board and find out what plans it has to make improvements to that service. I will keep the member informed about what happens.

I thank Bill Wilson for raising an extremely interesting topic, and I thank him and other members for their speeches. A number of points that we should all remember have sprung out of the debate. One is that the vast majority of young people are responsible, law-abiding citizens. Another is that good news often does not make good headlines, as Richard Simpson said. We must consider that in the context of how we deal with the media. I congratulate Scotland's Futures Forum on holding an excellent expert seminar on the social  norms approach back in October, at which the key speaker was Wesley Perkins, professor of sociology at Hobart and William Smith Colleges in New York, who has championed the social norms approach for a number of years. All of us will recall feeling pressure, as young people, to fit in with the crowd, but the social norms programmes in the United States have exposed that the reality of the crowd's behaviour can be misunderstood, and that such misconceptions can reinforce negative behaviours, such as binge drinking or smoking. As members have said, exposing those misconceptions for what they are and reinforcing majority behaviour are the keys to the success of the social norms approach. The recent study that was done at the University of Paisley draws some comparisons with the results from the United States, in that students tend to overestimate the alcohol consumption of their peers, and suggests that similar interventions could have positive results in Scotland. I look forward to reading the report of the wider study in January. However, I offer a word of caution. Although the evidence from the United States shows that that approach has merit, we know that we face significant challenges in Scotland in relation to attitudes and behaviour, and that our problems are complex. As Mary Scanlon said, we should bear in mind the fact that the cultural relationship that people in Scotland have with alcohol is different from the one that exists in the US. We also have some vivid statistics on alcohol-related illnesses and deaths, to which I will return shortly. If we are to achieve sustainable culture change, we need to educate our young people so that they can make informed, responsible decisions about behaviour such as substance use or risky sexual activity. We must empower them to make sensible choices to ensure not only that they safeguard their health, but that they do not fall foul of other problems, such as those that are linked to alcohol misuse, which include antisocial behaviour, drug misuse or unprotected sex. Government has an important role to play in supporting people to make healthier choices. We want to ensure that we communicate the benefits that our behaviour can have for our health in a clear and unambiguous way. Hugh O'Donnell highlighted the importance of that. We might be used to thinking of Government health improvement messages as warnings about what we should not do or what we should do less of, but it is just as important to give individuals and families, particularly those in our most disadvantaged communities, the tools to make more positive choices. For that reason, we are reviewing our health improvement communications, to ensure that  future campaigns offer a clear, supportive and inclusive way to positive behaviour that will lead to a healthy life. That means taking a more strategic approach that recognises that all the messages to be more physically active, to stop smoking, to eat more healthily and to consume alcohol sensibly have at their heart a basic requirement—that we feel confident about taking control of our lives and positive about making achievable changes. That is particularly important for those people who are likely to suffer from health inequalities. Our approach will take empowering individuals as its first principle and will have improving well-being, both mental and physical, as its goal. We are keen to look at evidence-based examples from around the globe and to examine whether they can be tailored for Scotland, so I have asked my officials to consider the social norms approach in more detail, with a view to conducting a pilot study on alcohol, if that would be feasible. Although the prime focus might be on alcohol initially, we will explore the scope for widening out that work to include smoking and sexual health. I will take account of the suggestions that Bill Wilson and others have made in that regard. However, as I said, we must recognise that Scotland does not have a healthy relationship with alcohol. The figures are stark: one Scot dies every six hours as a direct result of alcohol consumption and 35 people die each day as a result of smoking. We must acknowledge that we have a problem; the question is what we do about it. We are clear that a long-term, strategic approach is required if we are to tackle Scotland's complex relationship with alcohol and to denormalise excessive drinking and the behaviour that goes with it, just as we have sought to denormalise smoking. That fits in with the social norms approach. It is encouraging that awareness is growing of the problems that alcohol misuse causes, which range from short-term and long-term physical and mental health harms to antisocial behaviour and the damage that is done to our communities and to all our efforts to help Scots and Scotland reach our full potential. We are on the right path. Where do we go from here? We are committed to publishing a five-year smoking prevention action plan early next year that will aim to prevent young people from starting to smoke and becoming regular smokers. We will propose a wide range of measures, including some that are targeted at further education colleges and universities, in the light of the clear evidence that young people start to smoke or progress from occasional to regular smoking once they leave school. We will consider how the social norms agenda can help to reinforce the message about the number of young people  who do not smoke and the message that not smoking is something to aspire to. Work is under way on the long-term strategy to tackle alcohol misuse, which we aim to publish in the spring. Richard Simpson made an important point about involving young people. Following the recent debate on alcohol, we plan a summit on underage drinking that will involve young people directly in order to bed into the long-term strategy on alcohol their view on what works. We look forward to having their input. There is no single approach or magic bullet, but we are determined to achieve a healthier Scotland. Nothing is off the agenda to help us to get there. Tonight's debate has made a welcome contribution.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

Will the member give way?

A wide range of actions that contribute to children achieving and maintaining a healthy weight is delivered through implementation of the  Scottish diet action plan and physical activity strategy. Those actions are complemented by the on-going implementation of the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Act 2007. During the next three years, we will invest £4.9 million a year, in addition to increased spending on healthy eating and physical activity, in initiatives dedicated to tackling obesity. Those initiatives will include programmes to address childhood obesity through community-based and family-focused interventions. We will provide further detail on the initiatives as part of our plans on diet, physical activity and obesity, which will be published in the new year.

Physical education will be an important element of the outcomes for health and well-being that are being drafted as part of the work on the curriculum for excellence. As part of the curriculum review, a new model is being developed for managing the curriculum and the commitment on two hours of PE will be considered in the context of that work. I assure the member that physical activity among children is a priority for the Government. We will ensure that we increase physical activity levels as part of the wider strategy for tackling childhood obesity.

We are working on the best model to deliver that manifesto commitment. There is resource in the budget to take it forward. We are developing models of care, which will include health checks and increased health care capacity in schools. A range of health professionals will be involved, including nurses, because we acknowledge that other health  professionals have an important part to play in delivering the model. In rolling out increased health care capacity in schools, we will initially focus attention on schools in the most deprived communities. I hope that Margaret Curran will agree with that approach.

Future levels of funding for the development of sport will be made known following the strategic spending review announcement on 14 November 2007. In the meantime, I am sure that Mr McAveety, and even Mr Foulkes, will join me in wishing the Minister for Communities and Sport and the 2014 bid team all the best for tomorrow.

As Mr McAveety will understand, a number of discussions are taking place with local authorities on specific local bids. Those discussions are on-going and will continue after the comprehensive spending review. Mr McAveety will be aware that we have a secure budget of £298 million for the games, and a huge benefit will follow on from that for the people of Glasgow and Scotland, and particularly for people in his constituency, who will have a huge legacy if we are successful tomorrow.

As the Minister for Communities and Sport has already said in a written answer on 13 September 2007, there are currently no plans to lift the cap that was introduced by the previous Administration.

We are aware that electricity can be a more expensive fuel option than mains gas, but we have to strike a balance between the sometimes not insubstantial capital costs of preferred systems in specific circumstances and helping as many people as we can to keep warm. Mr Rumbles might be interested to know that we are running a renewable heating pilot to see whether technologies such as air-source and ground-source heat pumps would be more affordable alternatives for homes that are off the gas grid. I would be pleased to have further discussions with him about that if he so wishes.

Scottish Gas has had a number of problems in delivering the programmes, but it has now prepared a remedial plan and has given assurances that it will meet its contractual target this year. Elaine Smith can be assured that we will be holding Scottish Gas to that.

Christine Grahame will be aware that the Minister for Communities and Sport is considering how certain aspects of the policy can be improved. There is a debate to be had about whether other groups, such as those mentioned by Christine Grahame, should be included, and I am sure that the minister will be prepared to discuss that with her and with others.

The Government is currently considering funding across all policy areas as part of the Scottish spending review. All funding decisions will be announced in due course.

The Government is committed to a range of actions that will benefit town centres and support their regeneration. We are committed to reducing business rates for thousands of small businesses. We intend that measure to help kick-start the revival of town centres throughout Scotland. I am aware of the regeneration activity that is being taken forward by the Kirkcaldy renaissance partnership and I support the role of local partnerships in resolving local issues. Any further measures will have to be considered as part of the spending review.

I am hugely encouraged by the constructive tone of many of the speeches that have been made, although there were one or two surly exceptions; the debate has been a reassurance that we are on the right track. Members recognise that what is new is the bringing together of all the relevant aspects throughout Government into a national food policy that will establish the direction of travel for the entire food supply chain in Scotland. I will respond to some of the points that have been made during the debate and say a little about how we will progress from here. All the amendments—which we have indicated we will accept—make specific points about the procurement of food in the public sector, and many members have reiterated those points. I acknowledge that fresh, healthy and quality food should be the norm in our schools, hospitals and other public sector outlets and that Scottish producers, suppliers and processors should be encouraged to bid for public sector contracts. We must consider how we can encourage and support that. We must also understand better why those businesses are not bidding at present and what needs to be done to support them in competitive bidding for contracts. Rob Gibson hit on an important issue when he talked about the distribution problems that emerge. That is another issue that we must consider.

Yes, we will. The guidance dates back to 2004, so it needs to be refreshed. We are considering that as part of the strategy. As well as supporting small and local businesses in bidding for contracts, we must consider how public bodies procure food. We must get the two parts of the equation right. In areas of high food production, the chance of local suppliers becoming involved in bidding for contracts can be greater. For example, in Tayside, where local production is varied and high, it so happens that about 28 per cent of produce in the public sector is supplied from the locality—but, as several members have mentioned, that does not  translate to all parts of Scotland. We must work on that and improve it. The debate has highlighted the impact that the food sector can have on the economy. We are not starting from zero on food and health—there is the good work of hungry for success, which Sarah Boyack and others mentioned. As Mary Scanlon said, the review of the Scottish diet action plan shows that we are making progress in some areas but not in others. The review outlines several key themes, including the need to focus on closer integration between policy goals; to deliver on equality; to re-establish the grounds for engagement with the food industry; and to develop leadership to drive forward change. Whether we are environmentalists, food producers, processors or consumers, it is clear that food and food-related issues impact on us all. We need to be clear about when local food is healthier. We want to support Scottish food producers to maximise profit, but we also need to take into account our natural resources and the health of our future generations. We need a national food policy that integrates long-term and short-term thinking, and we need to tackle key areas that require action now. One of the key issues for me as Minister for Public Health is Scotland's high level of obesity, which is second only to that of the USA. As many members have said, obesity is linked to increases in several serious chronic diseases, which is why we are making tackling the problem of obesity a high priority. We already support a wide range of actions that will contribute to people achieving and maintaining a healthy weight through diet and physical activity, particularly in children's early years. Elaine Smith pointed out the importance of early palates and free school meals, and of getting those good habits in at an early stage. Where the health benefits are clear, we need to harness opportunities to support home-grown products that help our health, such as the important soft fruit industry in Tayside and elsewhere. Other action includes the Scottish Grocers Federation's healthy living programme and Community Food and Health (Scotland), which helps people who live in the most deprived and rural areas to get better access to healthier food choices—an issue that Sarah Boyack and others raised. There is the healthy living campaign, which promotes awareness of a healthier diet and encourages people to choose healthier food options; the healthyliving award, which markets the preparation and provision of healthier foods in the catering sector; and the development for the rest of the public sector of the nutritional standards that already exist in schools and prisons. Several members mentioned hospitals. Draft standards for food and nutrition in hospitals are out for  consultation. I encourage members to have a look at them, because they are an important step forward.

The Food Standards Agency is considering the issue of organic produce—we welcome that. We want more products that meet the high nutritional standards in our schools, hospitals and throughout the wider public sector. We should recognise the good progress that the Food Standards Agency is making, but we want to do more, for example on maternal and infant nutrition. Members have mentioned that. We will return with announcements on specific actions that we will take on the treatment of obesity, which should dovetail with our national food policy. There is growing interest in the origin of our food and in ethical and environmental issues. As several members said, we must take fair trade into account and build it into our policy. Of course, consumers still base purchase decisions on price. We need to ensure that nutritious, home-grown food extends beyond niche high-value markets and is available and affordable to all our communities. Local authorities have a key role to play in helping to create healthier environments and encouraging a healthier range of choices. They need to use the powers at their disposal to do that. Jamie Stone and others mentioned cooking skills, which are important. It was also important to have the skills of our Scottish chefs highlighted by Karen Gillon. We recognise that the debate has captured members' imaginations; we now want to take that forward to the whole of Scotland and gather views so that we can ensure that the policy that we develop has everybody's support. I assure Mike Rumbles that it will be very much about the action that follows that policy development. We will take that forward as a priority. I am sure that he will be pleased to hear that.

It is clear from today's constructive debate that awareness is growing of the problems that alcohol misuse causes. They range from short-term and long-term physical and mental health harm to antisocial behaviour and the damage that is done to our communities and to all our efforts to help Scots and Scotland reach our full potential. Tackling alcohol misuse is Scotland's top public health priority. As members heard in the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's opening speech, the figures are frightening: one Scot dies every six hours as a direct result of alcohol. As a nation, we have one  of the fastest-growing liver cirrhosis rates in the world, not to mention the huge cost to the NHS of that alcohol misuse. Everybody accepts that we cannot sit back and do nothing; we must think seriously about alcohol's place in Scottish society. We must make it clear that the Scottish Government is not anti-alcohol, but anti-alcohol misuse. We acknowledge that alcohol can be enjoyed sensibly and responsibly as part of a healthy lifestyle—after all, it features in many aspects of our lives, from social gatherings to celebrations—but too large a proportion of Scottish adults regularly drink more than is good for their health. We must dispel the myth that alcohol-related health harm is a problem that affects only those with a chronic alcohol dependency or so-called binge drinkers, although I recognise the harm that chronic alcoholism does to families, as Kenny Gibson showed in his personal account of that impact. We also recognise the impact of young binge drinkers, but we all have to accept that anyone who regularly drinks even a little too much can put their health and well-being at risk in both the short and the long term. It is that part of society, which includes all of us and our families and friends, that puts the real burden on the NHS, when people's drinking comes back to haunt them after a number of years. That is why it is so important, as a first step, to ask the Scottish public, through the national alcohol awareness week, "Does your drinking add up?" This week offers a fantastic opportunity to get Scots talking about alcohol, not only about units, but about their own drinking habits in relation to sensible drinking messages. It is also an opportunity to show what can be achieved when the industry, health professionals and the Government work together in partnership. I take the opportunity to thank colleagues in the Scottish-based alcohol industry for stepping up to the mark on this issue and showing leadership in promoting responsible drinking. However, as a Government, we will ask them to go further. Whether they will come with us on that journey remains to be seen. More needs to be done. The time has come to take action to match the scale of the problem of alcohol misuse in Scotland. We must ask ourselves where we want Scotland to be in 10, 15 or 20 years. If the long-term trends in increasing alcohol misuse and in alcohol-related harm continue, the future of Scotland looks bleak. We do not want to sit idly by and allow that to happen. We want to live in a country in which people live longer and enjoy better health and well-being as a result of having fewer alcohol-related problems.  We want people to enjoy a better quality of life because they are less likely to become victims of alcohol-related crime or violence and more likely to live in cleaner, quieter streets and communities. In the Scotland of the future, Scots would view as unremarkable someone deciding not to consume alcohol, either as a one-off or in the longer term, and would be able to make informed choices about their alcohol consumption and its potential consequences. Scotland should enjoy a healthy culture of sensible alcohol consumption. So how do we get there?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We will continue to deliver the commitments that have been set out in the updated plan for action on alcohol problems. I commend the previous Administration for publishing that work. However, we are clear that to complement that action, a longer-term approach is required, if we are to tackle Scotland's complex relationship with alcohol and deliver the change in attitude that we all seek. We will work together across the Government to identify effective, evidence-based interventions to tackle the problems associated with alcohol misuse. Members have heard about the range of measures that will be introduced under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, but that is only one part of the solution. The role of education is being reviewed to ensure that there is a more consistent, standardised and effective input into schools. Trish Godman requested that that be done—it is essential that it is. We need to ensure that others, such as the NHS, play their full role, recognising that much more can be achieved in partnership than can be done alone on such a complex issue. It is important that clear messages are given out, such as the chief medical officer's advice to pregnant women that no alcohol is the safest route. A number of members raised that issue during the debate.

A national licensing forum was wound up by the previous Administration. Its role was to advise on the development of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill. However, we will keep the issue of such a forum under review, and if we think that there is a place to re-establish it, we will consider that. Returning to the NHS—this is an important point—brief interventions have been shown to be  successful in leading to a reduction in alcohol consumption among harmful and hazardous drinkers. Current best practice is published as guideline 74 by the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network. It recommends that, when patients attend primary care settings with symptoms that may be linked to alcohol, staff should ask about alcohol consumption. To ensure that that is being implemented effectively, we have, as Ian McKee said, made available an enhanced service for alcohol screening and brief interventions through the Scottish enhanced services programme. Let me make it clear—as we did to the chairs of the health boards at one of our early meetings, soon after coming into government—that we expect that to be the core business of primary care. That is what GPs and other primary care staff should be doing as a matter of course, and we will ensure that that is what happens throughout health boards in Scotland. Over the coming months, we will be considering a range of options for effective interventions over the longer term, and we will consult on the new long-term strategy, setting out the direction we intend to take. We have made a start with alcohol awareness week, which we hope will pave the way for a much wider, productive debate about the place of alcohol in our society.

Does Bill Aitken not accept that the whole point of alcohol awareness week is that people should know their own drinking limits? Surely each person should assess his or her own drinking and decide whether it meets the guidelines on safe limits. The idea is to get people to look at their own drinking levels, which is exactly the point that the member made.

Would the member agree that the evidence clearly shows that rates of consumption have gone up? Where young people are concerned, there is a direct correlation between consumption and price.

We are currently examining options for taking forward that manifesto pledge.

We have a bit of a rent-a-speech going on here. We are currently considering options for delivering our manifesto commitment. We are looking at the best model for delivering the increased school-based health resource that we want in order to improve our children's health. We want to give priority to children in the most disadvantaged areas. I am sure that members will appreciate that it is important to ensure that the model is correct before we roll out the policy. I assure Jim Tolson that we will take it forward—something that the previous Administration, of which the Liberal Democrats were part, did not do.

Today's debate confirms that the free personal care policy continues to have strong support across Parliament and that there is a shared desire to ensure that the policy operates effectively. Many members have focused on the most important issue of resolving the outstanding problems for the sake of older people in Scotland. The debate has also emphasised the need for greater clarity and understanding of how the policy was, and is, intended to operate. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing noted, we inherited a number of well-documented problems with the policy from the previous Administration, and they now need to be fixed. They are not new—they have cast a shadow over the policy for the past five years.  The issues that need to be addressed are challenging and not simple, but we are not prepared to sit back and do nothing. That is not an option, which is why, even before we formed the Government, the Scottish National Party gave several unequivocal commitments on free personal care. I am pleased to confirm that we are in the process of delivering on those commitments. We have invited Lord Sutherland to establish an independent review to investigate the level of resources and their distribution to local authorities. He has confirmed that the review is making good progress and we look forward to receiving his full report in March. However, the issues surrounding the implementation of the policy are not just to do with the funding that is available to local authorities. The independent evaluation report identified various, essentially practical, issues that need to be addressed. We made a commitment to ensuring that the free personal and nursing care policy is implemented properly throughout the country, and we will deliver on that commitment. To ensure that the policy is implemented consistently and equitably, officials are engaging with local authorities to develop joint proposals. We know that we need to add clarification on issues such as food preparation and waiting lists. We recognise that full resolution of those issues might require legislation, and we have stated that we are willing to explore that option if it is the best way to fix the problems. I am in no doubt that positive engagement with local authorities will lead to the delivery of a more consistent approach to implementation of the policy, resulting in better outcomes for older people, which I believe everyone in the chamber wants. Local authorities have made it clear that they are keen to work with the Scottish Government to resolve the problem areas. That can be evidenced through our work with COSLA and our constructive engagement with local authority leaders. Officials and ministers have had several meetings with COSLA and the Association of Directors of Social Work. Another meeting will be held tomorrow, and I will meet Pat Watters again next week to take the issues forward. We have been actively engaged with the matter; in fact, we are in the middle of the resolution of many of the difficult problems that we inherited, which we are determined to resolve. We need to tackle the key issue of payments to self-funders in care homes for personal and nursing care. Since the introduction of the policy in 2002, those payments have remained static at £145 per week for personal care and £65 per week for nursing care. We have already  announced that, from April 2008, we will increase the payments for personal and nursing care in care homes in line with inflation. We believe that that is right, fair and affordable, and that it will help to resolve the issue of resources. The Scottish Government wants the very best for our older people, who richly deserve it. We want to improve their quality of life and their physical and mental well-being. This is a flagship policy and we should all be proud of it. We will enhance it and will continue to deliver it for many years to come. We want there to be cohesive services, clarity, early interventions and efficient delivery. Taken together, action in those areas will benefit many older people now and in the years to come. I reassure older people that free personal care is one of our key priorities and that we will do everything necessary to ensure that it will continue on a strong and sustainable footing.

Jackie Baillie will be aware that a report on Argyll and Bute Council's performance will be issued tomorrow. I have already arranged a meeting with the council leaders to have discussions. We are very aware of the issues, which is why we are taking speedy action to ensure that, if there are issues to be addressed, we will discuss with the council leaders what they are and how they are to be addressed. I end on an important point to do with Lord Macphail's ruling. There has been large-scale misinterpretation of what it means. It puts the obligation on the local authority to begin payments not at the point of assessment but when the local authority has a contract with a care provider. That is consistent with the guidance that the previous Administration issued to local authorities in July 2003, and it reflects the operation of the law as it stands. Local authorities must pay attention to that ruling and we and COSLA will make sure that they are aware of it. Of course, we will take opportunities to come back to Parliament as we continue to make progress with our COSLA partners in sorting out the problems that we inherited with the policy.

Will the member give way on that point?

I absolutely stand by that. Perhaps the member will explain why the previous Executive failed to sort out the confusion over the guidance?

The Lib Dem motion and many of the Lib Dem speeches send out strange messages to the Scottish public today. The first message is that the Lib Dems do not want robust waiting time guarantees. The second message is that they do not believe in strengthening patients' rights, which is in marked contrast to the view of the Lib Dems' health spokesperson at Westminster, Norman  Lamb. The third message is that they want to see investment in the private sector at the expense of the NHS. I suggest to the Lib Dems that that is not much of a vote winner.

It stands to reason that the investment in the private sector that Mr Finnie wants must come from somewhere and the only place from which it can come is the NHS. I will come back to that point in a minute. Let us be clear that good progress has been made on waiting times and we recognise the previous Administration's efforts in that area. However, there is more to be done. That is why we have set a target of an 18-week whole journey for patients. Labour supported that target, but there has been some confusion over that today. Richard Simpson said that there are circumstances in which a breach is okay, which is a marked departure from the position of the previous Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr, who did not accept any breaches in the waiting time guarantee.

That is not what Ms Curran's deputy said. He said that there would be circumstances in which the guarantee would be breached. This Government will not allow breaches to happen—we will deliver on the 18-week guarantee. On the motion's reference to the shortest waiting times, we are saying that the 62-day target for waiting times, including for cancer patients, will be met by the end of this year. We recognise that that is an important target. The motion criticises us for a supposed lack of commitment to investing in primary care facilities—nothing could be further from the truth. I have looked at the annual reviews of each health board, which have robust and commendable plans in place for primary care facilities investment. Many of those plans would be put at risk if the part of the Lib Dems' motion that wants investment in the private sector came to fruition. Such  investment can be done only at the expense of building capacity in the NHS.

In a minute. We have never said, either in opposition or in government, that it is wrong for health boards to use the private sector to address short-term capacity issues—we have no problem with health boards doing that. That has been, and will remain, our position. However, that position is different from that in the Lib Dems' motion, which proposes investing in the private sector as part of capacity building to tackle waiting times. We want to invest in the NHS and build capacity in it to reduce waiting times—that is where we differ from the Lib Dems.

NHS Borders did not ask us for permission to use more private sector capacity. What it is doing is fine; it can continue to use the independent sector—there is no problem with that. What the Lib Dems are saying is that, as part of their health strategy, they actively want to divert resources from the NHS to the private sector—we are saying no to that. We are happy for the independent sector to be used at the margins of the NHS. That practice has always been the case and it is not a problem. However, we do not want to sacrifice building NHS capacity for the sake of the private sector, which is what the terms of the motion propose.

No, thank you. I move on to patients' rights and the different approach of Norman Lamb, the Lib Dems' health spokesperson down south. He has a forward-looking vision of building up patients' rights and putting the patient at the centre of the health service. How different that approach is from what we have from the Liberal Democrats here today, which is a cobbled-together motion that desperately tries to seek agreement from the other Opposition parties, rather than outline any positive vision for the health service. The Liberal Democrats have nothing positive to say on health.  Contrast that with our position: we want to ensure that patients' rights are at the centre of what we do in the NHS.

Patients already have that right, but we want to ensure that we have the capacity in the NHS to ensure that they can be treated here instead of having to travel abroad for treatment, which Mary Scanlon highlighted in her speech earlier. The NHS will have the capacity to deliver for patients, who will not have to go abroad or to the private sector. The Government will deliver that capacity.

In Fife, as elsewhere in Scotland, we want to ensure that the NHS has sufficient capacity. Helen Eadie raised very serious issues about some of her constituents, which I have asked officials to look into. We will get back to her on that. I am concerned to hear about any issues concerning delayed discharge and people not getting the right to go home or to go into a care home, whether in Fife or anywhere else. I will write to Helen Eadie about that. Let us be clear, however, that the debate has clearly exposed Labour's feeble words. The party's leader, Wendy Alexander, talks about a patient-focused NHS. However, when it comes to putting patients' rights at the centre of the NHS, Labour votes against it.

I cannot. I am in my last minute. Labour's actions show how different the rhetoric is from the reality with the Labour Party. The Government wants to ensure that patients' rights are central to what we do in the NHS. That is what patients want and what the Government wants—we will deliver on it.

That is exactly why the cabinet secretary was pushing that point at the review of NHS 24. At every health board review, we have been talking about the need to devolve NHS 24 to a local health board area and co-locate with other out-of-hours services. Good progress is being made on that.

Does that mean that the Liberal Democrats do not support maximum waiting time guarantees?

Will the member give way?

Given that the member raised the matter at the Health and Sport Committee, I looked into it. In that case, people did not get the choice of care home that they wanted, so the delay is due to choice. I have sent in a team to examine the Fife situation. I can guarantee that, like other councils, Fife Council will meet the six-week delayed discharge target next year. I hope that the member will be reassured by that commitment.

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the 18-week whole journey target, which is one of the elements of our amendment, was a commitment made in Labour's manifesto—a shared agenda—is it not concerning that Ross Finnie said that he had ruled out maximum waiting times, which indicates where his motion is coming from? Will Margaret Curran support our amendment in guaranteeing that 18-week whole journey target?

Will the member give way?

Are the Liberal Democrats not in favour of any maximum waiting time? If they are in favour of one, what maximum waiting time do they favour?

The Scottish Government attaches the very highest importance to ensuring the dignity  and well-being of Scotland's older people. We have confirmed our commitment to the vision and actions for Scotland's ageing population set out in the "All Our Futures" document, published earlier this year. For older people with long-term care needs, we have undertaken to increase free personal and nursing care support in line with inflation from next April. We are continuing to support the vital work of bodies, such as the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, in ensuring and improving standards of care, in particular through the national care standards. We have also identified as a priority the needs of people affected by dementia.

I am aware of the case and I am very concerned about the facts that surround it. Of course, the care commission exists to ensure the highest standards and it will take the appropriate action. As Irene Oldfather said, at the moment, the case is sub judice. I am prepared to hold further discussions with the member on the matter at a future date.

Community first responder schemes are operated by volunteers who are trained by the Scottish Ambulance Service in first aid skills. They respond to emergencies while an ambulance is en route. Those schemes are an essential part of patient care, particularly in remote and rural areas. There are currently around 39 schemes across Scotland, two of which are in the Borders. I know that work is currently under way to try to develop more schemes not only in the Borders, but elsewhere in the country. I encourage more people to become involved in such a worthwhile cause.

I am aware that the British Heart Foundation is funding one of the current posts until June 2008. The post is currently filled by a paramedic who is on secondment. If the Scottish Ambulance Service believes that the post to which the member referred should be retained—as I hope it does—I would expect it to subsume the cost of the post into its budget for 2008-09.

I have listened with great interest to the issues that have been raised during the debate. I congratulate Brian Adam on bringing the debate to the chamber and Shirley-Anne Somerville on her maiden speech. It is hard to imagine what someone who has faced the undoubted difficulties and challenges of having cancer must feel like when they face yet another hurdle along the road to full rehabilitation. As Mary Scanlon said, survival rates have been improving. For example, breast cancer five-year survival is now at 80 per cent, bowel cancer survival is at more than 50 per cent and testicular cancer survival is at more than 90 per cent. More and more people are living longer with cancer, so the insurance issue that we are debating is a hurdle that more and more people will undoubtedly encounter. It seems to me that this issue is not faced only by people who have cancer or who are recovering from it, nor is it unique to Scotland. The problem is surely a common feature for a great number of people, including those with diabetes and people who have had heart surgery, a stroke, or countless other diseases and conditions that may strike any one of us at any time, as Brian Adam said. The problem applies equally to other insurance, such as life insurance, mortgage protection, income protection and critical illness cover. It is well known that insurance companies are likely to charge people who have a pre-existing condition that might increase their chance of becoming ill while on holiday increased premiums or offer an increased excess. The national health service cannot meet the costs of treatment abroad in such circumstances. The duty of NHS boards is to attend to the health needs of people who are resident in their areas in Scotland. There is no duty on boards to meet the medical costs of residents who become ill on holiday abroad. The onus is on the individual to take out suitable insurance. It follows that if the Government were to take the initiative to help people who have had cancer to obtain health insurance, a substantial body of people who have or have had other conditions might expect equal consideration.

I will come on to reciprocal arrangements. Financial services, including investment business, banking and deposit taking, collective investment schemes and insurance are reserved  to Westminster, but it is surely in all our interests to avoid discrimination by seeking to work with the industry to make progress for the benefit of people in difficult circumstances. Members might be aware that the United Kingdom has reciprocal health agreements with some countries. Except for countries in the European economic area and Switzerland, such agreements provide only for "treatment the need for which arose during the visit", which is generally taken to mean treatment for accidents and any newly diagnosed condition, and not the routine management of a long-standing condition. An unexpected exacerbation of a long-standing condition might or might not be deemed to fall within the agreements. That would depend on clinical judgment in the individual circumstances of the case. Under the terms of the European treaty, a person who was visiting another member state of the European economic area and became ill would be entitled to any necessary health care on the same basis as a permanent resident of that member state. However, the state health care systems in EEA countries vary and there might be charges for services that the NHS provides free. Treatment for a pre-existing condition is not excluded from that arrangement. The only requirement is that a person invoking treaty rights must produce a European health insurance card that has been issued in the member state in which the person is resident. The EHIC replaced form E111 in January 2006. In the UK, the EHIC is issued free to residents on request and no details of medical history are sought. Insurance companies are aware of the arrangements and should adjust travel insurance policy premiums to take account of them—companies usually warn the buyer that the policy will not cover them if they neglect to acquire an EHIC and are charged for treatment as a result. Travellers are therefore advised to take out private travel health insurance in addition to carrying an EHIC. I am advised that some brokers specialise in higher-risk cases and might be prepared to help people who have had cancer or other pre-existing conditions. As members said, the area is complex, so I welcome the efforts of Macmillan Cancer Support not only to raise awareness but to seek a practical way forward. I look forward to hearing more about the joint study between Macmillan and the Royal Bank of Scotland, which will investigate how cancer sufferers can obtain fairer travel insurance, especially as the findings could have a significant impact not only on people with cancer but on  many other people who suffer from long-term conditions. In response to Brian Adam's request, I will write on behalf of the Scottish Government to the Association of British Insurers, to highlight the issues that have been raised in the debate and to seek the ABI's views on what might be achieved through collaboration and partnership between the industry and Government. I hope that that will be of assistance to Macmillan's campaign and to Brian Adam. I thank all members who raised important issues during the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

I will speak to the motion. The draft order will raise the age for tobacco sales in Scotland to 18 years, from 1 October 2007. Making this country a healthier place is one of the top priorities for the Scottish Government and raising the age of purchase for cigarettes to 18 will help us achieve that. We have already seen the health dividends that tackling smoking can bring if we are prepared to take bold, decisive steps such as legislating for smoke-free public places. The evaluation of that legislation shows that the number of people who have been admitted to hospital with heart attacks has fallen by 17 per cent since it was introduced. We should not, however, view the smoke-free legislation as a case of job done on tobacco. We need to start with our young people by discouraging them from starting to smoke. Those who start smoking at 15 are three times more likely to die from a smoking-related disease than those who take up smoking in their 20s. Indeed, the younger people start smoking, the greater the likelihood of their continuing to smoke throughout their adult life. Raising the age limit for tobacco sales will make it more difficult for young people to buy cigarettes and it will bring the age limit into line with that for alcohol sales. It will make the law easier to enforce and it will help younger children to resist peer pressure. The draft order is part of our strategy to denormalise cigarette smoking. Raising the age for tobacco sales should not be viewed in isolation, but as part of a wider range of measures  that include prevention, education, tougher enforcement and help for young people to give up smoking. I have already committed to publishing a five-year smoking prevention action plan next year that will draw on many of the recommendations of "Towards a Future without Tobacco—The Report of the Smoking Prevention Working Group". We need more vigilance among retailers to avoid illegal sales and more effective enforcement of the law by trading standards officers. We will ensure that that happens. We are already working with retail organisations and trading standards officers to ensure that the new age limit is introduced as smoothly as possible. Subject to the order being approved by Parliament, we will launch a communications campaign to alert young people to the change in the law and we will issue information packs to all tobacco retailers. Smoking is the greatest preventable cause of premature death and ill health. I firmly believe that raising the age limit will stop more young recruits taking up the habit and reduce the terrible toll that smoking takes on Scotland's health. I urge Parliament to support the motion.

The responsibility for the overall provision of NHS dental services in an area rests with the NHS board. NHS Fife has a number of projects under way that propose to create, over the next two years, an additional 27 salaried general dental practitioner surgeries over five sites throughout Fife to help to increase access to NHS dental services in its area.

I gently remind Mr Smith that his party's Administration had eight years in which to resolve the very difficult issues in NHS dentistry. In the four months that this Administration has been in power, we have ensured that the matter has been given the highest priority in our discussions with every NHS board in Scotland. We have ensured that boards are clear about their plans to expand the salaried dental service. I can tell the member that we will leave NHS dentistry in a far fitter state at the end of our four-year term than his party did after eight years of failure.

I thank Dave Stewart for lodging his motion on diabetes and welcome the expertise that he brings to Parliament as the former secretary of the all-party parliamentary group for diabetes at Westminster. I welcome this evening's debate as an opportunity to underline the serious challenge that diabetes presents in Scotland, and to welcome the work that Diabetes UK does during diabetes week and the rest of the year to improve the lives of diabetics. As many members do, I have family members with diabetes and I know the impact that it can have. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing was delighted to support diabetes week through the launch of the campaign by Diabetes UK and the Royal National Institute for the Blind to promote awareness of the importance of retinopathy screening for people who have diabetes. When it was published, we welcomed the national framework for service change as a sound analysis of the health challenges that face us. Its conclusions remain valid and we continue to support them. As Karen Whitefield did, we welcome, too, the positive contribution that the diabetes action plan is making to diabetes care. The action plan was developed with support and contributions from a wide range of stakeholders, including voluntary groups and diabetics. It has been well received and there is, among health care professionals, a strong commitment to delivering it. It includes commitments on a number of important areas, including patient education, improving access by disadvantaged groups to services for people with diabetes, improving foot care services, implementing state-of-the-art e-health solutions, enhancing the knowledge and skills of staff, and improving access to diabetic retinopathy screening. Continuity of policies and targets is crucial where they bring benefits to patients, so we support delivery of the diabetes action plan.  I turn to the six key themes in the "Diabetes UK Scotland Manifesto 2007", the first of which is to "Support people with diabetes to look after themselves". That is an important objective, as Mary Scanlon said. It is imperative that we equip diabetics with the knowledge, skills and confidence to deal with their condition and to effectively integrate self-management into their lives so that they can improve their quality of life. Mary Scanlon mentioned blood-testing strips. As I understand it, the issue that Diabetes UK raised related more to the problem that health authorities in England were encountering with blood-testing strips, but if members have any evidence of that being an issue for health boards in Scotland, I would like to hear from them. As a Government, we believe that patients and carers should be genuine partners in the design and delivery of care—I expect that principle to be applied in the context of diabetes. Systematic structured education is a central part of diabetes care, and I welcome the emphasis that the diabetes action plan places on education and the efforts of diabetes services to extend such provision to everyone who requires it. The second key theme in Diabetes UK's manifesto is to "Retain entitlement to free prescription charges for people with diabetes". I can offer members comfort on that because we agree that diabetics should be entitled to free prescriptions and will ensure that that remains the case. We made a manifesto pledge to phase out prescription charges and we are taking steps to deliver that goal. The third theme was about diabetes education for non-specialist health care professionals. All health care professionals who care for diabetics should have the knowledge and skills to provide safe and appropriate care. We look to health boards to provide suitable training courses and support to non-specialists so that we can help shift the balance of diabetes care towards local communities. Lewis Macdonald mentioned that—it is particularly important in remote and rural areas, such as the Highlands and Islands. The fourth theme was to "Identify people with Type 2 diabetes early", which a number of speakers mentioned. Early identification of people with type 2 diabetes offers significant benefits. Providing people with appropriate diabetes care and treatment reduces the risk of complications and produces benefits for the person with diabetes and for the resources of the NHS. The keep well projects, which target at-risk groups in deprived areas, provide one  mechanism through which to reach at an early stage people who may have undiagnosed diabetes. The figures that were referred to by David Stewart show the extent of that group of people. We also have a manifesto commitment to introduce "life begins" health checks for all men and women when they reach the age of 40. Such checks could provide a systematic mechanism through which to identify people with undiagnosed diabetes and those who are at risk of developing diabetes. We will introduce plans for those checks at a later stage. The fifth theme was to ensure access to treatments and therapies. Increasing numbers of people with diabetes are receiving the regular tests that they require, and we have seen an overall improvement in the numbers of patients reaching treatment targets. We need to build on those successes and ensure that remaining service gaps are filled. I welcome the fact that the diabetes action plan highlights the need to improve access to diabetes services for disadvantaged groups and communities. I am aware that the number of people in Scotland who use insulin pumps is low in comparison with other countries. We are working with health care professionals to develop national guidance for those professionals on the use of insulin pumps, and we will monitor that through an audit. We are also exploring whether insulin pumps can be added to our drug-prescription lists to allow people who have an insulin pump to obtain their pump supplies on prescription. We expect such measures to make it easier for the people who meet the criteria for a pump to obtain one. The sixth theme is to implement the diabetes action plan by 2009 and update it to 2012. I have already emphasised that we intend to see though the objectives of the action plan, and we will look closely at the outcomes of current action plan and consider, in consultation with others, what further steps need to be taken to secure improvements in diabetes care beyond 2009. Overall, diabetes services in Scotland provide a high standard of care. There is, of course, more to do, and there are gaps in provision that need to be filled, but I congratulate health care professionals who work in diabetes on what they have achieved in recent years to improve services. We want to develop that work throughout Scotland.

The report of the Social Work Inspection Agency on Argyll and Bute Council's social work services is due for publication in late October. I will provide my response to that report once it is available and I have had time to consider its findings.

We will expect the council to act on any recommendations that the Social Work Inspection Agency may make and we will expect to see the results of that action through the new outcome-based monitoring approaches that we will develop with our local authority partners. I will keep a close eye on that process.

We recognise the real contribution that the Scottish Society for Autism and other voluntary organisations make to improving the lives of people with autism spectrum disorders and their families throughout Scotland. The Scottish Government works collaboratively with the Scottish Society for Autism, along with other voluntary sector organisations, service users and carers, on groups such as the national ASD reference group and the ASD education working group to develop appropriate and responsive services for people on the autism spectrum. We  will continue to work in partnership towards our shared goal of improving services in Scotland.

I agree with Keith Brown's comments about New Struan school, which provides excellent services. I encourage local authorities and other public bodies to use those services, and I am happy to accept the invitation to visit the school.

It is a privilege to close this debate on the health and well-being of the people of Scotland as Scotland's first Minister for Public Health. I apologise for my voice: I have the same bug as the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I was generous enough to give it to her. I hope that members will bear with me. I welcome the widespread recognition throughout the chamber of the importance of improving health and well-being. There has been a lot of consensus this morning. We have already proved that we can work together to put in place enlightened, world-leading legislation on smoking and mental health. I am greatly encouraged by those successes as well as by the support for further action that has been given today, because achieving our goals requires a long-term programme of sustained action, not quick fixes. Most important, we must join forces with the people and communities of Scotland in sustaining and improving health. The Government is determined to provide the leadership that is required and has structured government to facilitate that, but improving the health and well-being of the people of Scotland is everyone's business. For our part, ministers are committed to working together across portfolios to tackle the most important issues. We will work together to support families during children's early years of life. Pauline McNeill made an important point about that. It is with the next generation of Scots that the benefits of early intervention will generate the biggest payback. We will tackle problems such as the rising levels of childhood obesity. Children need a healthy environment that encourages them to be active and eat well. That is why we are investing £5 million in piloting free nutritious school meals for pupils in primary 1 to 3, focusing on some of Scotland's most deprived areas.

We are actively considering that as part of the comprehensive spending review. We want to build on the success of the hungry for success school meals programme, which we pay credit to the previous Administration for introducing. The overwhelming evidence is that healthy children become healthy adults and are therefore more likely to avoid diabetes and other risks to their well-being. Improving Scotland's dental health, to which several members referred, is also a priority. We need to ensure that children receive early  preventive advice and treatment, particularly in areas where children are less likely to attend for regular dental treatment. We will introduce a school-based preventive dental service that will build on the child smile programme. We want all children to have the best possible chance of growing up with good teeth and we want to reduce the number of extractions and fillings that they must endure. After the debate, I will write to Jamie McGrigor about the issues that he raised with NHS dentistry in his area. The single most pressing issue that we face is tackling health inequalities. Scotland has reversed some of the long-term trends on cancer, heart disease and strokes—several members referred to that—but the health gaps between the best-off and the worst-off are widening. We will build on what we already know about, such as the experience of the keep well programme, under which more than 8,000 health checks have been carried out so far. Later this year, we will extend the keep well service to parts of Fife, Aberdeen, Ayrshire and Glasgow and Clyde. I acknowledge the issues that Duncan McNeil raised about access to primary care services, which we take on board.

I assure the member that our approach will be outcome based. I am pleased to have been asked to chair the ministerial task force to steer cross-cutting Government activity to tackle health inequalities and to engage individuals and organisations outwith the Government in that work. I assure Sandra White that such work is intended to be outcome focused. We will get moving on that quickly. In delivering my responsibilities, I want to bring a new emphasis, energy and enthusiasm to public health. We will start with health protection legislation, which will update provisions, some of which date back to the 19 th century. We will also offer women the best possible protection from cervical cancer by introducing, from autumn 2008, a new vaccine against the human papilloma virus. The Parliament should be proud of its track record on health improvement through reducing smoking rates. Parliamentary consensus—we almost had consensus, with one exception—was crucial in delivering landmark legislation. We have developed the proposal to raise the age of tobacco purchase to 18. I hope that we can harness the spirit of co-operation and consensus in tackling what I believe to be the next health improvement priority: alcohol misuse. Working jointly with justice ministers, we  are taking action to clamp down on underage alcohol sales. Communities are right to demand action against binge drinking and the associated antisocial behaviour. We also share a wider concern about the shocking rises in alcohol-related deaths, to which Mary Scanlon referred. We must be concerned about the large proportion of the adult population, across all socioeconomic groups, whose alcohol consumption regularly exceeds the recommended weekly limits. We must address our excessive drinking culture. That is the problem not of a small minority, but of us all. Collectively, we consume too much alcohol. That position is the starting point for our action.

I very much acknowledge that, which is why I ask for the Parliament's help in leading a new debate about Scotland's relationship with alcohol and what we should do to tackle it. Mary Scanlon mentioned good mental health and well-being. We acknowledge that issue and our focus will be on early intervention and prevention. We will produce more information on that in due course. I acknowledge Angela Constance's reference to mental health and the expertise that she brings to the Parliament. She also talked about car parking charges at St John's hospital, which I will look into. The Government has—rightly—identified a healthier Scotland as one of its five strategic objectives. That lies at the heart of releasing Scotland's latent potential as a nation. Sustaining and improving health will also depend on Scots changing their behaviour, whether through changing their diet, taking exercise or changing their smoking or alcohol consumption. The Government will encourage and support people to make those changes. Today's debate is only the beginning. I look forward to working with the Parliament in our endeavour to create a healthier Scotland.

Some £15 million was allocated to Stracathro. Would the member have approved an NHS bid to deliver the same facility under the NHS if one had been put to him?

NHS Scotland announced in its "National Workforce Plan 2006" that the number of GP training posts would increase by 50 from August 2007, which means that 890 training places will be available from that date. The number of training places that NHS Scotland requires is determined by local and national workforce planning.

We encourage GPs into the salaried service and will continue to do so. We acknowledge the changing face of GPs and that many now come from different backgrounds, which is to be welcomed. We must ensure that the system supports that flexibility and we intend to make progress on that.

We are aware of such examples. Substantial assistance is available to GPs, particularly those who are located in more rural and remote areas, of which the member will be aware. The golden hello scheme pays out to GPs who establish new practices; additional payments are also available to those in rural and remote areas. Other assistance can be given to GPs who find themselves in difficulties. If the member wants to write to me specifically about his concerns, I am more than prepared to give him more details.

I pay tribute to Margaret Mitchell for bringing the debate to the Parliament and to the patients, carers and families, and people from the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association who are in the public gallery to listen to the debate. As members have noted, the debate is well timed, as it coincides with motor neurone awareness week and tomorrow is global motor neurone awareness day. Margaret Mitchell is right to raise awareness of the condition, which is perhaps the most devastating of the neurological conditions in its effects on those with the disease, those closest to them and carers. The motion praises the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association for its commitment to improving the lives of those with the disease. I am glad to have the chance to offer my thanks to the association for its valuable work in supporting people with motor neurone disease and their families, the importance of which was highlighted by Christina McKelvie in her very personal account; in increasing awareness of the condition among health and social care professionals; in promoting research; or in identifying areas in which services could be improved. The Government recognises the work of the association and supports it through the section 16B grant scheme. We said clearly in our manifesto that we wanted to work in partnership with the voluntary sector to support new ways of delivering services, since by doing so we can make an immeasurable improvement to the quality of life of people living with long-term conditions. The voluntary sector has generally led the way in promoting a person-centred approach to services, and in stimulating innovative ways of delivering services. The development of the voluntary hospices is perhaps the best example of that. The NHS has learned from that through the development of specialist palliative care units in parts of the country that do not have a voluntary hospice. We need to find a way of ensuring that that pattern applies to other aspects of service provision. We want NHS boards and their planning partners to work with  organisations such as the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association to ensure that the innovations that are introduced by the voluntary sector can become part of mainstream provision. That process frees up the voluntary organisation to continue innovating, rather than devoting a disproportionate amount of time to fundraising to sustain approaches that have already demonstrated their value. That sort of thinking is at the heart of Margaret Mitchell's motion. I have made some investigations of the services for people with motor neurone disease in the three NHS boards that are mentioned in the motion: Lanarkshire, Forth Valley, and Ayrshire and Arran. In NHS Ayrshire and Arran, everyone who is diagnosed with the disease is seen and given a full multidisciplinary assessment at the Douglas Grant rehabilitation unit at Ayrshire central hospital. They are always given priority and never have to wait for appointments. Services are kept local through outreach arrangements with the Southern general in Glasgow. The board believes that it has one of the most highly developed support services in Scotland for people with motor neurone disease. I give recognition to that this evening. NHS Lanarkshire is seeking to develop its partnership with the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association, based on the range of services that the association provides for Lanarkshire residents. The association's request for 50 per cent funding of those services is therefore under consideration. The board is discussing with the association how it can play into key pieces of strategic work. Those include the board's comprehensive review of neurological services and its revised palliative care strategy. The board will also encourage links between the association and the board's recently appointed nurse consultant for long-term conditions. NHS Forth Valley has a multidisciplinary motor neurone disease clinic, which is led by a consultant neurologist and supported by a Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association nurse. The board's managed clinical network for palliative care contributes to that clinic. I am particularly pleased to be able to say that the board has recently agreed to the association's request for a contribution to the funding of the motor neurone disease care teams. Taking account of Margaret Mitchell's general comments about boards, I intend to write to all boards to draw their attention to the terms of this debate and to encourage their active collaboration with the association. I will refer specifically to Richard Simpson's point about the principle of extending 50:50 hospice funding to the care of people with MND. I shall monitor that situation. We must be sure that people with motor neurone  disease get the best possible care, wherever they live. With that point in mind, I know that the association has been having discussions with NHS boards and a variety of other agencies about the development of a Scotland-wide managed clinical network for motor neurone disease. MCNs give a strong voice to people living with a long-term condition, the voluntary sector and those who provide the services, on the way in which those services should be developed in the future. Designation as a national MCN would bring with it funding contributed by all the NHS boards in Scotland. That funding would cover the time of the lead clinician in championing the network, the appointment of a network manager and the information technology underpinnings that such networks need. I strongly support the development of such a network on the grounds that it would promote equity of access to services throughout Scotland, improve integration of care across multiprofessional teams and develop uniformity of standards of care. The creation of such a network fits well with the work that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland currently has in hand to develop clinical standards for the provision of services for people who are affected by any neurological condition, which would include motor neurone disease. The standards need to reflect the aspects of services that matter most to the service users. In this case, that voice will be provided by the Scottish neurological alliance, of which the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association is a prominent member. Equipment and adaptations have an essential role to play. As well as making real and practical improvements to quality of life, the right equipment can support people to live independently in their own homes and help to reduce the need for home care services. With motor neurone disease, the challenge is to ensure that services respond quickly enough to people's needs. By bringing together responsibility for health and housing, we can ensure that those issues are tackled effectively. I take on board Richard Simpson's comments about support for carers. We recognise that need and will consider additional support to carers as part of the comprehensive spending review. The motion challenges us all to do the best that we possibly can for people with motor neurone disease. The Scottish Government is committed to the principle that one of the key drivers of service improvement should be the experience of people who live with long-term conditions. We must ensure that the services that treat people treat them as people, not as bundles of symptoms. That is hugely important. We also need to ensure that  services are delivered in communities to address their needs. People with conditions such as motor neurone disease deserve the best quality of life possible. I hope that I have given members assurance that we intend to build on the good work that has been done already and ensure that we develop equity of access throughout Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:31.

This has been a helpful debate. A number of important points have been made; we will reflect on those and take them forward. There has been a large degree of consensus that the policy of free personal and nursing care has been a success and that the people of Scotland have welcomed it. It currently touches and improves the lives of more than 50,000 older vulnerable people. Like many members, we regard it as a positive policy that provides an appropriate basis for the long-term care of the elderly in Scotland and delivers the desired outcomes effectively. People are receiving for free the care that many would previously have had to pay for. That, in turn, encourages people to live in their own homes for longer and enhances their physical and mental well-being. Overall, it is fair to assess the policy as having been good for older people, but there are a number of well-documented problems that need to be fixed. Christine Grahame and others highlighted those in the debate. We all recognise those problems, which is why we are engaging actively with local authorities to make sure that we develop the policy to best effect, adding real value and clarity where they are needed. Together, we and our local authority colleagues must build on the strong foundations that exist. We must ensure that we are equipped to deliver an equitable and reliable quality of service to our older people, regardless of where they stay. Therefore, we have formed two working groups with Executive and COSLA officials. Key stakeholders will be brought on board as necessary. The implementation group will consider issues arising from the implementation of the policy—including the eligibility criteria to which Richard Simpson referred—and will identify best practice to improve consistency of delivery across  Scotland. The joint improvement team is reporting to COSLA on a peer review of free personal care that it has conducted. That will be a valuable source of information. The strategic group will consider strategic issues that might need legislation or some other high-level intervention to solve them. We need to raise the bar in terms of delivery and to ensure that a consistent approach to implementation of the policy is adopted. I want good practice to be shared among local authorities to enable us jointly to improve quality of life for many older people. We owe them that. I appreciate that some aspects of the policy are clouded; we will replace that uncertainty with clarity. Different interpretations of certain aspects of the policy have led to some councils charging for services while neighbouring local authorities provide the same service for free. That is not right and it is not fair. David McLetchie, Stuart McMillan, Keith Brown and others referred to food preparation as an illustration of that problem, and I remind them all that the cabinet secretary made it clear that she is considering a legislative solution to it. Executive officials will work closely with local authorities and other stakeholders to move forward on all the issues, and I want differences to be resolved quickly. We need to be sure that we are directing sufficient resources at those who deliver the service. It simply would not make sense for us to ask local authorities to deliver a very important piece of policy if they were financially ill equipped to do so.

Part of the problem is that the legislation was not clear; that is why we have debates about it. Different people have interpreted it differently, which is why the cabinet secretary said that she will consider legislating to ensure that there are no differing interpretations.

I assure the member that officials have been in constant contact with  COSLA, which I will meet in the very near future. We have joint responsibility for taking forward the policy. It is important that Johann Lamont, Lewis Macdonald and others acknowledge that work is already going on; there are things that we want to take forward immediately, and that is what we will do. The emerging findings on resources will be considered as part of the spending review, but there is a wider issue around Lord Sutherland's review, which will specifically look at the level of resources and their distribution to local authorities. That has not been done comprehensively. There are immediate issues that can be taken forward, but we will take a wider look at the long-term sustainability of the policy. Everyone should welcome the greater transparency around the funding that will result from that.

COSLA will be involved in the long-term review that Lord Sutherland is taking forward. We are in constant negotiation and discussion with COSLA about the immediate issues that we are taking forward. As I said, some immediate issues have to be, and will be, taken forward, but the long-term sustainability of the policy also needs to be clarified. Members have mentioned sustainability in relation to how we will pay for the policy over 10, 15 or 20 years, given the demographics, which, of course, need to be looked at. It would be unfair to local authorities and older people if we were to use a distribution formula that failed to hit the mark in meeting people's needs. The review will inform us about whether change is needed in that area. I think that it was Lewis Macdonald who asked for the terms of reference for the inquiry to be placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. The cabinet secretary is happy to make them available in SPICe once they are finalised. I acknowledge fully the significant role that local authorities have to play. After all, free personal and nursing care is delivered by local authorities in Scotland and I warmly welcome their positive contribution.

Of course we want to ensure consistency in the delivery of free personal care, which is what this is all about—that is why we are here this afternoon. This Government will ensure that care is delivered consistently throughout  Scotland. The financing of that has to be looked at to ensure that it is equitable and that the distribution is right. Those issues were raised in the previous Health Committee's report, as the member is probably aware. The committee wanted a more in-depth review of the policy, which is what we will deliver. We know that delivery of the policy has not been easy, given the complexities of the legislation. Nevertheless, the policy has, largely, been delivered to good effect, although in certain areas there are real problems, which we need to resolve. I look forward to working closely with local authorities to do that. We should all want the very best for our older people, who are the most vulnerable in our society. Our aim is clear: we want to improve the quality of their life and their physical and mental well-being. I believe that the strategy outlined today will do that and put beyond all doubt what we want to achieve. We want cohesive services, clarity, early interventions and efficient delivery of services. Taken together, our actions will benefit many older people now and in the years to come. I want to deal specifically with a couple of issues that members raised in the debate that I have not yet touched on. Mary Scanlon and Jamie McGrigor both referred to the independent care home sector. We believe that that sector has an important role to play, but we also want to ensure that people are retained in their own home for as long as possible. If people require a care home, we want to ensure that places are available in the right locations. We recognise that we must ensure that care home places are where they need to be. Ross Finnie and Jackie Baillie referred to getting on with things. As I said, we will do that. Stewart Sutherland's independent review will look into the wider issues of the level and distribution of resources and their long-term sustainability. The attendance allowance is an important issue, but it is only one of many that the review will have to consider. Over the next few months, the Government will do a number of things, the first of which will be to establish an independent review to investigate the level of resources and their distribution to local authorities. [ Interruption. ]

As the cabinet secretary said, Lord Sutherland will chair the review. We will ensure that free personal and nursing care for the elderly is implemented properly across the country. We will increase the payments for personal and nursing care in line with inflation from April 2008 and we will reopen with  Westminster the issue of the attendance allowance. We believe that around £30 million needs to be transferred to the Scottish block for subsequent reinvestment in Scotland. I would be extremely concerned if anyone in the chamber disagreed with that. Let me reassure older people, their families and their carers. Free personal care is safe in our hands and we are determined that it will continue on a strong and sustainable footing. It is a positive policy that has received all-party support, and I hope that that support will continue. Since the legislation was passed in 2002, it has assisted many thousands of vulnerable older people. I believe that, with the list of actions outlined today, older people will be better served. The Scottish Government will not only enhance free personal care provision, but secure its place at the heart of our social care agenda for many years to come.

I thank Bashir Ahmad for raising the issue during carers week. We recognise the crucial role that Scotland's thousands of unpaid carers play and the importance of ensuring that they can access the support that they need. The Scottish Government is committed to intensifying efforts to take forward the conclusions of the care 21 report. Specific initiatives to improve support to carers will be considered in the forthcoming spending review. However, as a signal of our intent, I announced earlier today an additional £400,000 over the next two years to help to address two of the care 21 recommendations: we will establish a young carer forum to help give young carers a greater voice in Scottish public life and we will work with the national carer organisations to extend their piloting of carer training, helping carers—particularly new carers—to gain the knowledge and skills that they need to cope more effectively with their caring role.

Public bodies, including local authorities and health boards, are responsible for ensuring that their services meet the needs of the ethnic minority carers. Indeed, they have a legal duty to do so. Guidelines on carer assessments highlight the need for assessments to be culturally sensitive and to offer interpreting support where needed. National health service carer information strategies, which are just coming into effect, are specifically required to address the identification and information needs of carers from ethnic minority groups. In addition, I will ensure that the additional piloting of carer training that I announced earlier today includes work on training for carers from ethnic minority communities.

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing the debate and welcome the opportunity to consider difficult issues. I recognise the commitment of those who are actively campaigning on the matter and thank those in the gallery for attending the debate and for their understandable interest and concern. I put on record that I am happy to meet Des McNulty and the campaigners to discuss the issue in more detail. At the outset, I underline that the opinions and views that the First Minister expressed on Alimta in a letter to the Scottish Trades Union Congress and that I expressed only a few weeks ago have not changed. We still think that it should continue to be made available as per the SMC's standing recommendation, for all the reasons that Des McNulty and other members have given. The Government has a clear view on this issue—Ross Finnie referred to the debate on it that I initiated last September—but we have to recognise that there is a process and that Alimta is currently being assessed by NICE. The results will be considered by NHS QIS in due course. These are complex health care issues and we are discussing decisions that will affect people directly. No decisions have yet been finalised. The advice from NICE is pending. I cannot provide  members with a definitive response to a decision that has not yet been made. That would not be helpful to members, to patients and to the public in general, but I can share my thinking. Mesothelioma is a devastating condition and I offer my deepest sympathy to those who have it and to every family touched by it. There is no cure, sufferers do not live long, and their final months are not easy. As members might know, I have previously highlighted the importance that I attach to these matters. Members have spoken about the higher levels of mesothelioma in Scotland compared with other parts of United Kingdom. The disease has been attributed to Scotland's heritage of shipbuilding and past working practices that led to high exposure to asbestos fibres. There are clear links between mesothelioma and such exposure. Most sufferers are men who were exposed to asbestos in the course of their work, but others, including their families—often the women who did the washing—might also have come into contact with the fibres. The incidence of mesothelioma in Scotland ranges from 178 new diagnoses in 2000 rising to 200 in 2004. Those are the latest confirmed figures. As Des McNulty said, 62 per cent of diagnoses in 2000 and 52 per cent of diagnoses in 2004 occurred in the west of Scotland. However, in Tayside, during the five years 2000 to 2004 inclusive, 54 cases of mesothelioma were registered. In the UK as a whole, approximately 1,800 new diagnoses are made each year and we expect the figures to peak sometime between the 2011 and 2015. It is clear from tonight's debate that a number of issues could be considered in conjunction with the evidence on cost and clinical effectiveness but, as I have already said, I agree with much of what has been said tonight and previously about the features of the disease and its treatment. Alimta is licensed for the treatment of mesothelioma in conjunction with cisplatin. Many members will be familiar with the process of evaluating new drugs, but others might not and I want to touch on that subject. The SMC considers every new drug in Scotland and, on the basis of the manufacturer's evidence, recommends whether a drug should be available for use, and whether it should be made available for routine or restricted use. The SMC recommended that Alimta should be made available for restricted use as an option in the treatment of a small group of patients with mesothelioma. That very important point was made by Ross Finnie and others, and it is key to our deliberations.  A benefit of the SMC is that it makes decisions here in Scotland as early as possible once a drug becomes available. We should recognise that we have often been able to recommend new drugs ahead of other UK countries, but as medical science moves forward and further evidence becomes available, NICE may conduct a full evaluation of a drug, often alongside other treatments. Such evaluation is known as a multiple technology appraisal or MTA. An MTA considers a broader evidence base and additional research commissioned by NICE. It is easy to be blinded by the acronyms and the science, but there are real people behind the process. NICE draws on expert advice from all around the United Kingdom, taking evidence from oncologists, nurses and lay panel members. Because NICE appraisals tend to take place further down the track from the initial SMC recommendation, it is obviously prudent that we look at them and consider them. As I have said, Scotland benefits from a system to consider new drugs very quickly, but we realise that evidence can emerge after a therapy has had a period of use. That is inevitable, and it is why NHS QIS considers the outcome of NICE multiple technology appraisals and advises on whether they should apply in Scotland. The decisions are ultimately Scottish decisions; they are for people in Scotland who, I am sure members agree, would be best served by the most up-to-date evidence.  NHS QIS considers the therapy in relation to specifically Scottish contextual factors. It is NHS QIS's role to consider the implications of a range of issues on a case-by-case basis. The decision-making process takes into account the principles and values of NHS Scotland, epidemiology in Scotland—which has been an important issue in this debate—and the structure and provision of NHS services in Scotland. That provides the opportunity to ensure that the issues that we have debated tonight are fully considered. I hope that members will agree that I should not pre-empt the final recommendation from NICE, or the NHS QIS advice. However, I will seek assurances about the processes and, in the following weeks, I will consider a number of options available to me as minister. I will consider all the options and do what is in the best interests of mesothelioma patients in Scotland. As Minister for Public Health, let me be clear: I believe that interests would be best served by the continued availability of this drug to patients who, according to clinical assessment, would benefit. I can assure members that I will do my utmost to ensure that the needs of those who suffer from mesothelioma are put at the centre of any decisions about treatment and care.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

We remain committed to our manifesto pledge to phase out prescription charges and are currently considering options for delivering that goal.

I acknowledge the campaign that the member has carried out on this issue and the work that she has done with groups of people with long-term limiting illnesses. Part of our manifesto commitment was the immediate abolition of charges for people with chronic conditions, and we are currently considering options for how best to take that forward. However, she can be assured that we will be as inclusive as possible. As far as the timescale is concerned, we hope to be in a position to introduce changes around April 2008.

The keep well programme of health checks plans to provide checks for people aged 45 to 64 who are most at risk of preventable ill health. The programme will make every effort to communicate with people who have not yet had a health check and persuade them to get in touch with their general practitioner practice. The Scottish Government will also improve the health of people in the Coatbridge area through a range of other programmes, including smoking cessation services and the promotion of positive mental health and well-being.

I recognise the member's important contribution to breastfeeding. I share her concern about the fact that breastfeeding rates in some of our most deprived communities are far too low. The Scottish Government is considering how support for breastfeeding can be incorporated into its commitment to improve health. It is committed to the promotion of good eating habits from children's earliest years, which includes providing support for breastfeeding as part of a healthy food policy. I assure the member that the appointment of the adviser is expected to be made in the autumn and that that person will get the necessary resources to enable them to do the job properly.

Our manifesto commitment is to open a third dental school by expanding Aberdeen dental institute. We are currently exploring the options to deliver that commitment.

Unlike the previous Administration, this Administration will deliver on its manifesto commitments. Officials are working hard on the options at the moment, and I am hopeful that, if all goes well, we will be in a position to move forward to an implementation date of around October 2008.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Scotland's future will be decided by Scotland's people. We look forward to their decision on 3 May. Only Labour could call for a debate on Scotland's future in which its members have attempted to extol the virtues of the so-called union dividend in the same week that the party's inability at all levels of Government to address the scourge of poverty and child poverty in Scotland has been exposed. Under the union dividend almost a million people in Scotland are living in relative poverty, according to the most recent figures, which show an increase of 20,000 people in poverty on the previous year. The statistics show that the number of working-age adults in relative poverty has gone up by 30,000 to a staggering 620,000 people. Save the Children in Scotland was right to brand as "disgraceful" figures that showed a standstill in the number of children in relative poverty—250,000 children. Save the Children said: "The Scottish Executive and UK Government strategies have not gone nearly far enough—the figures are disgraceful." Behind the statistics are real people. The statistics are a shocking indictment of Labour's 10 years in power. The situation is made worse by the Brown bombshell for the lowest-paid families in our society. The doubling of taxation for low-paid families from 10 per cent to 20 per cent is a shameful attack on the poor. Gordon Brown's budget has backfired spectacularly. Low-paid and part-time workers in Scotland will be among the hardest hit by the budget, with a staggering 836,000 working Scots paying more tax under his proposals.

Of course, Mr Kerr does not mention that many people will not be eligible for working tax credit and will be much worse off under Gordon Brown's tax bombshell. We should contrast that with the SNP plans to scrap the unfair and iniquitous council tax and introduce a fair local taxation system under which nine out of 10 families will be better off. We should contrast that cut in taxation with Gordon Brown's tax rise. We have a Government that is more interested in spending tens of billions of pounds on a new Trident missile system while doubling the level of taxation on the poorest paid in our society. It is a Government that has lost its moral compass. Gordon Brown has been exposed as the reverse Robin Hood chancellor: he robs the poor in an attempt to bolster his failing leadership campaign. It must be embarrassing for Labour members to have to trot out the same tired old arguments in the debate when they know that no one is listening and that they have already lost the argument and the trust of the Scottish people. Labour has nothing new to offer the people; just the same old fears and smears, which are being roundly rejected by the Scottish people, who want a fresh approach and new leadership. They do not want to be insulted by being accused of window shopping when they have the temerity not to vote Labour.

Everybody wants full employment, but the fact is that Labour has failed to address the needs of the Scottish economy. Labour has been in Government for 10 years—what has it been doing for those 10 years? It has failed.

No, thank you—I want to move on. The people do not trust a party that tries to argue that Scotland is an economic basket case while simultaneously claiming good stewardship of the Scottish economy. That argument does not stack up and has been well and truly exposed in the past few months. The SNP is setting the agenda in the debate over Scotland's future, with a positive vision of what can be achieved with the right economic policies, the required economic powers and the ambition and new leadership to  take Scotland forward to a new prosperity that will lift those one million people out of poverty. During the campaign so far, the SNP has talked about Scotland's future and has set out its vision. Meanwhile, Labour has talked about the SNP—we thank Labour for that, although I hope that we will not have to include the costs of that publicity in our election expenses. That is welcome additional publicity for the SNP, because the more Labour talks about us, the more we are kent. Our positive vision for Scotland will transform our nation. We are committed to improving significantly Scotland's economic growth, by placing Scotland at a competitive advantage and by allowing the talent of the people of Scotland to flourish and our country's potential to be released. Only 12 per cent of Scots back Labour's case that we need no more powers for Scotland—it is clear that even the former Labour First Minister Henry McLeish is not one of that 12 per cent. The SNP's position is a popular one: to build credibility in government, to move Scotland forward and to give the people of Scotland the opportunity to choose independence in a referendum. We trust the people of Scotland to decide Scotland's future, and we ask for their trust to deliver that choice.

As I have said before, we whole-heartedly welcome the bill as a means of bringing some justice to those who are affected by mesothelioma and their relatives. I thank all the campaigners for their hard work, particularly Asbestos Action (Tayside), whose service I had the pleasure of launching in Dundee. I especially want to mention Ian Babbs, who, although greatly affected by asbestosis, has achieved a great deal. Advice and information are now available to mesothelioma sufferers in Dundee, which means that they do not have to travel to receive such specialist support. Given the health difficulties that those individuals face, we  should not underestimate the importance of providing advice as close as possible to home. I wish that that service had been in place for a lady who came to see me in, I think, 2000. Twenty years ago, she had worked in a Dundee foundry; all her life, she had been fit and healthy and could walk for miles, but suddenly she started to get breathless when she was out. She was diagnosed with mesothelioma and, indeed, died within six months of receiving the diagnosis. It proved very difficult to work through the mire of the benefits system and the claims process to provide advice and information, and had advice been available then in Dundee, things might have been much easier for the lady and her family. The bill, therefore, rights a wrong. Given that mesothelioma cases are expected to peak around 2015, we must make the claims process as quick and as simple as possible for people. It was an absolute travesty of justice to force people to make the difficult choice whether to pursue damages in their own name at a time when their health rendered them unable to take such decisions. Once the bill is passed, people will not have to face such an agonising dilemma. Indeed, that is the least that should happen, given that their suffering is no fault of their own. Of course, other corrections need to be made, one of which is the limited availability of medication for mesothelioma sufferers. Members have already mentioned Alimta; as we know, it is not a cure but at least it alleviates the symptoms of the condition. I do not want to get into that matter today—the decision of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence to recommend the withdrawal of that drug is under appeal—other than to say that it is another issue that mesothelioma sufferers and their families have to face. Depending on how the appeal goes, I am sure that we will hear more about the issue in this Parliament after 3 May. Today is all about unity of purpose. I am certainly pleased that I have been able to take part in the debate and that this parliamentary session is ending with legislation on a touchstone issue that is important not only to those who are directly affected by the condition, but to many other people who know that those individuals have been victims of an injustice for a long time now. I pay tribute to the Parliament for correcting that injustice today.

Given that we are still waiting for those options for reform and that the Parliament has only two weeks until dissolution, when and how will the outcome of the consultation be made public? Does the delay in publishing the report not do a great disservice to organisations such as the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, which my colleague Linda Fabiani mentioned, which has campaigned for some time for those who have a long-term condition to be exempt from prescription charges? Is not this unacceptable delay totally kicking the issue into the long grass?

It is not like George Lyon to repeat himself, is it? This has been a good debate, with a large degree of consensus on what needs to happen. That is positive. One issue that we all agree on is cultural and relates to Scotland's unhealthy relationship with alcohol. In that relationship, we are by no means unique in northern Europe, but we certainly have a binge-drinking culture. No one is arguing that there is a single solution. A number of issues have been raised, such as the need for education and the need to enforce existing legislation. However, we also have to consider where the gaps are. I will come back to that point in a moment. We must have an honest debate about the consequences of what we see happening in our communities, and we must consider where young people are accessing alcohol. One large supermarket was recently selling packs of 18 440ml cans of Strongbow cider on a two-for-£16 deal. That works out at a mere 44p for a can, or 19p for a unit of alcohol. Unfortunately, such offers are within the reach of too many young people. I will come back to the evidence on the link between price and the abuse of alcohol. As Kenny MacAskill said, we have to tackle the off-sales trade. A total of 50 per cent of all alcohol sold is now sold in the off-sales trade, where a bottle of cider is often cheaper than a bottle of water. The price of alcohol is an issue. As he said, a lot of progress has been made in the on-sales trade, with happy hours being curtailed. That applies in the pubs, but why are measures not being applied in the supermarkets where the same sort of two-for-one offers are rife? George Lyon quite rightly said that no one has the easy answers, which is why the SNP has highlighted a number of solutions that need to be introduced. However, he said very little about the off-sales trade. Yes, test purchasing is important—we have supported it—but it is not the only issue that must be addressed. We should consider the research on off-sales and whether we need to go further. There is already a lot of evidence about the link between off-sales and youth drinking and disorder. We only need to speak to the police in  whichever force we choose and they will tell us about the clear link between cheap off-sales and youth disorder and violence on our streets.

I suppose that we are just anxious for change—and quick change. There is already enough evidence for us to take action. However, I am sure that we will continue to debate that. George Lyon mentioned headline grabbing. Singling out for attention just one product—Buckfast—is a cul-de-sac debate. We need a sensible debate about all the measures that need to be taken. We believe that tackling the off-sales trade is one of those. Nanette Milne talked about the proliferation of licences and the role of the licensing boards in curtailing that, and she is right. In considering licence applications many licensing boards are already paying careful attention to what is already available in an area. She said that no evidence is available to link the off-sales trade's discounting of alcohol with excessive drinking. I refer her to a British Medical Association briefing, which states: "There is evidence that increasing the price of alcohol may be an effective method of reducing use by adolescents." That evidence is in the BMA board of science and education document "Adolescent health" and elsewhere. There is already enough evidence for us to take action. Stewart Maxwell talked about irresponsible advertising by supermarkets. He also mentioned the social acceptance of drunken behaviour, which he said has to change—given the 23 per cent rise in consumption in the past 10 years, I agree. Euan Robson talked about early intervention. That is an issue. We need to ensure that the next generation of Scots has a different relationship with alcohol. That is important for all of us who are parents and who worry about what the future holds for our teenagers. The funding of youth alternative activities programmes should also be addressed. We need to ensure that there are other activities for our young people so that they do not just hang out with the crowd that is drinking down the park. Stewart Stevenson talked a lot about the evidence that he had seen on the links between  alcohol abuse and crime. He was the only person to raise the important issue of violence against our health service workers, some of which is driven by alcohol abuse. Appalling behaviour is dealt with day in, day out in our accident and emergency departments and our community health services. Drink is an important factor. The SNP will not tolerate such behaviour. We need a zero-tolerance approach to any violence or aggression towards our health service staff. Rather surprisingly, given the Greens' approach to supermarkets, Patrick Harvie does not believe that the large supermarkets should be tackled on deep discounting. Campbell Martin made some important points, which we should take on board. Although we may not always have the best relationship with alcohol—we are perhaps as guilty as the rest of society—as legislators we are in the position to do something about it. The SNP wants the Parliament to tackle an important area that has not been tackled to date—the off-sales trade. This has been a good debate, and we thank everyone for their contributions.

Is not it the case that the Executive's continuing prevarication will mean that the inequities that exist in the system will persist into the future? Would not it be fairer to phase out prescription charges, as is planned by the SNP and as has been successfully implemented by the National Assembly for Wales, to end this tax on ill health?

Although the bill arose from the very tragic Miss X case in the Borders, it has—in the minds of the public, at least—focused on abuse of the elderly. As the minister pointed out in his speech, that problem certainly needs to be addressed. Indeed, I know from my previous experience as a home care manager that too many elderly people are too often at physical, mental or financial risk. However, the question that many of us have asked—and, to an extent, are still asking—is whether the bill will address that problem. I hope that it will, but it will work only if the system backs it up and only if hard-pressed social work staff are able to pick up whether a problem exists and can act accordingly. In that respect, I welcome the establishment of the adult protection committees, which will give a focus to important work surrounding the protection of vulnerable adults and will allocate responsibility. If the system does not work, that is a fundamental weakness—we know that system  failure is often highlighted in the high-profile, tragic cases that come up regularly and are put under the spotlight. There are other questions about whether support packages to keep people safe in their own homes will be put in place and whether carers who are at the end of their tether can be supported to continue to care safely and appropriately. Those questions will be answered only when we see the legislation in action. Many issues had to be addressed during the bill's passage. The minister referred to the debate about balancing the protection of the individual against their liberty and rights, including the right to be unsafe and to take risks. We are talking about individuals who have capacity, and the idea of overriding someone's consent in such a situation makes many of us feel uneasy. We will certainly watch the implementation closely, and we would suggest careful monitoring by the Scottish Executive Health Department in the first year of operation, especially if we are to satisfy some of the on-going concerns of certain groups—groups representing those with a disability were particularly concerned about the bill. The definition of an adult at risk has been amended and tightened up, with the three-limb definition, as the minister describes it. In essence, that means that being disabled in itself does not necessarily make someone an adult at risk but that other factors, such as being unable to safeguard one's own interests or being at risk of harm, have to come into play. We were pleased that the definition was changed at stage 2. Similarly, the term "abuse" has rightly been changed to "harm" to avoid stigmatising carers who may have caused harm unintentionally and who, with the right support, can continue to provide care to the person concerned. Such people are often the main carer and, if the person wants to remain in their own home, a support package must exist to take away some of the pressure that may lead to problems arising. The rights to resources and reciprocity underpin some of my previous comments and are vital to how effective the bill will be. We have to avoid giving the impression that the bill will, at the stroke of a pen, put an end to the abuse of elderly people and other adults at risk. It will not do that; it is what comes with the legislation that counts. The bill has to be backed up by changes in attitude and in the priority given to the protection of adults at risk. It also has to be backed up by adequate resources to ensure both that care packages are in place to maintain people safely in their own homes and that carers get the necessary back-up, so that the frustrations that can lead to people lashing out at the person for whom they care are avoided.  That is a challenge, given the situation in many parts of Scotland, where we know that budgets are under pressure, particularly in social work, in relation to fulfilling child protection responsibilities. I hope that we do not have to enter into a trade-off locally where competing priorities mean that adults who need to be protected come further down the list. Child protection responsibilities are very important, but we need to ensure that the resources exist so that social workers can also give priority to adults who are at risk. The bill will deliver people's expectations only if it has the right back-up and resources, and only time will tell whether that happens. With those caveats, the Scottish National Party is happy to support the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill at stage 3.

Does the minister have a sense of disappointment that so many of his own back benchers do not seem to have accepted that point, because they advocate the retention of accident and emergency services? If he cannot persuade them, how can he persuade the people of Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member aware of the recent report by the Royal College of Surgeons of England, which recommends that accident and emergency departments should serve a minimum catchment of 300,000 people? Would the member support the translation of that model to Scotland, given that that is the view of the clinicians? If so, which nine hospital accident and emergency units would he close?

I congratulate the Minister for Health and Community Care on lodging possibly the longest motion in the history of this Parliament. We decided to match it with probably the longest amendment in the history of this Parliament. In the spirit of co-operation, we agree with much in the motion and support the local service developments that are highlighted in the Executive's motion. The Scottish National Party's amendment highlights them, too. Initiatives such as the keep well service should be given our full backing and I am pleased that Dundee has been one of the first areas to benefit. We support such preventive health care measures to tackle health inequalities, particularly in light of the United Nations Children's Fund report, which was published today and shows that the United Kingdom is bottom of the league of 21 industrialised countries for child well-being. The gap between the life expectancies of rich and poor has widened, which is unacceptable for an energy-rich and wealthy nation such as Scotland in the 21 st century. We support the principle of reaching those whose health is in danger, even though they might not yet be aware of it. Men in the 10 per cent least deprived areas expect to live for 13 years longer than men in the 10 per cent most deprived areas. We have some way to go, and we compare very poorly with Norway, which has been top of the rankings for six years now. That is why a Scottish National Party Government will tackle head-on the prevention of major diseases, ill health and low life expectancy rates through our proposals to extend  the provision of primary care services in the most deprived communities. We want to focus our attention on intervention in the early years and to identify and work with children who are in danger of developing ill health in childhood that will lead to a reduced life expectancy in adulthood. Our society faces a major challenge in the increase in childhood obesity and its consequent health problems.

I certainly concur with that. The breast is best message is an important element of the many initiatives that need to be targeted at communities. I know that the matter is a major issue in Elaine Smith's constituency. One of our proposals is to double the number of school nurses to deliver school-based health checks and individual health plans. The nurses would work with parents, teachers and local health professionals to prevent bad habits from being established in many of our children who, in adulthood, may be most vulnerable to ill health and premature death. We have some concerns about the proposed changes to the new community nursing model. The proposals could be counterproductive if they diminish, rather than enhance, the health improvement role of nurses. I have written to the Minister for Health and Community Care about that and we will watch developments closely. Where we differ from the Executive is that we do not agree that we must have Hobson's choice, as if good preventive health initiatives have to come at the expense of the retention of core acute services that are delivered as locally as possible. We do not subscribe to that assertion. Given that the health budget is now reaching £10 billion, we do not believe that the public need to make that choice.

I am pleased to hear that finance is not the issue. In that case, the driver is policy. On this side of the chamber, we believe that both policies are important: people deserve to have core acute services that are delivered as  locally as possible at the same time as they are offered the preventive health measures that are being developed.

The member asks whether that is a spending commitment, but the minister has just said that finance is not the issue. We are pleased to hear that the changes are being driven not by finance but by policy developments.

No; let me develop this point. Of course, many Labour members agree with us that the Kerr report—the report from Professor David Kerr—backs the retention of core acute services, such as accident and emergency and maternity services. They have made that point in the chamber and elsewhere.

No, I need to make progress. As we have said consistently since our submission to the Kerr review more than two years ago, the SNP considers that A and E and maternity services must be delivered as locally as possible. We see merit in community casualty units not as an alternative to A and E units but as a supplement that can take pressure off overstretched A and E services such as those that we have seen closed over the past few weeks.

We are saying that the proposals to close the A and E units in Monklands hospital and Ayr hospital are fundamentally flawed. For example, the Monklands closure was based on a private finance initiative decision rather than on a clinical decision. If Mr Rumbles speaks to the clinicians in the local area, he will find that they had alternative proposals but that they were never heard because the health board had already made its decision. We need an honest debate rather than a debate that is skewed from the start for other, non-clinical, reasons. Let me be absolutely clear: as well as promoting the important initiatives that aim to tackle health inequalities, we believe that we need to tackle deprivation, which is the root cause of the majority of ill health and low life expectancy in Scotland. It  is time for Scotland to enjoy the same wealth and living standards as other small independent nations such as Ireland, Norway and Finland, which came in the top half of the UNICEF league. I have pleasure in moving amendment S2M-5572.2, to leave out from "the goal of" to end and insert: "the delivery of core acute services, such as accident and emergency and maternity services, as locally as possible while also recognising that some specialist services may need to be delivered in larger centres; recognises that "Delivering for Health" provides an opportunity to reverse the trend of further centralisation and keep services local; welcomes the additional investment in primary medical services; supports the new community hospital strategy with its focus on providing local facilities and services appropriate to modern-day demands; welcomes the establishment of the Scottish Centre for Telehealth in Grampian and the approaches it will bring to widening access to specialist services, such as seen in the tele-neurology service in Orkney; commends the shift from hospital-based provision to local access for services such as chemotherapy and dialysis and expects community health partnerships to continue to accelerate such a shift; recognises the benefits of community casualty units which can help to relieve pressure from busy accident and emergency departments; welcomes the continuing development of new staff roles and expertise as a means to carry services closer to patients; supports the community pharmacy minor ailments service as an excellent example of improved local access; supports the increasing focus of NHS Scotland on reducing inequalities between those with the best and worst health; acknowledges the contribution to improving health of services in local communities for people of all ages, from improving children's dental health in Glasgow to promoting walking for health by older people; applauds the world-leading anticipatory care "Keep well" services which tackle coronary heart disease in the most deprived communities, and welcomes the continued development of local community health partnerships as a strong and coherent response to the changing pattern of demand that NHS Scotland will face."

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to publish the initial findings of the study of the economic, social and environmental impact and cost of retaining or removing tolls from the Tay and Forth road bridges. (S2O-11903)

Given the prevarication and delay over the current and previous studies, is it not time to stop trying to kick the issue into the electoral long grass? Will the minister publish the draft report along with the evidence next week, so that the public can see exactly what their £80,000 has paid for in advance of the election on 3 May?

Given the logic of what the member says, what are the Greens' proposals for the introduction or reintroduction of tolls on all the other bridges in Scotland? Surely there has to be consistency in his argument?

On 30 March last year, I moved motion S2M-4197, which was "That the Parliament agrees that the tolls on the Tay bridge should be removed." There was much ducking and diving by Labour and Liberal Democrat members to come up with reasons not to support that motion. Almost a year later, an awful lot of water has passed under the proverbial bridge. First, we have the Tories' belated—but welcome—conversion to the principle of supporting the abolition of tolls on both bridges. Secondly, we have Helen Eadie's proposed member's bill, which is supported in the public domain by many of her colleagues—we will remind them of that at 5 o'clock tonight. Thirdly, we have the well-trailed talk of election manifesto pledges from both the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. I know that a week is a long time in politics, but it seems to be stretching it a bit to put forward an argument today that tries to dismiss the principle of abolishing the tolls on the ground of environmental impact only to do a  complete turnaround in a matter of weeks—if not days—and announce a manifesto commitment to abolish tolls on both bridges. Does not that position make the characters in "Shameless" look intellectual and principled by comparison? The Executive may think that it can fool some people some of the time, but it cannot fool all the people all of the time, despite the Liberal Democrats' efforts to make that an art form. They will be truly exposed on that at 5 o'clock tonight. There is another way. Today, the Parliament can speak with one voice and end the parliamentary session on a high by doing away with the unfairness and inequality of still having tolls on the Forth and Tay road bridges although tolls have been removed from the Skye and Erskine bridges.

The tolls would be removed in exactly the same way as they were removed from the Erskine bridge. Within a month of Parliament agreeing to a motion, the Erskine bridge tolls were gone. Why can that not happen with the tolls on the Tay and Forth road bridges? Mr Smith can lend his support to our motion here, in Parliament. He surely cannot be saying one thing out there to his constituents but another thing here. That would not stack up at all. He can be assured that we will watch what he does at 5 o'clock tonight. There are many reasons for getting rid of the tolls. Doing so would give a much-needed boost to the local economies. The economy of Dundee needs that boost because, as we know, it has had a hard time of late, with many losses in its manufacturing base. Let us be clear: even if members do not support the motion today, the SNP Administration that will be elected on 3 May will abolish the tolls. Moreover, we will expose any candidate in the elections who dares to argue in favour of the abolition of the tolls but who does not vote for that today. I end with the same question to the minister that I put to him earlier. How can tackling congestion on the Forth and Tay road bridges be a problem before 3 May but somehow—miraculously—become not a problem after 3 May? Mr Scott has some explaining to do. He must tell the people of Scotland how on earth he can say one thing here, as the minister, and say something completely different outside the Parliament on behalf of the Liberal Democrats. He will be exposed for that today.

I know how closely Bristow Muldoon is involved with Labour's election campaign. Given what he has just said, will he, on behalf of the Labour Party, rule out any manifesto commitment to abolish tolls on the Forth and Tay? Surely, such a commitment would be totally inconsistent with what he has just said.

rose—

The minister has set out his stall against removing tolls and has based his argument on increases in congestion. I take it that his position will be exactly the same after 3 May, meaning that he cannot possibly, at any point, commit the Liberal Democrats to abolishing tolls on the Forth or Tay. Surely he cannot do that.

The member will be aware that the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation—I hope that I have got the name right—will have its next meeting on 14 February. Does he agree that an opportunity  exists for a decision to be made so that we can adopt a programme as speedily as possible?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking  as a result of the response by the chief executive of NHS Scotland on 17 January 2007 to the Audit Committee's report "Implementing the NHS consultant contract in Scotland". (S2O-11817)

Is the minister aware that, in Dr Kevin Woods's response to the Audit Committee's report, he agrees with the committee conclusion that the consultant contract "is not being used to best effect" and states that, in the coming year, boards are being asked to concentrate on developing "clear plans for achieving the 1% target increase in consultant related productivity"? Why is it taking so long for work to start on meeting the target and when will the minister be able to confirm what progress has been made towards achieving what must seem to many people a very modest improvement in productivity for a vast investment of resources?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Before we make a decision on this matter in 15 minutes' time, I seek your guidance. At the Health Committee meeting on 7 November 2006, the Minister for Health and Community Care and other members—Duncan McNeil in particular—confirmed that the pilot proposals are purely a matter for the Labour Party. Is it therefore appropriate that what amounts to nothing more than a possible Labour Party manifesto commitment should be put forward today by ministers on behalf of the Executive, particularly given that they will be in no position to implement it after the election?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Given the member's comments, will he explain why he signed up to Bill Butler's bill in the first place?

Oh, come on.

Will the member give way on that point?

What support does the member have for that proposal? Who out there supports the idea?

I pay tribute to the work of Bill Butler and his bill team in developing the bill. The Scottish National Party has supported the principle of direct elections to health boards for some time, not because of some notion that it is a panacea that would resolve entirely any local  disagreements about how health service changes are managed, but because we believe that it is the right thing to do. Supporting direct elections to health boards is about saying to Scotland's people—who are, after all, the consumers of health care—that we trust them to have a strong say in what happens to local health services. That is important, given the significant disillusionment that exists and the belief that decisions in the health service are being taken by unelected and unaccountable people who have little regard for the views of the local population. Far too often, health boards make clear their preferred option at the start of a consultation process and do not deviate from it, even though the consultation process might throw up sensible alternative suggestions and options. I believe that the proposal in the bill would help to restore some of the public's confidence in how our health service is managed and delivered. I remind those members who do not think that there is a problem with public perception of Bill Butler's evidence to the Health Committee last year. He said: "according to a survey that the Executive commissioned in 2004, 73 per cent of the public feel that they have little or no influence over how the NHS is run", which represents "a rise in dissatisfaction of 16 percentage points over a survey in 2000."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 7 November 2006; c 3200.]

I am sure that there are a number of views about that and that many members of the public feel that they are not properly represented in the Parliament's decisions but, ultimately, it is for Margo MacDonald and other members to ensure that they are effective in representing the people whom they have been elected to represent. The issue that we are debating is about the public having a voice at the top table where health service decisions are made. We must acknowledge that people feel disfranchised. If we had direct elections to health boards, difficult decisions would still have to be taken, but they would be taken in an open and transparent manner and local people would be involved at the heart of the process. There are some areas of the bill that we would like to be changed at stage 2. For example, we agree with the recommendation of Fairshare Voting Reform that a single transferable vote  system would be a better way of running the proposed elections. The fact that Bill Butler mentioned the need to reflect the geographical balance in health board areas has reassured me that he is willing to take on board the committee's concerns on the issue at stage 2. Cost has been an area of debate. Predictions of what the elections would cost range from Bill Butler's estimate of £1.2 million over four years to the Executive's estimate of £5 million over that period. I suspect that the actual figure would be between those two sums.

Mr Rumbles knows how the Parliament works. It is a question of trying to persuade people of the merits of one's arguments at stage 2. That is all one can do. We know from experience that compromise is necessary so that the best elements of a bill can be progressed. We should not throw the baby out with the bath water. I am aware of the opposition to the bill of some of the professional bodies, which fear that the adoption of direct elections to health boards would prevent changes from being made to the health service at local level and would politicise the NHS. However, we would be fooling ourselves if we pretended that politics do not already feature in the NHS. The professional bodies should have a little more faith in the ability of local people to make difficult decisions and to weigh up the competing demands and pressures that arise.

I have taken two interventions and I need to make some progress. [ Interruption. ]

Surely the same arguments and concerns could be raised against involving the democratic process in the management of education or social work. Even so, I assume that the minister agrees that no one is suggesting that we do away with democratically elected local authorities. The Minister for Health and Community Care's vehement opposition to the bill and its principles is disappointing. In commenting on the balance of opinion in the committee, he should have said that, at the end of the day, the committee came down in favour of the bill. If the Executive is now saying that it will take forward only legislation that  has the overwhelming support of committees, that sheds an interesting light on some of the decisions that it has made. The minister said in evidence: "The bill is ... unnecessary. It adds nothing to the programme. Indeed, it undermines the current clear and unambiguous lines of accountability from NHS boards to ministers".—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 7 November 2006; c 3183.] I disagree. The minister is taking a rather blinkered view of the matter, which portrays little trust in those who seek to serve as public representatives on elected health boards. It is good that many of the minister's back benchers do not share that view. I refer to the 16 back benchers who supported Bill Butler's bill from the start. That is positive. I hope that the Tories may change their position in the way that Tory members of the Health Committee did. I hope that they will support the general principles of the bill. Tory members can argue their position on the percentage of elected members at stage 2. I am very surprised about the continuing reluctance of members of the party of liberal democracy to allow people to have their say on this and other matters. Surely denying the public a say in the way that our health services are delivered is not a very liberal view for them to take. Despite the opposition of Liberal Democrat members, the 16 Labour back benchers who pledged their support for the bill mean that we should have a parliamentary majority in favour of the general principles of the bill.

Surely that option is preferable to that which the minister is taking in fudging the issue by calling for pilots. Clearly, he is diametrically opposed to the principles of the bill. We require a clear mandate from the Parliament, and I hope that the Parliament will give that today.

What are the reasons for cases of MSSA being up by 100 in the past three months? Does the minister believe that the extended use of pre-admission screening in elective cases has a major role to play in combating hospital-acquired infections? Will he give the chamber an indication of whether the use of pre-admission screening has gone up in each health board area? If he cannot give us that information today, will he provide it at a later stage?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

This is a debate.

I thought the minister was summing up.

The Scottish National Party welcomes the bill, which offers one way of promoting good health and nutrition in schools. During the first session of the Parliament, I called for the removal of unhealthy products from vending machines in schools, because their presence undermines the healthy eating message that is promoted in the classroom and sends a mixed message to children. I am thankful that the Executive has come round to our view on the matter. It is essential that we ensure that minimum nutritional standards are met for all food that is provided to children in schools throughout Scotland. We welcome the health promotion duty and concur with the evidence from witnesses that health promotion will become a central component in schooling, which will reinforce the practice of providing and promoting healthy food and drink in schools. We hope that the bill will contribute to a culture change in the understanding of nutrition and health issues and that it will help to change habits, so that young children's palates are exposed to healthy food, as Fiona Hyslop said, and children do not become addicted to a diet of salt and sugar at an early age. Schools' involvement in health promotion will have an effect on the wider community, because families will become engaged. The role of parents is hugely important. We hope that children will take home their experiences in school. The SNP agrees with the Communities Committee's unanimous view that "the Scottish Executive should extend the health-promotion provisions contained in the Bill to ensure that they apply to all children in Scotland, regardless of where they are educated." Children in the independent and early-years sectors should be included. It is unfortunate that the Executive is prevaricating on that. We share the committee's concern that food and drinks manufacturers appear to produce an extremely limited range of healthy and nutritious products, particularly products that are suitable for vending machines. However, it has been  suggested to me that under European Union rules some products that meet all the nutritional standards, such as some cereal bars, are categorised as confectionery. That commonsense issue needs to be addressed, because vending machines that contain only pumpkin seeds might be of limited value. We need to get it right. We welcome the flexibility that is provided by giving local authorities a discretionary power to provide food and drink free of charge, but that flexibility should be extended to apply to school lunches, as Fiona Hyslop said. We regret that the bill does not give local authorities the flexibility to introduce free school lunches or even to pilot them. We strongly believe that a pilot should be conducted, to assess the benefits of free school lunches and consider the implications of the approach for education authority resources. Such work would provide evidence from Scotland that people on both sides of the debate could consider. We would not have to look elsewhere for evidence. We share members' concern about the challenge that is presented by vans and outlets that are close to schools, which are magnets at lunch time, particularly for secondary school students. Local authorities should do all that they can to work with outlets to promote healthier options and, if necessary, they should use their licensing powers, perhaps to set up exclusion zones around schools. An important point has been made about the use of local produce in schools. In Dundee, we are fortunate to be surrounded by berry fields and we have the Tayside berry project, which has done a lot of good work. Unfortunately, the product is brought into schools on only limited occasions. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry that Jamie Stone thinks that that is a laughing matter, but healthy food is an important issue for the Scottish National Party. We believe that it is necessary to get produce from local farms into schools to improve health. We pioneered and support many of the measures in the bill, but we realise that, alone, they will not be an adequate response to the growing levels of childhood obesity. That is why the SNP's action plan for fit, healthy young Scots contains a range of other measures, including annual fitness checks and individual health plans, to ensure that children, their parents, schools and local health professionals are all involved in a planned and managed way in the continuous improvement of children's health. That will allow potential problems to be picked up at an early stage and will encourage children to take more responsibility for their health through to adulthood. We cannot continue with the present situation, in which there are fairly low levels of obesity in primary 1 but high levels of obesity in primary 7,  and in which one in five 12-year-olds is clinically obese. That is why we need active intervention. Other measures in our action plan include an increased level of physical education and more sport through innovative sport volunteer programmes. The issue is about diet, but it is also about fitness. We need a range of measures. I hope that members will support the SNP amendment.

Given NHS 24's difficult history of dealing with its core business, can the minister assure us that it is ready and able to take on the additional work to which he refers without that affecting its core business?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in reducing local authority waiting lists for free personal care. (S2O-11644)

We welcome the comments by the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform on 13 December, when he conceded that free personal care requires to be more adequately funded. However, does the minister agree that too many people are still on waiting lists for free personal care and that it is unacceptable to expect those people and their families to wait until April for a better financial settlement? What action will the minister take now to end waiting lists, which have been operated by three quarters of Scotland's councils?

Is the First Minister aware of the discussions that are taking place as we speak with the workforce at NCR in Dundee about the future of its plant? Although we are not yet sure about the extent of the redundancies that may be announced, it is possible that the impact will be severe, especially given that there could be knock-on consequences for hundreds of jobs in the supply chain. At this stage, will the First Minister commit to using all the powers at his disposal, including regional selective assistance, to minimise the impact of any jobs that may be lost and the devastating blow that that would be for Dundee? Will he ensure that the Deputy First Minister visits NCR as a matter of urgency to discuss what assistance can be provided?

I welcome this debate, but perhaps a bit of new year's advice to the Minister for Health and Community Care is that he should calm down a little. The debate follows on from a similar debate that the Scottish National Party brought to the chamber  last September to highlight the folly of further cuts to Scotland's A and E units. The consultation processes in both Lanarkshire and Ayrshire have been accepted by many in the chamber as little short of a sham. The clearly expressed views of the public have been ignored and it is apparent that decisions were taken before the consultation process even began. In our submission to the Kerr review, the SNP was clear that we regard A and E not as a specialist service but as a core service that must be delivered as locally as possible. Although there is consensus on some of the Kerr recommendations, there is not agreement on all of them. As I and many others have said, the interpretation and implementation of the report are the critical issues. Ministerial approval has now been given to plans by NHS Ayrshire and Arran to close the A and E unit at Ayr hospital, centralising all emergency services at Crosshouse hospital in Kilmarnock. That is despite the massive opposition that John Scott outlined. Health professionals have also been at the fore of raising concerns about the potential impact on patients, given Ayrshire's geography and the current use that is made of local A and E facilities. Switching to Crosshouse, which would be the only specialist casualty unit in Ayrshire, could add at least 30 minutes to some patients' journeys. Therefore, we believe that there is a strong case to be made for retaining two A and E departments, one at Ayr hospital and one at Crosshouse hospital. That is not to say that community casualty units are a bad thing—they are not, but neither are they a replacement for core, well-located A and E services. Community casualty units should be regarded as a supplementary service, particularly in rural areas, to take some of the strain off under-pressure A and E departments. As we know, Monklands has one of the best performing A and E units in Scotland. It meets the four-hour waiting target in 94 per cent of cases and only four years ago received investment of £4 million to develop innovative ways of delivering accident and emergency services. The hospital serves some of the poorest communities in Scotland. As those communities have some of the lowest levels of car ownership, that makes it difficult for people to travel to alternative sites. There were more than 17,000 emergency admissions in 2005. Many of those people will have to be transported across Lanarkshire by ambulance, which will put enormous pressure on the ambulance service. The move will have serious knock-on consequences for the other Lanarkshire hospitals, which are already experiencing pressures.  Monklands has one of the busiest A and E units, and the second busiest is in Wishaw. Only last year, we released figures that showed that Wishaw general hospital was running at more than 20 per cent overcapacity. The pressure came to a head only this week, when Wishaw had to close its doors, taking only the most severe emergency cases. How much worse would the situation be if there was a repeat of those winter pressures with only two A and E units operating in the area? The change is extreme folly given the pressures on services—and that is before we think about the pressures on Glasgow royal infirmary and the new-build hospital at Larbert. These are bad decisions and the Executive should think again—but let me be absolutely clear: if it does not, an SNP Government will think again on both proposals. We will go further by addressing the democratic deficit in heath boards by putting local people at the heart of decision making in the health service. I move amendment S2M-5389.2, to insert at end: "particularly in the light of recent events at Wishaw General Hospital which was forced to close its doors to all but the most severe emergency cases."

rose  —

To ask the Scottish Executive when the target of 95 per cent of cancer patients starting treatment within two months of urgent referral will be met. (S2O-11332)

I remind the minister that the target was supposed to have been met by the end of last year. Is he aware that, back in July last year, he said that action would be taken to reduce waiting times, that in October last year he said that he would be closely monitoring future performance, that in March this year he said that he would closely monitor how each board performed, that in June he said that he would probe long waits, and that this month he has said that hit squads would be sent into boards that underperform? He will understand that we now want action rather than words. How can he reassure us that firm action will indeed be taken this time to address the huge regional variations that exist in cancer waiting times in Scotland? Will he commit to reporting to Parliament on an on-going basis on the progress that is being made in health boards?

Will the minister join me in congratulating the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals on its campaign to reduce the noise level of fireworks from the current level of 120dB that is specified under the 2003 act? Will he make representations to the United Kingdom Government, asking it to consider amending the act to reduce that level?

This has been a useful debate that has left the minister in no doubt about where changes to the bill are required. Euan Robson said that the bill is the mark of a civilised society. That may be true if it does what the Executive says it will do, but that is what concerns are being expressed about. He also said local authorities will be left in no doubt that they have a duty to take action to protect vulnerable adults. Of course, they should be doing that already. He said that the bill would work in the interests of clarity, but the system should already be clear. He also talked about the establishment of adult protection committees but, as Christine Grahame pointed out, that has happened already without the bill. Euan Robson made a reasonable point about  the need for the bill to provide for appropriate accommodation in relation to reciprocity. We all agree with that. Roseanna Cunningham talked about how the law of unintended consequences can haunt legislation, and that is what we are concerned about. We are not being difficult when we raise concerns; as legislators, we want to ensure that the law that we pass does what it is intended to do and does not have unintended consequences that we have to pull back from later. There is undoubtedly ambivalence about the bill, as Roseanna Cunningham said. She mentioned that various groups have expressed concern, particularly those who represent disabled people, whom the bill intends to protect. We need to listen to those who will be affected by the bill, in particular when they raise genuine concerns about the bill being patronising and taking away rights. It is the minister's duty to reassure them on those points. Roseanna Cunningham also talked about key definitions that are flawed, which has been a theme throughout the debate. She talked about equivalent and appropriate accommodation, which is similar to a point made by Euan Robson, and the necessity for the minister to accept the Health Committee's recommendations. He has accepted some recommendations, but others will be the subject of further debate. Janis Hughes talked about the need for significant amendments if the bill is to be fit for purpose. She said the bill should not be a policing mechanism. I totally agree with that, and it is of concern that the bill is being perceived in that way. She also made the point that 14 out of 18 respondents were concerned about the term "abuse", which is something that the minister has said that he will address at stage 2. We will need to see what he comes back with on that. Janis Hughes also mentioned the rights to advocacy that must be included, and we agree with that. She talked about déjà vu in referring to extensive amendments at stage 2—the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 comes to mind. There were about 600 amendments to that legislation at stage 2; I hope that we will not have to deal with so many amendments at stage 2 of the bill. I would have thought that lessons might have been learned from the 2003 act. The Executive has to get a bill right at stage 1 when it can. There will always be amendments at stage 2, but the minister must acknowledge that amending fundamental parts of a bill at stage 2 shows that it was badly drafted. We should not have to redraft fundamental elements of the bill at stage 2, but that is what we will have to do.  Christine Grahame challenged us all on the need for the bill, and she made some valid points. She talked about the fact that failure in procedures and practice was at the root of the Miss X case, and she asked whether the bill would have made any difference. The jury is out on that. She also made points that had not been made previously about the terminology in the bill. She referred to visits, to the wide ability to enter any place in the course of inquiries into an adult protection case and to the fact that the examination of records could include the examination of someone's personal information against their will. That takes us back to the issue of consent, which gives all of us—certainly Scottish National Party members—cause for concern. Christine Grahame also asked whether the lack of a right of appeal where a banning order is in place had ECHR implications, which is a valid question, and she suggested that other things, such as the speeding up of the guardianship orders process, should be happening anyway. That point was worth making, as there are concerns about that process. Christine May discussed the role of carers and their need for support. We all agree with what she said in that respect. She talked about the single point of control in the system and the creation—to an extent—of the duty to investigate. Someone will have responsibility for that duty, but it is a concern that, in Scotland in this day and age, legislation must be passed to make a duty out of something that should already be the job of someone who works in social work services. It is in that context that we must reflect on having to pass the bill. We must ensure that people are aware of their responsibilities in their work and that they receive the appropriate back-up and have enough resources to do their jobs to the best of their abilities. Jean Turner spoke about the training that will be required to ensure that the legislation is adequately implemented. Her point was well made. Unlike the rest of us, Helen Eadie was glowing about the bill. Perhaps she does not share the concerns that other members have, about which, as I said, the minister has been left in no doubt. Finally, Robin Harper talked about hate crimes against elderly people. Of course I accept what he said, but I am not sure that the bill will combat such crimes. Societal attitudes must change, but we must be cautious about always looking to legislation to fix societal problems. Education is needed to change attitudes. Legislating can sometimes seem an easy answer, but it can make problems even more difficult because it is often not the answer.  The tone of the debate and the content of speeches by members of all parties should give the minister a clear indication of what is required at stage 2. I hope that we can make the bill into legislation that will have a practical effect and will achieve what people have set out to achieve. With the caveats that I have mentioned, we are, as I have said, happy to support the bill at stage 1.

In which cases would the member think it appropriate to override the views of an adult with capacity who did not want an intervention?

The bill has had what I would describe as a difficult birth. Perhaps that is because, as I understand it, its origins lay with the Bichard proposals, from which it was disentangled. Initially, the focus was on the elderly, but the bill was broadened out to cover other groups. Whatever its background, suffice to say that it is a bill with a lot of difficulties, to which I want to turn my attention. We have no problem with parts 2 and 3 of the bill; our problems are with part 1 and, in particular, sections 3 to 38. As legislators, we have to balance the involvement of the state in people's lives, and its duty to protect vulnerable individuals, with the rights of those individuals themselves. I do not diminish the fact that that is a difficult balancing act. The first problem is who is covered by the bill. The minister said that there will be amendments at stage 2, but a bill that has to be significantly amended at stage 2 tells its own story. I hope that the Executive will reflect on the drafting of the bill for future reference. If a bill has to be substantially rewritten, that should concern everyone in the Parliament. As the minister said, the bill is widely drawn. There is potential for everybody to be covered at some stage in their lives. The definition of adults at risk includes those with disabilities and those who have temporary illnesses, but surely the fact that someone is disabled does not, in itself, make them vulnerable. The disability organisations made that point. It is someone's disability along with other factors that makes them an adult at risk. That needs to be made clear in the bill. As the Health Committee said, we need to make it clear exactly whom the bill is designed to protect. The second problem is the use of the word "abuse", which is not helpful because it is loaded and accusatory. An adult at risk might have been subject to benign neglect rather than deliberate abuse. If their carer is labelled an abuser, that will not help them to accept the perhaps badly needed help that they require to continue with their caring role. We know that the pressure on carers can cause frustration and lead them to act in a way that puts people at risk of harm, but if we are to engage in positive discussions with carers about how they can change that behaviour, the term "abuse" must change. Use of the phrase "at risk of serious harm" is one way forward to address the  problem. Clarification is needed of the bill's relationship with other legislation, including the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. It is important that adults who are covered by the bill have the same rights as those who are covered by the 2003 act, including, for example, the right to advocacy services. I hope that the minister will reflect on that. The right of officers to enter premises is a powerful provision in the bill and it should be exercised only by those who are involved in dealing with the legislation. At present, the bill gives any council officer the power to enter premises, but that must be amended. The minister acknowledged that the power is far too wide. The power to override consent is of greatest concern because it is such a fundamental issue. Let us remember that we are talking about an adult who has capacity. Surely the power to override their consent should be used only as a last resort, when all other options have been tried and it is necessary to avoid immediate harm. I am afraid that the case studies that have been given—not just by the minister, but by some of the organisations that gave evidence to the committee—are of concern. To me, they were not cases of last resort and the intervention was disproportionate. I hope that the minister notes the concern about the power to override consent. Are we really saying that someone who has a chronic alcohol problem, who refuses assistance or services but who clearly has the capacity to make decisions can be forced to accept help and may be forcibly removed from their home for their own protection? If the minister is saying that legislation should be used to do that, he is mistaken. I know from my years of experience working as a home care manager that we cannot force people to accept help even if they badly need it. The idea that home care staff should force their way into someone's house, perhaps facing verbal or even physical aggression as they do so, is not practical. No one would want to see people being moved from their home against their will, other than in exceptional circumstances. Neither of those situations is palatable, and I cannot see either happening in practice. That means that there is another danger with the legislation, because it raises the expectation that it can be used to sort out some of our difficult social problems. Clearly, the bill will not do that and it is not fair on anyone to raise those expectations. There needs to be some honesty and clarity about exactly what the bill can achieve. It cannot be used as an excuse for people not to do their jobs. In committee, we heard time and again about  cases in which, if the person responsible had been doing their job properly when there was lots of evidence that someone was at risk, the outcome would have been different. We need to be clear that, even with new legislation, if people do not do their jobs properly and are not resourced correctly, others will still be left in vulnerable situations. It is a question not just of legislation, but of what goes with it. Having said that, I believe that there is a small group of people who need protection and support but who are not currently covered by the appropriate services. The bill needs to define clearly who those people are and what assistance they can be given. There needs to be a two-way process, with reciprocity in the bill to ensure that it is not just a big stick to threaten carers and that it provides the help that is badly needed. The Executive must recognise the cross-party concern about the bill. We want to salvage something out of a badly drafted bill, and we are happy to co-operate in doing that. With reservation, and with the caveats that I have outlined, we are prepared to support the general principles of the bill at stage 1. We want the serious issues to be addressed by the minister at stage 2.

Does the minister agree that as the 187 physiotherapy graduates who are not employed in a physiotherapy post are looking to other countries for such posts, we need to get the problem fixed quickly, before Scotland loses that wealth of talent? Given that 28,000 patients in Scotland are on a waiting list to see a physiotherapist, will he agree to take firm action to ensure that we keep those Scottish graduates in Scotland?

As others have said, there is a degree of cross-party consensus on the need to address the fact that 35,000 young people are not in education, employment or training. That consensus is reflected in the recent establishment of the cross-party group on young people in Scotland not in education, employment or training, of which I have the honour of being vice-convener. I offer praise where it is due to Duncan McNeil for pushing for the establishment of the group. I welcome the input of the Smith group and the Hunter Foundation. I was pleased to attend the launch of the action plan "More Choices, More Chances" at Braeview academy in my constituency in June. I heard Sir Robert Smith talk about the national disgrace and shame of society failing those young people. He said that tackling the issue is not just a moral imperative but an  economic necessity, although I would stress that it is a moral imperative. Dundee is regarded as one of the NEET hotspots, with 14.2 per cent of young people in the NEET category. Of course, it also has the highest level of benefit claimants per thousand population in the NEET league table. There are obvious connections between poverty and achievement, which have been discussed in the debate. I welcome the fact that Braeview academy is a school of ambition; I also welcome the funding that comes with that. The focus at Braeview will be on early intervention in the under-16 group—the potential NEETs of the future—through the involvement of Careers Scotland and others. I look forward to seeing progress being made. However, I add a caveat. Staff and parents at Braeview also want to ensure that the basics are right and that we see an end to the problems from which the school has long suffered, such as staffing shortages and an overreliance on newly qualified staff. It is all very well for the First Minister to talk about science academies, but some of the pupils at Braeview did not get a science lesson for the first six weeks of the school term. We have to ensure that schools such as Braeview are attracting the brightest and best teachers—the ones who have aspirations for the children. We need more of them. The building blocks are crucial, which is one of the reasons why, as Fiona Hyslop said, it would have been useful for the Minister for Education and Young People to be here, given that so much of the discussion has been around the role of schools and the need for them to get the culture right. The culture of a school is so important, but it is also the hardest thing to measure. How do we measure the ambition and aspiration that are instilled in young people in school? Young people get to know at an early age that their life chances are being written off and that no one has any aspiration for them, whether at school or at home. A number of members have, quite rightly, made the point that the home environment is crucial. It is all very well for us to talk about what happens in school, but if the child does not get to school because of the chaotic life that they experience in the home, we have not even taken the first step. We have to ensure that we have the basics right and that the child is, if required, assisted to get to school. For example, we have to ensure that breakfast clubs, which are important in ensuring that children get a nutritious meal during the day, are in place. For some children, none of that exists, which is why our getting the basis right is so important. We must restore aspiration and ambition for the most vulnerable young people in particular and  ensure that they are not written off as no-hopers or told, as one senior teacher told a concerned parent who asked for more help for his son, "Someone has to clean the streets." I do not want that attitude to have any place in Scotland's schools in the 21 st century. If we are to be successful, not only will we have to put in place measures that will lead to the obvious benefits of having more young people stay on at school and go into further or higher education or training or employment, but, as Kenny MacAskill said, we will have to have a reduction in teenage pregnancies, alcohol and drug abuse and crime and antisocial behaviour. Most important, the vast talent of those young people is being wasted, and our opportunity to tap into that vast talent is also being wasted. I hope that the debate will be a start in ensuring that the plan not only sounds good and looks good on paper but makes a difference to the lives of young people in my constituency—and in all the other constituencies in which young people require Government intervention—and to their aspirations and hopes for their futures.

Will the member give way?

Is the minister aware of a report that was submitted to Dundee City Council's social work committee on Monday night, which shows that the number of people who are waiting for funding for a care home place in Dundee almost doubled between  May and September, from 63 to 118, and that, in the same period, the number of people waiting for free personal care rose from 17 to 30? What advice can he give my constituents who are caught up in those waiting lists? Who does he hold responsible for those waiting lists? Is it the Labour-Lib Dem coalition that runs Dundee City Council, or his own Executive?

To ask the Scottish Executive why attainment levels for Scottish Qualifications Authority examinations in Dundee are below average. (S2O-10706)

Does the minister share my concern that Braeview academy in my constituency has particular problems with SQA attainment levels? Is he aware that, although the school board has raised concerns about recruitment and retention problems at the school with Dundee City Council education department on a number of occasions over a long period, the problems continue and have a severe impact on attainment levels? When parents met me earlier this week, they expressed concern that some children had received no science teaching for the first six weeks of the new school term. I ask the minister to take those issues seriously. Will he  agree to meet the school board and me so that he can hear those parents' concerns directly?

I take it that the minister is saying that there is no barrier to NHS QIS coming up with the recommendation that the drug should be offered to patients in future. If NHS QIS reaches that conclusion, will the minister be happy with that?

I thank the members who have stayed for this debate, particularly those who signed my motion. I also pay tribute to members across the chamber who have campaigned to improve the deal of those affected by asbestos. To its credit, this Parliament has done good work on behalf of sufferers, one example of which is the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill, which was published today and will allow mesothelioma sufferers to claim full compensation and their families to claim for their own loss. Until now, people have been forced to make a distressing and unreasonable choice in that respect. I pay important tribute to those involved in campaigns in various parts of Scotland from Clydeside to Tayside and, indeed, very much welcome to the public gallery some of those campaigners. I must also thank Ian Babbs and Asbestos Action (Tayside) for their work on behalf of sufferers and their families in Dundee and the rest of Tayside. As a result of their pressure, politicians have been made to sit up and take  notice of the injustice that has been suffered by those affected by asbestos. It is predicted that, by 2025, 25,000 Scots will have died from asbestos-related diseases. Mesothelioma is a terrible lung disease caused by exposure to asbestos. It is a cancer of the lining of the lung, which is unlikely, in its early stages, to cause any symptoms. However, as it progresses, it typically causes patients to feel breathless and to experience chest pain. Men and women who worked in the foundries or on the building sites of our industrial past have been left with a silent killer that creeps up on them without notice. One of its most cruel aspects is its speed; a constituent of mine recently died within 14 weeks of being diagnosed. The speed of the disease means that people have little time to make arrangements with their families, let alone to apply for compensation. That is why Alimta has been such an important treatment and a lifeline for many sufferers who are clinically assessed as being suitable for the treatment. Around 80 to 90 per cent of sufferers in Scotland are currently getting the drug, and Alimta is the first and only chemotherapy treatment to be licensed in the United Kingdom. It is not a cure, but it has been proven to alleviate symptoms of what is a very painful disease, and it has also been shown to prolong life, with a proven survival increase of between 23 and 40 per cent, giving people a bit more time to spend with their families. It is of great concern that the guidance released in June by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence said that the use of Alimta was not considered to be cost-effective. If that is the conclusion of NICE's final report, it will lead to the drug's withdrawal next month. There are real concerns about the NICE process that has been used to assess the drug and about whether the reports on clinical and cost-effectiveness are representative of the evidence available; an appeal is likely. Relatively few people in Scotland—around 200 last year—receive Alimta, at a cost of less than £500,000. That is not a huge amount out of a predicted budget of £10 billion by 2007-08. Although the number of patients will increase as we approach 2015, the cost is unlikely to rise above £750,000 even then. Furthermore, it is not as if there are other, cheaper alternative treatments available. This is it, and it would be cruel in the extreme to withdraw the only available treatment to any group of patients. However, that is likely to be NICE's decision, and we in Scotland must decide how we will respond. The question is whether Scotland will follow suit. To date, it has been custom and practice for National Health Service Quality Improvement Scotland and the Scottish medicines consortium to  follow the recommendations of NICE, but that does not need to be the case. It is the role of NHS QIS—I apologise to those in the public gallery for the NHS jargon, which is hard to avoid—to review its decision to offer Alimta to patients in the light of the NICE recommendation, but NHS QIS guidance makes it clear that that body should consider the suitability of NICE guidance for Scotland in the light of any contextual differences, such as epidemiology. It can be shown that Scotland has some of the highest rates of asbestos-related conditions, because of our industrial past, and the number of cases is predicted to peak in 2015. That is further strengthened by the guidance which also states that NHS QIS should take account of the existing guidance of the Scottish medicines consortium. The existing advice from the SMC is clear: that Alimta should be freely available to patients with mesothelioma. In fact, the consortium's position could not be clearer. Those guidance sources, taken together, show that a clear case can be made for taking a different approach in Scotland, but political support and pressure are needed to help us to get to that position. We are looking for some comfort from the minister and an assurance that he understands the concerns that are being expressed. More important, we need him to give a clear signal to those considering the issue that the Government has a view on the matter and that its view is that Alimta should be made available to existing and future mesothelioma patients. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say, not only to this Parliament but to those people who are already affected by this terrible condition and to those who will be affected in future. I hope that he can provide some assurance to them and to their families.

To ask the Scottish Executive how research and development-intensive companies based in Dundee could benefit from a reduction in business rates. (S2O-10631)

Given the importance of the research and development sector to Dundee, does the minister understand the great disappointment and frustration of companies in that sector that planned additional research and development investment but which now find that the Executive's much-trumpeted business rate relief scheme has been kicked into the long grass? What new alternative proposals will be developed to provide specific assistance to the research and development sector in Dundee and elsewhere in Scotland? I suggest to the minister that the Scottish National Party's proposals would represent a good starting point.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there will be a reduction in training posts for junior doctors under the modernising medical careers initiative. (S2O-10557)

Does the minister appreciate that there is widespread concern among junior doctors about the new training proposals in the modernising medical careers initiative, correspondence on which is filling all our mailbags? To alleviate some of those concerns, will the minister give a clear commitment to an expansion of consultant numbers, not only to ensure that the current pool of senior house officers has a realistic chance of progressing to consultant grade, but to seize the opportunity to absorb the pool of senior house officers over the next three to five years to help sustain health services throughout Scotland?

Does the member agree that the Executive has to take some responsibility for the situation, given the fact that it has issued three different sets of guidance? Perhaps we would not have this confusion if it had got the guidance right from the start.

We should remember that, despite the difficulties with implementation, the policy of free personal care has been widely welcomed and judged to be a success. As Janis Hughes said, it was supported by all parties in the chamber, although some parties came rather later to the table than others. If we are to keep that perception, we must deal with the problems that are outlined in the committee report. If we do not, the policy could wither on the vine as public support for it falls away. The funding formula was established on a false premise, with a snapshot of the requirements of each local authority at the time. The use of such a blunt instrument led to a situation in which some councils are strapped for cash, which has resulted in waiting lists for free personal care, while other councils have an underspend. That does not mean that councils can abdicate their responsibility to provide people with their entitlement to free personal care, but it explains how some of the problems have arisen. The situation has been exacerbated by the fact that the legislation did not provide for inflationary increases, which means that there is an ever-decreasing return for the money as costs increase over time. That must be addressed urgently. The situation has been further exacerbated by the clawback by the London Treasury of the £40 million for the attendance allowance, which should be in the pot of money that goes towards care in Scotland. Members on this side of the chamber will fight hard to return that money to Scotland. The operation of waiting lists for assessment of care needs by about 75 per cent of councils  speaks volumes and cannot be allowed to continue. It is right for the Social Work Inspection Agency to go in and ensure that councils are delivering on their responsibilities, but who will go in and ensure that the Executive is delivering on its responsibility to ensure that the policy is adequately funded and that the distribution of that funding is right?

Frankly, the issue is that there is buck-passing between all levels of government. That has to end because vulnerable elderly people are caught in the middle, which is unacceptable. The distribution of funding has led to some extreme policies in certain councils. Dundee City Council refuses to pay the first 90 days of free personal care entitlement, so people who live in Dundee are financially disadvantaged because of where they happen to live. How the Executive has allowed that situation to continue is beyond me. A further problem is that the councils interpret the legislation in different ways. We had the debacle over meal preparation. The Executive brought out its new set of guidance, but it was as clear as mud to me. Again, the councils interpret the guidance in different ways, so the situation continues, with vulnerable elderly people caught in the middle. What can we do to solve the problems? Well, there are some short-term problems and some longer term problems. In the short term, we have to sort out the inflationary increase, and that has to happen quickly. We also have to sort out the waiting lists. Councils must be told that waiting lists are unacceptable and will not be tolerated. The loopholes have to be closed and the different interpretations of the guidance on meal preparation must be sorted out as a matter of urgency. There are also some longer-term problems. We in the Scottish National Party believe that there is a role for people who are independent of Government to advise on the long-term sustainability of free personal care and to examine the wider issues around the policy. We have had discussions with Stewart Sutherland and we are pleased that he agrees that a review is required to ensure the long-term sustainability of the policy. He has agreed to advise us on framing the terms of reference for such a review. We are happy and  pleased that he has agreed to do that, given his commitment to and expertise in the area. The Health Committee's inquiry was not just about free personal care and I will touch on some of the other matters that it considered, one of which is the regulation of care. The establishment of the care commission provided increased protection for elderly people and others who receive care services, but, again, there have been problems with implementation and some providers face increased regulation and duplication. That must be sorted out. Poor communication and co-operation between the care commission and councils are weaknesses, particularly when complaints and investigations arise. Only eight of the 32 councils have agreements with the care commission. Again, that is something for the Executive to resolve. The unnecessary bureaucracy around multiple registrations is a burden—particularly in relation to costs and staffing—on some of the smaller providers. The self-financing of the care commission is also a problem. The Welsh Assembly acknowledged such problems when it introduced a policy to ensure funding from the centre. Self-financing is a problem for two reasons. First, it distorts the relationship between the care commission and the providers of services because providers expect a return for the fees that they pay, yet it might be that the commission should focus on where the problem actually lies. We received evidence from the care commission that the funding situation distorts the process. The second problem is the circulation of public money in the system. Councils pay for people to be placed in care homes, but some of that money will require to go from the care home to the care commission to cover fees and so on. Public money in the system will go through a bureaucratic chain and will be of diminishing value as it does so. Surely that is not a sensible way to proceed. We back the committee's call for the end of the requirement for the care commission to be self-financing. There must be an improvement in the process for registering and investigating complaints, particularly when a complaint against a care home has been upheld. As a minimum, all the other residents in the home and the families should be made aware of the complaint and its outcome, although confidentiality should obviously be protected around certain issues.

Finally, direct payments are a way of ensuring or improving people's independence. However, there is disturbing  evidence that certain local authorities feel threatened by direct payments and are reluctant to ensure that people who receive care services are aware of the existence of direct payments. That reluctance must end. Direct payments are a threat to councils only if their services do not come up to scratch; if their services come up to scratch, there should be nothing to fear because people will want to use those services. I want the use of direct payments to be extended and the issue of individual budgets to be considered. We can ensure that people receive the services that they want only by giving them their independence.

Will the minister clarify the timescale for the review that the Executive is going to carry out? When will it be concluded?

We accept that the Government is training new teachers, but does the minister know how many of those teachers are actually being recruited into classrooms? Is not it the case that because of delays in the recruitment of teachers, the Government is relying on falling school rolls to meet its targets? I ask the minister again what progress has been made in cutting class sizes towards the 2007 target. Will he publish a report for Parliament on that subject?

Is the First Minister aware that there might well have been a major underestimation of the number of people who will complete the GP training scheme? The figure could be as many as 250 more than the 500 by which it was estimated we would be short in 2012, which would leave a shortfall of 750 GPs. In light of that, can the First Minister tell us by how many the Executive will increase the number of GP places, and when will that happen?

In our submission to the Kerr committee, we were very clear that we regarded A and E not as a specialist service but as a core service that must be delivered locally. For minor injuries units, the best model is the one that currently operates at Monklands hospital, where the minor injuries unit works alongside the A and E unit to reduce pressure on the A and E services.

I have no problem with repeating what I said about the Kerr report. I understand it as backing the provision of local services. If Euan Robson interprets it somewhat differently, I am afraid that we have different interpretations of what Kerr said.

Will the member give way?

The debate is not about saying no to any change. It is not about refusing to recognise some of the real challenges that face our health service and it is not about rejecting the Kerr report. The debate is about Parliament sending out a clear message that it believes that the process involved in Lanarkshire Health Board deciding to downgrade accident and emergency services at Monklands hospital was fundamentally flawed and that that has resulted in a deeply flawed decision. Monklands is one of the best performing A and E units in Scotland. It meets the four-hour waiting target in 94 per cent of cases and it is the most cost-effective unit: it has had the lowest cost per attendance and the lowest increase in cost over the past five years. Only four years ago, the facility at Monklands received a £4 million investment and it has developed some effective and innovative ways of delivering its accident and emergency services, which is all to the benefit of patients. When I visited the unit I was struck by the dedication and loyalty of its staff. They are a credit to the health service, which makes the decision all the harder to understand. The hospital serves some of the poorest communities in Scotland, which have some of the lowest levels of car ownership. That makes it difficult for people to jump in their car and travel to the proposed alternative sites, which will have a consequent effect on the ambulance service in the area. More than 17,000 emergency admissions were made to Monklands in 2005. The fact that many of those people will have to be transported across Lanarkshire by ambulance will put the ambulance service under enormous pressure. The move will have serious knock-on consequences for the other Lanarkshire hospitals, which are already experiencing pressures. Monklands A and E is the busiest unit. Under this  proposal it will join the second busiest unit, at Wishaw, which will result in huge pressure on the service. In June the Scottish National Party released figures that showed that Wishaw general hospital was running at more than 20 per cent over capacity. It was designed to treat 50,000 people a year, but more than 61,000 patients passed through its doors last year. Furthermore, back in April it emerged that Wishaw's A and E department had clocked up one of the longest delays recorded in Scotland when a patient was held up for almost 20 hours. It is clear to me that further reducing A and E capacity in Lanarkshire will serve only to make the situation worse, which is why we believe that there is a case to be made for the retention of all three A and E departments. The decision betrays a lack of joined-up thinking and planning and it will lead to added pressures on Glasgow royal infirmary and the new-build hospital at Larbert. Given that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is in the middle of a beds review process, the decision will impact heavily on its estimations of what is required. Furthermore, the new hospital at Larbert, which might be expected to bear the burden of referrals from the Cumbernauld area, would need to expand by 20 per cent to do so effectively. The preferred bidder has already been selected for Larbert, based on the tender needs of NHS Forth Valley alone. Best value can no longer be guaranteed if the proposed A and E services need to expand, as the preferred bidder now has an effective monopoly on any change to the plans. What about the process? In the new post-Kerr world, the bad practice of health boards consulting on plans when they had already made their mind up was supposed to be a thing of the past; there is a duty on health boards to consult properly. The Minister for Health and Community Care stated during the debate last year: "I expect people to be consulted about the case for change, and the options for change, long before a preferred solution is reached."— [ Official Report , 25 May 2005; c 17155.]  However, it seems that the bad old days are as much with us as they ever were. NHS Lanarkshire has had a preferred solution right from the start. The consultation process was a sham that sought to sell a predetermined option to an increasingly sceptical public. The decision is unacceptable to the people who use the hospital and is viewed with concern by many who work in it. It is high time that some democracy was put back into health boards. The SNP will do that by making health boards directly elected bodies. Why did the set of so-called options put forward by the health board all lead in one direction: to the closure of Monklands A and E? As we all know,  the reasons had little to do with clinical priorities and everything to do with finance. NHS Lanarkshire is running an £8.4 million deficit, which is the worst financial performance of any board in mainland Scotland. It is clear that that deficit has been one of the driving forces behind the decision. The other key issue concerning finance is the fact that the other two Lanarkshire hospitals were built under the private finance initiative. The fact that managers are tied into the remaining 25 years or so of the PFI contract has grossly distorted the decision-making process. All things have not been equal when the options have been weighed up in this case. The inherent inflexibility of the PFI contracts means that the hands of policymakers are tied for years to come. The Hairmyres contract alone runs to 350 pages and it governs everything from how many porters will be employed, to getting a light bulb changed. That squeezes out flexibility, abandons common sense and ensures that any proposal to reorder services around PFI facilities becomes from the outset an exercise in financial damage limitation. All those factors are considered in private well before the issue that matters most: the good of the patient. All are considered before the conjuror's three-card trick that passes for a consultation even sees the light of day. The decision is a bad one, which the Executive must re-examine and reverse. We have no problem with Karen Whitefield's amendment but, in order to get to vote on it, she and others who support her amendment will have to defeat the Executive amendment. Otherwise, her amendment will be pre-empted. I am sure that Karen Whitefield understands that point and will vote accordingly. Today is an opportunity for Parliament to make a stand against bad decision making and the erosion of local services. I urge members to put the interests of patients first and foremost by supporting the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament does not accept the case put forward for the downgrading of the accident and emergency unit at Monklands Hospital and calls on the Scottish Executive to re-examine its decision to approve this downgrading.

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr McConnell is very fond of praising the Centre for Confidence and Well-being, something that Margo MacDonald referred to earlier. However, there is the hypocrisy of his—and of his Labour back-bench colleagues in particular—using the first plenary debate of the new parliamentary term to talk down the ability and prospects of their fellow  Scots to manage their own affairs. Can they not see the contradiction in that? They talk down the confidence of their people and their ability to run their own affairs, but praise the Centre for Confidence and Well-being for trying to do the opposite. What a ridiculous situation to have in Scotland. My daughter gets the fairytale about Henny Penny and the sky falling in, but she is three years old and is at nursery. It is patronising in the extreme that Labour, when talking to adult Scots, is trying to use the same fairytale in relation to independence. It shows how desperate Labour has become. If any Labour politician had been brave enough to knock on a few doors over the summer, they would have realised that such scaremongering has a diminishing return, even among their own supporters—a growing number of whom now support independence. We can all agree that good health is the key to happiness, success and self-esteem. Few would differ from that opinion. Time and again, the people of Scotland place good health, through the provision of health services, at the top of their agenda. However, the Registrar General for Scotland yesterday published figures that showed life expectancy in Scotland to be 74.2 years for males and 79.2 years for females. Although life expectancy has shown an increase, huge disparities exist in Scotland, especially in the west. We remain obstinately behind all our European neighbours. We pay dearly for that—and not only in terms of lives blighted by poor health or lives cut short unnecessarily. Nicholas Crafts of the London School of Economics has written that, if Scotland were to achieve even the mortality rates of our English counterparts, the gain to our economy would be in the region of £2,900 per person, or 21 per cent of gross domestic product. That is an astonishing figure. Simply by living longer and enjoying better health, and by matching the life expectancy of people in England—which is far from exceptional by European standards—we could make our nation a fifth better off than it is at present. The prize of a healthier nation—whether cast in social terms or in crude economic terms—is one worth seeking. The question is how we can get there.

Without a doubt, there are some things that we agree on. For example, we supported the ban on smoking in public places, which was initiated by my SNP colleague, Stewart Maxwell. [ Interruption. ] If the Minister for Health and Community Care will listen for a moment, I will point out that we do not believe in opposition for  opposition's sake. When we agree, we will say that we agree. There are some good public health policies that we have agreed with. However, improvement is needed in many areas. The question is whether this Parliament can deal better with the underlying causes of ill health. The underlying causes are poverty and deprivation, and no one would argue that they are easy to fix. They cannot be fixed overnight. However, to begin to fix them we have to have powers at our disposal. The First Minister made a passing reference to challenges that still exist in tackling child poverty. What an underestimate. We have a shameful record of child poverty in Scotland. For an energy-rich nation to have any children still living in poverty is a disgrace. We on this side of the chamber want to fix the deep-rooted problems—but we can do so only if we have the powers of a normal independent Parliament. To pretend otherwise to the people of Scotland is to deceive them. When it comes to the big ideas on health, we are prepared to take Labour on. The Minister for Health and Community Care brags of record levels of investment in health. Yes, there have been record levels of investment, but what we need is better delivery. What we have are hidden waiting lists—which the minister continues to support—and hospitals that are lumbered with credit-card scale repayments because of ill-considered private finance initiative projects. In the minister's own area in Lanarkshire we have seen the debacle of accident and emergency services that are driven by PFI considerations. The minister knows that that is the case. Short termism and the ill-founded policies of the minister's Government are lumbering future generations. Scotland desperately needs and deserves a Government that will put the health of the nation at the heart of everything that it does—a Government that is prepared to tackle not only the effects but the causes of child poverty. The SNP will do just that. We are the only party with the big idea to move Scotland forward to independence, to ensure that this Parliament has the powers to deliver for the people of Scotland.

On dentistry, will Euan Robson take the opportunity to apologise to the SNP, given that he and his Labour colleagues have now adopted the SNP policy of providing bursaries for dental students, which the First Minister said was ridiculous when we suggested it?

Will the member give way?

Is the minister aware that unmet needs funding for a number of projects, including the excellent Dundee mental health and well-being counselling service, is about to end next week? I am told that that is due to the Scottish Executive's priorities changing to prevention 2010. I am sure that, along with the Minister for Health and Community Care, the Minister for Communities has a great interest in tackling health inequalities. Will he therefore agree to review, along with the Minister for Health and Communities Care, the decision to withdraw funding from the service? Surely what matters is what works in reducing health inequalities, which should not be dependent on the Scottish Executive constantly chopping and changing funding streams.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the funding structure for local authorities to meet its commitment on free personal care, in light of the Health Committee's care inquiry report. (S2O-10245)

The minister will be aware of the Health Committee's disappointment that he did not appear before it, given the nature of the financial questions that were in front of the committee. Can he give us a commitment today that he will very much involve himself in the committee's recommendations? I refer in particular to the lack of inflationary increase—such an increase was not built into the legislation—which should be addressed and to the review of funding, which should take account of the collective and individual finance that is provided to local authorities for free personal care.

Given the difficulties with waiting times for audiology services, will the minister consider setting a waiting-time target for the services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action will be taken to ensure that waiting time targets for urgent referrals for people with cancer are met. (S2O-10082)

I am pleased that the minister shares my concerns, but the past few sets of statistics have shown that in some of the areas in which the targets on particular cancers have not been met, the situation has worsened. We know in which health board areas there are particular problems. What action can the minister guarantee will be taken to ensure that the next time we get the statistics for urgent referrals there are signs of improvement in those specific areas?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister will have seen from the report that Dundee's position has worsened relative to the Scottish average on all four deprivation indicators. What messages of reassurance can the minister give that there will be any change or difference in the Administration's policy programme to make that situation better? What reassurance can he give other than warm words?

The minister mentions clinicians' judgments. Is he concerned about the comments made by ear, nose and throat surgeon Clive Davis, who said that clinicians have been asked to defer cancer cases so that patients who need to have their wisdom teeth removed can have the operation done on time? If he is concerned, will he institute an inquiry into whether such practices are common within the health service? What will he do to ensure that such practices never happen again?

Does the minister think that his job of selling the delivering for health agenda is made easier or harder by the interventions of Ms Whitefield, Mr Reid and other Labour colleagues of his in campaigns against changes to accident and emergency services? I have sympathy with the views of his colleagues. Why should the public be persuaded by his strategy, given that so many of his Labour colleagues are not persuaded by it?

The minister will be aware that schedule 1 to the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 is explicit: the preparation of food should not be charged for. What discussions has he had with local authorities, half of which have been charging for meal preparation? Should the Executive make it clear to all local authorities that no one should be charged for meal preparation, what financial discussions will the minister have with local authorities?

Come 1 April, how will the Executive guarantee that people who are not registered with an NHS dentist will be  able to get the free dental check to which they are entitled?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

It is interesting that Mr Arbuckle mentioned his Lib Dem colleague on the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board. Would that perhaps be Margaret Taylor? She is quoted today as saying: "Councillor Andrew Arbuckle"— I take it that that is Andrew Arbuckle MSP— "and myself welcome the unanimous support we are now getting from other members of the Tay Road Bridge Board since the publication of a review of the bridges at the beginning of March. If the motion for the removal of the tolls is passed, then this will, I hope, put great pressure on the Scottish Executive to abolish the tolls on both the Tay and Forth." Will Mr Arbuckle distance himself from his colleague Margaret Taylor, who clearly thinks that he is on her side?

Will the minister give way?

Given that the minister has just reiterated exactly the same arguments as he made before and that he said that there has been no change in his position, what is the point in having another review, as the Executive amendment proposes?

Many MSPs across all parties wish to see tolls on the Tay bridge removed. Today is an opportunity for Parliament to make its voice heard on the issue. If all the MSPs across all parties who have said publicly that they support the removal of the tolls from the Tay bridge vote for the motion later today, the Executive will have no choice but to heed the will of the Parliament and to remove the tolls from the Tay at the earliest opportunity. I will outline why we believe that the tolls should go now. It is unfair that tolls should remain on the Tay bridge when they have been removed from the Skye bridge at a cost of £27 million and will be removed from the Erskine bridge tomorrow at an annual cost of £4 million plus maintenance costs.

It took a month for the Executive to remove the Erskine tolls. That gives a clear timescale in which it could remove tolls from the Tay bridge—the process should take no longer than that. It is not fair that the people of Tayside and Fife should be penalised by the tolls remaining in place. Scottish National Party members believe firmly that tolls should also be removed from the Forth bridge. We recognise that more members of the Parliament have to be persuaded of that case, but we hope that that will happen in due course. A vote today to remove tolls from the Tay would be a step in that direction and an important element of that campaign. The arguments from the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications for retaining tolls on the Tay bridge are deeply flawed. The only consistent thing about them is their inconsistency. First, we are told that removing the tolls would increase congestion in Dundee. That is patently absurd, given that everyone knows that the congestion at peak times is caused by cars being tailed back from the toll booths. The removal of the tolls would allow a free flow of traffic, as seen by everyone on Tuesday when no tolls were in operation. Then the Deputy First Minister tells us that the main reason for retaining the tolls is to do with the debt that still exists on the Tay bridge. Of course, there was debt on the Skye bridge, but the tolls  were scrapped, and there is no debt on the Forth bridge, yet the tolls remain.

That is very consistent, minister. There is no consistency or logic in the argument.

The situation is particularly galling as the original debt for building the bridge was paid off years ago. [ Interruption. ]

We are told by the minister that the toll booths are to be moved from the Dundee end to the Fife end of the bridge at an estimated cost of £13 million, which is about the same amount as it would cost to scrap the tolls. Leaving aside the huge disruption that moving the toll booths will cause, the move will double the debt on the Tay bridge to about £26 million. That will make it difficult for the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board to meet its obligations to pay the debt off by 2016 and will burden the people of Tayside and Fife with tolls for decades to come. "O what a tangled web we weave" is the phrase that comes to mind when we turn to the Executive's amendment, which is a crude attempt to kick the issue into the long grass until after the election by having yet another review. What was the purpose of the tolls review if we are to have yet another review? A couple of weeks ago, the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications was asked whether the position on the Tay could be kept under review. He said: "All that I can say is that we have had a lengthy process ... and ... the position is that the review has concluded."— [ Official Report , 1 Mar 2006; c 23602.]  What exactly did he mean? He stated that the decision had been made and would not be revisited, so we are waiting to hear what has changed in the past two weeks? The answer is that nothing has changed and we have a Lib Dem minister who will say anything at any time to anyone to get out of a mess of his own creation. Let us be clear: we know the arguments, we have had the debate and we do not need further reviews; now is the time for a decision. Every decision in the Parliament cannot be made on the  basis of what is seen as being politically advantageous by either Labour or the Lib Dems at any given moment. That is no way to run the country. A promise of jam after the election next year is not on. That is exactly the sort of political shenanigans that gives politics in this country a bad name.

Would the minister like to intervene?

Exactly. If MSPs believe that the tolls should go, as they say they do in public, they should not make people pay them for another year just because they want to play political games and make this an election issue. The people of Tayside and Fife—95 per cent of whom supported abolition of the tolls in a recent poll in The Courier —deserve better than that. They will not be conned by those who say one thing outside the Parliament and come in here and do the opposite. It is not good enough for members who get up at party conferences and say that they are against bridge tolls to come to Parliament and vote against their abolition. It is not good enough for members to say that they want to make removal of bridge tolls an issue at the next election when they are not prepared to vote for it now. Members need to put their votes where their mouths are. If they do not do so, their position will be exposed to the people of Scotland as something that begins with an H and ends with a Y. A vote for the motion will force the Executive to bring forward proposals to remove the tolls at the earliest opportunity. As I said, it took the Executive only one month to remove the tolls from the Erskine bridge. Therefore, it is clear that where there is a will there is a way. I urge MSPs from all parties to do the right thing now, rather than promise jam tomorrow, and vote for the removal of the Tay tolls today. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the tolls on the Tay bridge should be removed.

I have not had that pleasure.

Given what the minister said, are local authorities that operate waiting lists not meeting their statutory obligation? If so, will the talks in which officials are taking part with local authorities end with a clear instruction to local authorities that operate waiting lists that they should cease to do so immediately?

Last week, Dundee City Council told the Health Committee that, as far as it is concerned, the problem is that it does not have enough money. On the one hand, the minister tells us that he has given the council enough money and, on the other hand, the council tells us that it does not have enough money. In the meantime, my constituents and their families are on waiting lists for free personal care. What will the minister do to resolve that?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made towards reducing the number of young people in Dundee leaving school without any qualifications. (S2O-09266)

Does the minister share my concern about the latest available figures, which show that the proportion of children in Dundee who leave school with no qualifications is well above the national average? Nearly one child in 10 leaves school without a single standard grade to their name, which is more than twice the national average. Is it likely that the figures that are due to be published next month will show any improvement? What else does the minister intend to do to turn around a situation that is failing too many young people in my constituency?

The cost of moving the tollbooths is going to be many millions of pounds, which could go towards paying off the Tay bridge debt. Does that not undermine the minister's argument? Given the unanimous view of the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board that the tolls should go, how and when will the Deputy First Minister respond to that unanimous view, and when will he instruct his Minister for Transport and Telecommunications to start listening to the views of local people on this matter?

I pay tribute to the hard-working staff of the NHS who have done their best to deliver progress in meeting targets for patients with waiting time guarantees. There is no doubt that the NHS treats those patients more quickly than was the case under the minister's predecessor. Staff have delivered what they were asked to, and we recognise their achievement. While recognising the progress that has been made for patients with waiting time guarantees, we should also recognise that it is a different story for those who are without one. I remind the minister that they are not simply a handful of patients, but one third of all patients who are on waiting lists in Scotland. Those patients have no right to be treated according to the waiting time targets, yet most of them will still require to be treated by the NHS at some stage. The Executive's policy is at  fault: it has excluded one third of patients from a waiting time guarantee. This is not the result of decisions made by NHS staff. Last week's report into waiting times from Audit Scotland was balanced. It recognised the progress that has been made, but also raised major concerns on several fronts. From the waiting list census information, the report revealed the true extent of hidden waiting lists in the NHS for those who are without a waiting time guarantee. It revealed that, as of September last year, the number of people without a waiting time guarantee had increased—approximately 24,000 patients were waiting more than six months. That is unacceptable.

I would abolish ASCs and ensure that all patients have a waiting time guarantee. As the minister will do the same at the end of 2007, why does he not do it today? If ASCs are fundamentally flawed—which the minister accepts, because he will abolish them—he should abolish them now. The situation is even more concerning if one considers the waiting time information that is collected by ISD Scotland. The minister should recognise those figures, as they are Government ones. They show retrospectively how long people actually waited for treatment—that is, the actual time patients waited from the point they were added to the waiting list to the date of treatment or appointment. Today, the SNP released figures that show that by the end of 2005, approximately 40,000 Scots had waited more than six months for treatment. They undermine the minister's claim that no patient waits more than six months for treatment and add weight to the SNP's numerous calls for the immediate abolition of ASCs, which are widely discredited and are regarded as hidden waiting lists.

The minister seems to misunderstand the point that it took more than six months for those patients to actually receive treatment. The minister can shake his head, but that is what retrospective waiting times mean. They mean looking back at how long people waited. The minister may need a briefing from ISD Scotland to explain how that works. I want the immediate abolition of ASCs. They should go now, because patients deserve cast-iron patient rights, not fiddled waiting time figures.

I am not denying that: I am saying that for 40,000 patients it took more than six months to be treated. That is not a difficult concept to grasp—I do not know why the minister has difficulty with it. We must now look to the future. We need to be ambitious when it comes to waiting times. Audit Scotland says that future waiting time targets are challenging, but the Executive's target for the whole patient journey is 36 weeks, which is double that in England. Surely we need to raise our sights and expect the system here to deliver a waiting time commitment that is similar to that south of the border, especially given the level of investment in the health service in Scotland. With the right policies, Scottish patients will not have to wait longer for treatment than patients south of the border. That will require us to address a number of fundamental issues, not least the lack of capacity in the NHS in Scotland. Audit Scotland recommends better use of the Golden Jubilee national hospital and a better split between elective and emergency procedures. We agree, but we need to do more. It also makes the point that the increased use of the private sector to cut waiting times comes at relatively high cost. The private sector may be a short-term fix, but only by making the NHS more efficient and productive can we deliver real, long-term reductions in waiting times. Funding methods such as payment by activity are just one way of improving productivity in the system and encouraging the NHS to do more by rewarding extra work. Audit Scotland also suggests strengthening patients' rights within the system and giving them more choice about where they are treated, which it says would reduce waiting times. We agree with Audit Scotland that patients should be more involved in decisions about their treatment. Through our patients' rights proposals, on which we will consult soon, we want patients to have greater involvement in and choice about where  and when they are treated. We also want each patient to have an individual waiting time guarantee that is appropriate for them within the national waiting time guarantee limits, which would be maximum limits. Patients should expect to be given a clearer indication of how long they can expect to wait for treatment and should receive from the clinician who is assessing them an individual waiting time that is appropriate to their condition. There is a need for an honest debate on waiting times. Today, we have been honest in acknowledging the progress that has been made in meeting waiting time targets for patients with a waiting time guarantee. It is unfortunate that that has not been replicated by a more honest response from the minister, who should acknowledge where there is a need to do much better for all patients who are still waiting for treatment in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-3990.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "congratulates NHS staff for their hard work in delivering progress in meeting targets for patients with waiting time guarantees; however recognises the recent concerns of Audit Scotland that the number of people without a waiting time guarantee has increased, that nearly 24,000 patients have been waiting more than six months for in-patient and day case treatment and that the total number of people waiting for in-patient and day case treatment has changed little in the last two years; further notes that Audit Scotland's report, Tackling Waiting Times in the NHS in Scotland ,  regards the increased use of the private sector as being "relatively high-cost" compared to the NHS; welcomes the report's recommendation that there should be greater involvement and choice for patients, and therefore commends the SNP's Patient Rights proposals to provide every patient with an individual waiting time guarantee appropriate to them within national waiting time targets."

The minister commented that when patients receive treatment in the private sector it is better and safer. Better and safer than what?

If ASCs are such a good tool, why is the minister going to abolish them?

The minister has spent half his speech talking about hidden waiting lists.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in the dispersal of civil service jobs to Dundee. (S2O-9058)

Does the minister appreciate that, although Dundee started from a low base, those welcome job transfers represent a mere 0.3 per cent growth in civil service jobs in the city since 1999? I am sure that the minister is aware that three sites in Dundee have been identified for possible future relocations, but will he give me a clear timetable for when Dundee can expect more jobs to be dispersed to the city? Does he appreciate that, if he cannot, The Courier's  comment that there has been more talk than action on the issue will be seen to be well founded?

Does the minister agree that pay and conditions are important in encouraging school leavers and students to consider nursing as a profession? Will he respond to the concerns that are being raised by staff and unions about delays in the implementation of agenda for change? Can he reassure us that the May deadline, to which he has referred previously, will be met and that health boards will have the necessary resources to implement agenda for change?

The Scottish National Party is pleased to support the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill at stage 3. I would like to thank all those who gave evidence to the Health Committee. It is crucial that the focus of the bill has been on determining the wishes of the deceased and on ensuring that those wishes are respected. The concept of authorisation should ensure that a person's wishes are respected if those wishes are registered in some way and that, when no wishes have been registered, there is a clear process for ascertaining any wish that the deceased might have made and for seeking authorisation through the nearest relative hierarchy. The hope is that, by strengthening the opt-in system, there will be an increase in the number of organ donations in Scotland. There are members in all parties who favour a system of presumed consent, as expressed by John Farquhar Munro and others. However, the Parliament made the right decision in rejecting the amendments that called for the introduction of presumed consent. It is important that we build public confidence in the system, which proposals for a system of presumed consent would not do. The new system of informed consent should make it easier to ascertain a person's wishes. As we know, most people would want to donate their organs, so, alongside the new legislation, a public awareness campaign will be crucial in encouraging more people to register their wishes and to discuss them with family members. The rules for living donation in the bill are sensible. It is essential that the bill should provide the required reassurance to parents and others who find themselves in the traumatic situation of having to deal with a hospital post mortem. Procedures have already changed in the wake of what happened at Alder Hey children's hospital, but it is  crucial that we frame such changes in legislation. The concept of authorisation also applies to hospital post mortems, although it is complicated by the fact that different standards of authorisation are required in different cases. Concerns about that were expressed during the progress of the bill. The minister has gone some way to reassure us that the guidance on authorisation will be very clear. It is right that the penalties for a breach of procedure will be severe—they must be so that public confidence is restored and the public is reassured that scandals like Alder Hey do not happen in future. With regard to the reform of the Anatomy Act 1984, there is a need to ensure that human body parts are not displayed for purely entertainment purposes and that they are treated with respect. The amendments to the bill provide reassurance that that need will be respected. I compliment the minister on going out of his way to provide reassurance and to lodge amendments in answer to concerns that were raised. The bill's overarching aim is to increase organ donation and therefore the number of lives saved. I hope that we will have a system for carefully monitoring the impact of the legislation in achieving that aim. I hope that the minister, in his summing up, will tell us how he will ensure that such a monitoring system is introduced and that there will be regular feedback to the Parliament on the success of the legislation.

The vote on the amendments should be a free vote, because it is not a party-political issue; it is about the views of individuals. My personal view is that authorisation is the way to proceed because we must respect the wishes of deceased persons. There should be informed consent, not presumed consent. The relatives of a deceased person who had not expressed a view about organ donation will be consulted. Mike Rumbles made the most important point in the debate so far when he said that the issue is about trust. Like it or not, after Alder Hey and other tragedies, the public have lost some of their trust in the system. That must be built up again; the bill will go some way towards achieving that. It has the potential to increase the level of organ donation, but that potential will be realised only if the bill is backed up by an effective public information campaign about organ donation.  That will be the key to the bill's success. I ask people to support the bill and to reject John Farquhar Munro's amendments.

rose—

How will exempting better-off students help the poorest in our communities?

Does the member accept that exactly the same arguments were used against free personal care for the elderly, which the member supported at the time, which he is now turning around to use against the policy that we are debating now? Is that not hypocritical?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Today, we have yet another example of the Executive's disrespect for the Parliament. After a two-year delay in moving forward with the reform of prescription charges, and the minister being unable to provide the Health Committee with any details only a few weeks ago, a tabloid newspaper gets to know, through an exclusive briefing, the Executive's long-awaited thoughts on the matter before Scotland's democratically elected Parliament.

If the minister would like to defend his position, he is welcome to do so.

It is a pity that the minister said that he did not have any information to give to the Health Committee when he appeared in front of it. He clearly had the information, but he was just not willing to share it with us. Reading today's Daily Record  headline—"We'll scrap script charge"—makes me wonder whether we are in the same debate, because what it says is far from the case. I will return to the long-awaited consultation document in a minute but, before I do, I will outline why the Scottish National Party is supporting the bill at stage 1. There is a fundamental principle that if someone falls ill, they should not be financially penalised for it. The health service is based on the principle that treatment should be free at the point of need, no matter what the patient's income is. We regard the provision of medication as an intrinsic part of the health service, and it should be based on the same principle as the rest of the health service—it should be funded through general taxation.  The bill should be allowed to progress to stage 2, when it can be amended. The SNP will seek to amend it to phase in abolition to reduce any likelihood of additional pressures and demands being placed on general practitioners, pharmacists and the public purse. Other parties might wish to amend it in other ways.

I will come to that, because I am about to move on to the key objections to the bill. Cost is cited as one of those. I would never argue that the cost of abolition is a drop in the ocean, because it is not, but the Executive's costings are exaggerated for its own ends. It will be interesting to hear the costs of the complicated bureaucratic system that it proposes as the alternative. I ask the minister: where in the consultation paper can the detailed costs of that system be found? We wait to see them.

There is a real danger of that. Where there is a political will, resources can be found. The Executive has shown that by finding £295 million over three years for dental services, which is welcome. The question is whether there is sufficient political demand in the Parliament to make the abolition of prescription charges a reality. Cost is not the key objection. During the debate, we will hear speeches from Labour members that will masquerade as principled stances, and state that the abolition of prescription charges will help only the better-off, rather than their poorest constituents. While a principled argument can be made along those lines, it does not apply to prescription charges. In the Daily Record article, someone—I think that it was a source close to Labour ministers—said: "This is getting back to good old Labour values, making sure support and exemptions are there for those who need them." Anyone who uses that argument in this debate will have to explain why those good old Labour values did not apply to free eye checks, free dental checks, concessionary travel or free personal care. Where, in those instances, were the good old Labour values that said that it should be about income, and that those who could afford to pay should pay?

The phrase "angels dancing on the head of a pin" comes to mind. The principle that Labour and, I assume, the Liberal Democrats are trying out is that those who can afford to pay should pay. The Labour Party did not apply that criterion to a raft of policies when it did not suit its coalition agreement with the Liberal Democrats. It is more about political expediency than any point of principle—and Labour members know it. They are kidding themselves if they think that it has anything to do with principle. It is the same old thing: the Executive wants to have it both ways. If the Daily Record is to be believed, full-time students will be exempted from prescription charges. What about the better-off full-time students? They are to be exempted as well. It is supposed to be all about those who can afford to pay, but it is not about them, is it? It is about the coalition agreement between Labour and the Lib Dems, and principle has nothing to do with it whatsoever. A bit of honesty from those members would not go amiss today. I return to the consultation paper. While we would support moves to extend exemptions to those on lower incomes, because it would be an improvement on the current position, that would still lead to unfairness for those who are just above the line, wherever it is drawn. The commitment to review the list of chronic conditions has been around for more than two years. All that we have in front of us today are more limited options to add to that list, thus creating more winners and losers. The alternative that has been advanced is to link exemptions to the drug, not the condition, which would mean that drugs that were not linked directly to a condition would be subject to a charge. Who would decide on the definition of "linked directly"? What would it mean? What if someone had a chest infection that, on the face of it, was not directly linked to their chronic condition? In reality, their poor health might make them more susceptible to such infections. Would they be charged for the drugs for that infection?

Well, I look forward to Duncan McNeil's explanation of what it is that the Executive is actually proposing. Its proposals are a minefield, and could lead to further unfairness in the system. Let us keep it simple and do the right thing. I urge members to support the bill and allow it to proceed to stage 2.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing this important debate and offer my apologies for the fact that I will not be able to stay until the end of it. Nanette Milne has made a clear call for action. Usefully, the motion is specific in what it calls for. I  await with interest the response from the social research unit. I hope it will come soon. Perhaps the minister will be able to shed some light on when we are likely to get that response. I want to highlight a case that was brought to my attention recently. It concerns a young child with communication support needs. The child was due to start school but the parents and the school had concerns about the school's ability to provide the necessary support. The parents were concerned that the child was just not ready for school and needed more support, particularly speech therapy, before they started school. Agreement was reached that the child would delay starting school for another year, to allow speech therapy to continue. However, when the parents sought continuation of the nursery place for a further year to allow the child's pre-school education to continue, it was denied and the child was left in limbo for that year, between pre-school education and school. That case highlights the need for joined-up services in the pre-school and school systems. It also shows that there should be more flexibility if we are to meet the needs of children with communication support needs. Although there was agreement that going to school at that particular time would probably have been a negative experience for the child and the school, the parents were somewhat shocked that there was no back-up to ensure that the child's educational needs were met at an appropriate level. The parents feel that the lack of support through the system—the child is a bit older now—has left the child with communication difficulties that they would not have had if the appropriate support had been in place through the school years. What is being done to ensure that such children have the support they require? I want to make a plea on behalf of speech therapists. They are still too thin on the ground. We do not have enough of them to ensure that people who require speech therapy get regular access to it. More must be done to address that shortage. I would be interested to hear what the minister has to say about that issue. If I miss the minister's response, I will read what he says in the Official Report .

I agree with the minister that resources are not the key driver in the issue.  However, there may be a need to invest to save. An upfront investment in areas of Scotland that do not have well-developed palliative care services may be required if we are to shift the balance in relation to where services are provided.

I thank those members who have stayed for the debate and I pay tribute to Marie Curie Cancer Care for providing members with important information for the debate about its crucial work in developing the first Scottish project of the delivering choice programme in Tayside. The project aims to look at the problems in the provision of palliative care in the region, before developing a strategy to improve end-of-life care for patients in that area and, it is hoped, across Scotland. Nothing is more certain than the fact that each of us, one day, will come to the end of our lives. Although that is inevitable, we in Scotland do not like to talk about it much. The 2003 Scottish partnership for palliative care study showed that 70 per cent of people thought that there was not enough discussion in our society about death and dying. I agree. Today's debate is about how we can ensure that, where possible, people can exercise some control over their death, particularly over where it occurs. Research has shown clearly that three quarters of us would choose to die at home, with 90 per cent supporting the dying person's wishes. However, in Tayside at present, 75 per cent of admissions to the cancer centre at Ninewells hospital are for palliative care, much of which could be given in the person's home given the right back-up and resources. Yet we know that the difficulties that are associated with supporting our dying loved one at home can be immense.  Moreover, research has shown that the vast majority of us do not believe that we will be able to cope with providing the care for that person so that he or she can exercise their choice. Today, around only 25 per cent of people with a terminal illness are able to exercise their choice to die at home; in Dundee, that figure is just over 21 per cent. Too many people are denied that choice and end their lives in a hospital bed in a busy ward. Although hospital staff try to be as sensitive as they can be to the needs of the terminally ill, hospital wards are not designed to be places of peace and tranquillity where terminally ill people and their families can spend quiet, quality time together. Despite those figures, Dundee and Tayside are fortunate with the services that are available to support people in the choice to spend their last days at home with their loved ones. In fact, the people of Dundee and Tayside are more fortunate than people in many other areas of Scotland. We have the specialist palliative care unit at the Royal Victoria hospital, and several beds in the community hospitals are designed for palliative care. In the near future, units will open in Perth and Forfar to provide palliative care services. There are also several day-care units in Dundee, Perth and Stracathro, along with the highly regarded symptoms control clinic. Moreover, we are well supported by Marie Curie and Macmillan nurses, who are able to support the primary care team in meeting the complex needs of dying patients and their families throughout the area. Dundee and Tayside have excellent resources, but more must be done to ensure that all those who would like to end their days at home are able to do so. Achieving that will require a number of changes. Services need better integration; doctors and nurses need to know more about the palliative care services that are available in the community; and, importantly, flexible services need to be available when and where people require them. In particular, 24-hour access to nursing care in the person's home is extremely important to prevent carer crisis or late-night admission to hospital due to lack of symptom or pain control. Carers must be assured that services are there, otherwise many of them will not take the risk of being left unable to cope at home with a terminally ill person in distress. I will quote from a real-life case study. Eilidh and John went through the process of John dying at home. Eilidh said: "During his illness John spent ten days in a hospital setting. These ten days were the worst of his illness. All he wanted was to be at home. I wanted to have John at home but only if I knew I would have the right support." That is the key for many carers—they have to be reassured that the support will be there.  Additional resources might be required to ensure that services are established, and the outcome of the Tayside project will be crucial in determining the level of resources that might be required. In the long run, things might balance out, given that, as research by Marie Curie shows, every £1 that is invested in palliative care at home saves £2 in acute services. The debate should not be driven by money. It should be about what is best for the terminally ill person and their family. I quote Eilidh again: "Being able to have John at home provided a sense of normality to an otherwise totally abnormal situation. Our children could come and go and see their Dad for short periods of time at regular intervals during the day. John was much more secure and orientated in his own surroundings and I could sleep when he did rather than sit in a chair by a hospital bed." Perhaps that says everything that needs to be said about the benefits of someone getting their choice. As has been stated previously, the majority of patients have expressed a clear preference to remain at home, properly supported, for as long as possible towards the end of their life. If we were all to exercise our preferred choice, that would entail a threefold increase in demand for services, from 25 per cent to 75 per cent. Despite the level of service that is available in Dundee and Tayside, that target would be very difficult to achieve in the short term. Nevertheless, the target is worth while and achievable and the Tayside project will go a long way towards helping us meet it. The Tayside project, which is the first of its kind in Scotland, was launched just last month by the Minister for Health and Community Care. Its aim is to develop service models that meet the needs of, and ensure the best possible care for, palliative care patients and which improve equity of access to services. The project will be subject to an independent academic evaluation, which will include the economic impact on health care services of more patients receiving palliative care at home as opposed to in hospital. Once the project findings have been evaluated, it is intended that they will be disseminated to other health and social care providers, thus sharing best practice throughout Scotland. I would like some assurance from the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care that, should a need for additional resources be evidenced by the Tayside project, those resources will be forthcoming so that the necessary changes to services can be delivered, not just in Tayside but throughout Scotland. The Tayside project provides a great opportunity for us to show that, with the proper support and information, people throughout Scotland can have confidence in their abilities to look after their  nearest and dearest in their final days, weeks and months. I am delighted to welcome the project, and I am confident that it will enhance the services that are available to people with a terminal illness, better enabling them to exercise their right to choose how they spend their final days.

Is it right that, every time someone pays to visit a council-run leisure facility to improve their lifestyle, Gordon Brown takes 17.5 per cent of the charge in VAT? Is that not just a tax on health? Would not it be sensible for such facilities to be tax exempt, to help to keep charges down or to prevent councils such as Dundee City Council from having to hand over their leisure facilities to a charitable trust to avoid paying tax? Will the minister make representations to that effect to the Chancellor of the Exchequer?

Since the Parliament was established, the Scottish National Party has a long track record of supporting hepatitis C sufferers in their campaign for a public inquiry. Although we will support the SSP motion, I remain to be convinced about the timing of the debate. History tells us that the limited gains for hepatitis C sufferers that have been made in the Parliament have been made through the Health Committee rather than on the floor of the Parliament. I am not convinced that another defeat for a public inquiry will be helpful at this point. Limited gains have been made during the 14-year battle by campaigners, and of course it was the Health and Community Care Committee that forced the Executive into agreeing to offer limited financial assistance—something that it had resisted for some time. The Skipton Fund is to be welcomed. It was also the Health and Community Care Committee that supported my attempts to extend the assistance to cover bereaved families who had been excluded. That support was overturned here in the chamber by the Executive—and I have to say that it was  disappointing, given the closeness of the vote, that some people were missing from the chamber that day. All I will say is that they know who they are. However, we are where we are now. The Health Committee will take further evidence from the Minister for Health and Community Care at the end of January. The meeting will focus on a number of things, one of which will be whether any new evidence has arisen. We remember the commitment of the previous minister that he would hold a public inquiry should new evidence arise. A problem now is that we have almost too much information in the public domain. It can be difficult to extract what is new and what is pertinent. A cynic might say that that is precisely why the minister released documents into the public domain on the same day as campaigners lost the right to cap the costs of the judicial review. Nanette Milne spoke about a test case. However, test cases cost money. It is not easy for people to bring test cases to court; it is a very expensive way of getting to the truth. That is why the SNP will continue to support calls for a public inquiry. The minister referred to the Health and Community Care Committee's report and what he said was factually correct. However, at that time, the committee was focused on the issue of financial assistance. It is true to say that we did not want any delay in progress towards an offer of such assistance, but the committee was not hostile to the idea of a public inquiry. Our focus was elsewhere because we wanted to get money into the hands of those who were suffering. Many questions remain to be answered and an inquiry could answer some of them by distilling all the information in the public domain. Who knew what and when? What were the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service's practices at the time? What were the sources of blood? The people affected, and their families, deserve nothing less than answers to those questions. We will continue to support their campaign for an independent public inquiry.

Why has there been a delay in establishing an appeals process for the Skipton Fund? Is the minister aware that more than 50 people have been turned down by the Skipton Fund and that they have no right of appeal?

Will the minister take an intervention?

We need to pause to reflect on how we ended up in this situation and ask whether the Executive has learned lessons from its poor handling of the Argyll  and Clyde debacle. It was the Executive's inaction and its failure to direct the management of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board effectively prior to its reorganisation of December 2002 that ultimately resulted in the Executive's decision to propose the dissolution of the board almost two and a half years later.

I am sure that the minister will be familiar with the report of the Audit Committee that was published earlier this year. It criticised the Executive, the lack of continuity among personnel representing the Health Department, the collective failure of the department and the board to agree a financial plan and so on. I am asking the minister whether lessons have been learned from that experience.

No—we would have expected a lot of action to be taken earlier. Is the Audit Committee wrong in its findings? I do not think so. I want to know whether lessons have been learned because my fear is that we might end up in a situation in which other boards have financial difficulties. What monitoring is the Health Department doing to ensure that, in such cases, intervention takes place earlier? We cannot have another Argyll and Clyde. As I said at the time of the minister's announcement in May, I believe that the decision that we have heard about today is the only one that could be made, in the light of the lack of public confidence that people in Argyll and Clyde had in the health board. The predicted deficit of between £80 million and £100 million could not be allowed to develop. It remains to be seen whether lessons have, as the minister says, been learned in relation to the serious questions that were asked about the role of the Health Department in the Audit Committee's report. The Auditor General's report gives cause for concern: it states that health boards are predicting a funding gap of £183 million, and that several expect to overspend on their budgets. We need to  know that the Executive's new and improved procedures are robust enough when it comes to financial monitoring. As I said, we cannot have another Argyll and Clyde. The minister must consider the underlying financial difficulties that are leading to some of the poor financial performances that have been outlined today. We know that health board chiefs have privately expressed concerns that, for example, the agreements that are being made at the centre are not being fully funded. We need an honest debate about that.

I know that there is consultation, but I tell the minister that senior managers in health boards are saying that pay deals are not being fully funded from the centre. They accept that more money is coming from the centre, but there is also more money going out, specifically for pay deals, which is why some financial difficulties have arisen. If that is not the case, how does the minister explain some of the financial difficulties that were highlighted by the Auditor General's report? He must explain: if the difficulties do not arise from the source that I suggest, where do they come from? We know that chiefs from Argyll and Clyde would sit in meetings with the minister and his predecessor and say that their choice was either to get more money or to cut services. As I understand it, both options were refused. The Executive must have been well aware that the situation was becoming difficult in Argyll and Clyde and must accept a share of the responsibility. Despite the difficulties—

Very briefly.

Obviously, it was silly of the board to do that but, despite what the member says, we know that the board raised with ministers the concerns that I mentioned. As the minister said, it is important to recognise the contribution that staff have made; they have kept services going in difficult circumstances. We know that morale can be a problem when there is uncertainty.  Of course, the most important people are the members of the public who depend on health services in Argyll and Clyde. They need to know not only that there will be an end to the uncertainty but, more important, that services will improve under the new arrangements. Today, the minister outlined the changes that will be made to the boundaries of Highland NHS Board and Greater Glasgow NHS Board to include Argyll and Clyde. There is a great deal of concern about the proposal among people who live in the Helensburgh area. More than 80 per cent of the people who responded to Helensburgh community council's consultation were in favour of option 2, under which the Helensburgh area would have become part of NHS Greater Glasgow. People in the area will no doubt feel that even though they have been consulted their views have been ignored. People are concerned that decisions on their health care will be taken miles away. People whose health care will be affected by the boundary changes must be given cast-iron assurances that they will be able to access local services irrespective of where the health boards' boundaries lie. The minister has to do some convincing on that. In the minister's statement in May, he said that the geography of Argyll and Clyde precluded effective management by a single health board. That might be true, but the geography is still the same and the same challenges now face NHS Greater Glasgow and NHS Highland. The writing off of the cumulative deficit is helpful and welcome, but the structural deficit remains a problem for the new chiefs to resolve. The minister said that they will get Argyll and Clyde's share of the money, but he also said that it is in effect up to them to manage the process. I urge the minister to be a bit more forthcoming with transitional finance assistance, because there will be difficulties. With the best will in the world, if NHS Argyll and Clyde could not manage to address the recurring deficit, it will be difficult for the new chiefs to do so and they will need assistance. I hope that the minister will come back at an early stage and tell us how that will be done. I also ask the minister for a guarantee that he will formally review the sufficiency of the financial settlement and how services are working for patients a year after the new arrangements come into force. The public require that assurance. We need to consider the best way to deliver health services throughout Scotland and to consider which structures work best. At the moment, we have a bit of a dog's breakfast with health boards of dramatically different sizes. Changes need to be made on a planned basis that  takes into account the Kerr report: crisis-driven restructuring must become a thing of the past. I move amendment S2M-3684.2, to leave out from first "supports" to end and insert: "regrets the failure of the Scottish Executive to direct effectively the management of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board prior to its reorganisation of December 2002 and the continuing lack of direction and support that resulted in the Executive's decision to dissolve the board two years and five months later in May 2005 and to redraw the boundaries of the neighbouring boards to take over its responsibilities from April 2006; applauds the continued successful efforts of staff in NHS Argyll and Clyde during these difficult times to maintain comprehensive healthcare services for the people of the area; demands clear evidence that input from the public consultation on the boundary option to be adopted has been fully and objectively considered; supports NHS Highland and NHS Greater Glasgow in their task of returning services to financial balance while maintaining high standards of quality and access, and demands that the Executive provides these boards with adequate support and more effective leadership and direction that will assist them to address credibly the structural and financial problems in NHS Argyll and Clyde."

Will the minister expand on that and explain how the  finances would work around the patient flows that he talks about?

The Scottish National Party is pleased to support the general principles of the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill. I put on record my thanks to the people who gave evidence to the Health Committee; given the complexity of the bill, their evidence was most helpful to committee members. I also thank the people who sat on the review groups, which were the starting point for the bill. It is important to separate organ donation from organ retention, which all too often end up being lumped together. Given the complexity of the bill, I am pleased that the Executive took the decision not to include its provisions in the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill, because the task that we would have faced would have been even more difficult than the one that we face today. With regard to organ donation, it is crucial that the focus is placed on determining the wishes of the deceased person and ensuring that those wishes are respected. As the minister said, the concept of authorisation should ensure that, in cases in which they are registered in some way, a person's wishes are respected and that, when no such wish is registered, there is a clear process for ascertaining any wishes and for seeking authorisation through the nearest relative hierarchy. The minister put it well when he spoke about a positive decision in favour of, rather than an objection to, an act. We very much support that principle. The Health Committee recommended that reference to the organ donor register be made in the bill. I recognise that the minister has agreed to amend the bill at stage 2 to ensure that those who are currently on the register will be deemed to have given authorisation under the new system. That is very welcome. The hope is that, by strengthening the opt-in system, there will be an increase in the number of organs being donated in Scotland. I know that members across the chamber favour a system of presumed consent, but I do not believe that that would be the right  way to proceed, given the need to build public confidence in the system. That is an important consideration and I do not think that proposals for a system of presumed consent would do that. The new system should make it easier to ascertain the person's wishes. As we know, most people want to donate their organs. Alongside the change in legislation, a public awareness campaign will be crucial to encourage more people to register their wishes and to discuss them with family members. There was a fair amount of discussion in the Health Committee about parental authorisations for children. The bill provides that, in the case of the death of a child under the age of 12, it is up to the person who, immediately before the death, had parental rights and responsibilities and so can authorise organ donation, hospital post mortem or the use of samples that are no longer required for the procurator fiscal's purposes. If there is a dispute between parents about the authorisation of a post mortem on the body of a child or about the donation of organs, the bill allows clinicians to proceed with the intervention. The ministers will be aware of the evidence from Professor Sheila McLean of the review group on the retention of organs at post mortem, who said that, if there was a dispute between parents, "a post-mortem should not go ahead".—[ Official Report, Health Committee , 8 September 2005; c 2105.] When asked about that situation, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care said that "clinicians, when faced with a position in which two parents took different views, might well take the safer option of not proceeding."—[ Official Report, Health Committee , 25 October 2005; c 2314.] He also noted that the bill allows clinicians discretion in that respect. Given the sensitivities around the issue, and in order to protect clinicians who might be caught in the middle of a very difficult situation, I support the Health Committee's call for clear guidance on how disputes between parents should be handled. We need clarity on that. Further guidance on how the needs of looked-after children are to be considered in cases of a dispute between the responsible local authority and either parent would also be appreciated. Concerns were expressed about the late withdrawal of authorisation for organ donation, which could obviously put the recipient at risk. Further consideration needs to be given to such situations. I welcome the minister's commitment in that regard and his willingness to consider lodging an amendment at stage 2 to provide clarity on the matter. The rules for living donation as outlined in the bill are sensible. They include a prohibition on live  donation, with the exception of regenerative tissue, for those under the age of 16, the purpose of which is to protect against the possibility of coercion. I welcome the further clarification on domino transplants that the minister provided in his speech. There are continuing concerns over what constitutes tissue and what is an organ. We had some discussion of that question in relation to the liver. I know that there has been clarification on that: a liver is to be treated as an organ, rather than as regenerative tissue. However, other parts of the body, such as skin—my colleague Roseanna Cunningham will go into the issue in more depth—could be regarded either as an organ or as regenerative tissue. The details need to be clarified so that there is no confusion. Concerns about hospital post mortems arose from what can only be described as a breach of trust on the part of some people in the medical profession who failed to respect the rights of parents in situations in which clear authorisation to remove organs from deceased children was lacking. Having listened to harrowing accounts from parents in my constituency, I think that it is essential that the bill provides the required reassurance to parents and others who find themselves in such traumatic situations. It is fair to say that procedures have already changed in the wake of Alder Hey and other scandals, but it is crucial to frame such changes in legislation. The concept of authorisation also applies to hospital post mortems and can be a complicated matter, given the different standards of authorisation required in each case. There is a risk of confusion, so public awareness and professional training will be essential. Clear and explicit procedures for authorisation are required and I back the committee's recommendation that consideration be given to having a separate form in respect of children under the age of 12 years. The penalties for a breach of the procedure are, quite rightly, severe. They must be, to restore public confidence and reassure the public that such scandals will not happen in future. There has been some debate on the issue of post mortems that are carried out by the procurator fiscal. It would be difficult to apply the concept of authorisation to circumstances in which forensic procedures were required. However, improvements can be made to the way in which families are treated and kept informed. I am aware that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has taken action on that. The bill also deals with reform of the Anatomy Act 1984. There is a need to ensure that human body parts are not displayed for what would be regarded as purely entertainment purposes, but  are treated with a degree of respect. However, people are concerned about the need to ensure that bona fide museums are not affected and are exempt from a licensing requirement. The minister's clarification on that is welcome, as is the clarification on the 100-year cut-off date. There is little that divides us on this issue; we all support the Executive's intentions. However, we need to see from the minister a willingness at stage 2—of which we have had an indication today—to address some of the concerns that, having listened to the evidence, the Health Committee raised. I look forward to further discussions on those matters at stage 2.

What systems have been put in place to monitor the unmet need that occurs when local authorities assess people and determine that those people need free personal care but say that they are unable to provide that service due to resource constraints?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

It is.

We must end the foghorn diplomacy that we have seen of late. It is unhelpful and, indeed, is in danger of alienating ordinary dentists, the vast majority of whom want to do the best for their patients. We accept that a small number of dentists have not put their patients' interests first;  however, that is not true of the majority of dentists, who are a bit fed up with being portrayed as being greedy and insensitive to their patients' needs.

I will address that question in a moment. The tone and atmosphere of discussions are sometimes almost as important as the issues that are being discussed, and I am very concerned about the tone and atmosphere of the current discussions—indeed, about the lack of such discussions. It is hard to see how, in such an atmosphere, the dentistry profession will be encouraged to agree to the proposed deal. Of course, it must agree: what will happen to the Executive's plans if many dentists simply walk away? We must remember that, in the research that the Health Committee commissioned in February, only 3.5 per cent of primary care dentists stated that they intend to increase over the next two years the time that they spend treating NHS patients. Without the co-operation of general dental practitioners, the Executive's plans cannot and will not be delivered and the crisis in NHS dentistry will worsen. Access problems cannot be resolved simply by increasing NHS-salaried dentists, which—although we welcome the move—will bring only a relatively small number of dentists into the system. They cannot be resolved by making a few deals with companies such as Integrated Dental Holdings Ltd or, indeed, by welcoming into Scotland a small number of dentists from Poland and elsewhere. Even with the most optimistic forecasts, such measures will not be enough to fill the gap. We need GDPs to stay with the NHS or, if they have left it, to rejoin, but I am afraid that such an aim will not be achieved in an atmosphere of hostility and bad faith.

That is an example of the problem that I have been highlighting. There is fault on both sides in the negotiations and, for the record, I agree with the Executive that adults  should be included in the definition of NHS commitment. However, if we are to have the best chance of success, the onus is on the Executive to create the right atmosphere. I have to say that I have been very concerned about the Executive's approach. For example, it ran to the press just as yesterday's talks were about to start. Does that help in reaching a successful outcome? I suggest that it does not. Moreover, on the attempts to sideline BDA Scotland, it is neither here nor here whether the Executive likes the organisation. The BDA is the professional association and trade union for dentists in the UK and, like it or not, the Executive will have to agree the deal with it. The Executive's release of the answer to Stewart Stevenson's parliamentary question on dental salaries is another example of an attempt to brief the press to make dentists look greedy, without mentioning that the gross figures that were referred to are required to pay for staff costs and premises, too. That was disingenuous to say the least, and was seen by ordinary dentists as an attack on them.

The Executive's spin doctors put the spin that I described on the story when they were speaking to the press. A bit of honesty in the debate would not go amiss. My concern is about what it all means to the patient. There are patients who cannot get access to a dentist or who are in danger of losing the dentists whom they have at the moment. A huge gamble is being taken that dentists will sign up to the deal, despite failure to agree its terms with their representatives. I would like to know what evidence the Executive has that its strategy will work. Can the minister guarantee that progressing the proposals without the agreement of the BDA will not lead to acceleration of deregistrations? I also want the minister to answer in summing up the question that my colleague, Richard Lochhead, asked: What is plan B? On the detail of the plan and the definition of NHS commitment—bearing in mind that we saw the plan only yesterday and that the dental profession has not yet responded to it—we support the broad principle that a practice must provide general dental services to all categories of patients in order to secure the new allowances. We also agree that the required number of registered NHS patients appears to be reasonable and is not a particularly high threshold. We have some concerns, particularly about measuring NHS  commitment on the basis of gross NHS earnings, which must be £50,000 or above per dentist if they are to receive 100 per cent of the new allowances. One of our concerns is about the position of part-time dentists, many of whom are women, who might be disadvantaged by the criteria. I ask the minister to respond to that concern in his summing up. As I said, what is on the table is broadly acceptable to us, but it is the way in which the plan has come about that concerns us most, and we believe that that puts at risk the chances of its being successfully implemented. If the dental profession itself does not sign up to the plan, it will not be good for patients. The Executive's target is that an additional 400,000 patients be registered with an NHS dentist by March 2008, but only last year nearly 58,000 patients were deregistered as more dentists left the NHS. Access to dentists in many parts of Scotland remains as difficult as ever, and that is before we even discuss delivery of the free dental checks which, if access is not improved, will be a theoretical rather than a real entitlement, which will lead to further public dissatisfaction. There is not a problem only in primary care: secondary care dental services are also a real cause for concern, with a rise in overall waiting times for all specialties since 2004. In Glasgow, patients have to wait 15 months for specialist orthodontic work, compared to 30 weeks in 2004. We must get that part of the system right, as well. In frustration, the people who can afford to are turning to the private sector. There has been a huge increase in the number of people taking out private dental plans. However, not everyone can afford to do that, and those who can afford to should not have to. Given that they pay their taxes, people should be entitled to treatment through the NHS. The Executive will be judged on whether everyone who wants access to an NHS dentist will get access to an NHS dentist within a reasonable timeframe. It is unfortunate that the minister could not provide my colleague, Alasdair Morgan, with a timeframe for that. Those are some of the challenges that we face. There are other challenges to do with training of dentists; our support for a third dental school is on record. We are a bit fed up of hearing about endless consultations on that and we want to see some progress. The proposals that the Executive has made will not turn the situation around, but the plan could be a step in the right direction if, and only if, the Executive can take the dental profession with it. That can be achieved only through constructive dialogue between the Executive and the British Dental Association, so we look forward to a bit more of that.  I move amendment S2M-3584.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "acknowledges the vital contribution which NHS dental services make to health improvement and patient care; believes that to progress implementing Improving Oral Health and Modernising NHS Dental Services in Scotland requires the co-operation of the dental profession, and therefore urges the Scottish Executive and the British Dental Association urgently to reach agreement on the definition of 'NHS commitment' in order to secure the future of NHS dentistry in Scotland."

I thank the Minister for Health and Community Care for the advance copy of his statement and I add our support for the work that has been done so far. Clearly, a concern will be how prepared our NHS is to cope with a pandemic influenza outbreak of whatever strain. The chief medical officer for Scotland, in a letter to health professionals on preparing for such a pandemic, estimates that hospital admissions for acute respiratory and related conditions are likely to increase by at least 50 per cent. Will the minister tell us what preparations will be made to increase the capacity of our hospitals to cope with demand should an outbreak occur? What other measures will be put in place to treat affected people in non-hospital settings? How will the minister ensure that Parliament is kept up to  date with the continuing preparations for a possible pandemic? How will the public be provided with accurate and up-to-date information on a situation that may change rapidly?

Given that 36 per cent of pregnant women in Dundee smoke, and given that Dundee has the highest teenage pregnancy rates in Scotland, will additional resources be made available to ensure the availability of more smoking cessation programmes and other support targeted specifically at such groups, especially in the light of the Kerr report, which we debated this morning?

What is the answer?

I welcome this debate, disappointingly short though it is. I know that there are members across the chamber who will be disappointed that they will not get the opportunity to speak and I hope that the Executive will reflect on that. The Scottish National Party welcomes the broad thrust of the Kerr report and the Executive's response to it. I will come back to that point later, but it is important to recognise that, as the Minister for Health and Community Care states in the foreword to "Delivering for Health", "This is a plan for the long-term." That means that there are other measures that have to be taken to address some of the immediate problems in the health service, not least the unacceptably long waiting times. The minister paints a rather rosy picture of that in the plan document, but I remind him that there are challenges in that regard, particularly in relation to colorectal cancer waiting times—with less than half of the targets being met—and the 112 per cent rise since 1999 in those who are waiting more than six months for hip replacements. We believe that action must be taken in relation to the challenges that are presented by waiting time issues. Before dealing with the action plan, I will detail some of the SNP's proposals, which are detailed in our amendment. We want to give the patient more power. Each patient should be given a  statutory right to an individual waiting time guarantee, based on their particular health needs. If it were deemed appropriate, that individual guarantee could be much shorter than the national waiting time guarantee. That would reinstate the clinical priorities to ensure that the waiting time better reflected the patient's clinical need. For many people with pressing needs, the national targets are too long to wait. Our proposal would put the patient at the heart of the process and ensure that the NHS delivered better for their needs.

Far too often, everyone is striving to achieve the national waiting time target rather than considering the target that is best suited for that patient. We want to put the patient's need first and foremost, which is why we believe that having a right to an individual waiting time guarantee—as happens successfully in many other countries—would be the best way forward. We believe in a public NHS, but recognise that, if it is to deliver a better deal for patients, the service has to change and reform. We need to be more ambitious for the NHS and for patients. To ensure that a public NHS delivers a better deal, we want to introduce an element of activity-based payment, to encourage hospitals to do more and to do it more efficiently. We have to release the necessary extra capacity within the NHS rather than rely increasingly on the private sector, which the Executive is doing.

The Executive, of course, would allocate resources as it does at the moment. However, an element of the payments to hospitals would be activity related to ensure that they better reflected the activities of those hospitals. Our policy is not the same as that of the minister's Labour colleagues in England, where there are 100 per cent activity-based payments; it is more like the model that is used in Norway, which has a level of around 30 per cent. That  would allow extra capacity to be extracted from the NHS, which would be preferable to handing over the NHS to the private sector, which the Minister for Health and Community Care is obviously doing. Our policy provides a way of keeping the NHS in public hands and delivering a better deal for patients. We agree with Professor Kerr that there has to be a separation of scheduled and unscheduled care. That will make a big difference and will reduce the number of cancelled operations, of which there were 13,000 last year. That must be done in the NHS to avoid some of the dangers that the British Medical Association has identified, such as damaging fragmentation between the NHS and alternative providers, the financial inequities, the serious questions about value for money that emanate from south of the border, and the potential effect on junior doctors' training, which is a major problem in England. Another danger is the high number of reported clinical exclusions due to the private sector cherry picking its cases. That is why separation can best be done in the NHS. There are good examples in the NHS in England, in which separation has delivered a very good deal for patients. We can agree with the Minister for Health and Community Care—there is much to agree on this morning—on the broad thrust of the Kerr report. It was a response to the increasing concern in the chamber about the creeping centralisation of services that was driven by crisis management, financial problems and staffing shortages, not by the wishes of patients in an area. I am pleased that many aspects of the SNP submission—the increase in undergraduate medical places, better networking across hospitals and support for the rural general hospital model—are reflected in the Kerr report, although we need to know what the core set of services will be. We need to know a great deal more about that, as the devil will be in the detail. We support a shift in the balance of care to build up community services and to deliver health services more locally. That can be achieved through better-equipped general practices, community health centres and by giving a new enhanced role to community hospitals. That runs counter to some of the health boards' proposals to reduce services in community hospitals. There is no reason why people cannot access diagnostic treatment and procedures in a community setting. The shift in delivery of services from acute to community, which is central to the Kerr report, has been talked about for a long time. However, we must be cautious, because I am not convinced that there will be a massive freeing-up of acute resources. We caution against any assumption of huge resource savings in the acute sector, as  there will always be demand from those who require acute services. The shift should mean that those who require such services are seen more quickly and spend less time in hospital. Of course, by preventing unnecessary admissions we can ensure that the right people are in the right setting with the right staff. That is the prize for patients if this vision becomes a reality. I want to turn to health inequalities—

I am running out of time. It is a badge of shame that in a rich country such as Scotland a health gap is widening between rich and poor. Some of our poorest communities are experiencing a fall in life expectancy and that can no longer be tolerated. Anticipatory care is not a single solution in any way. However, it could make a difference by targeting those who are most in need of help but who are least likely to ask for it. There are questions about how such a service will be staffed and how it will be paid for. I would rather see some of the new moneys being ring fenced for that purpose, because robbing Peter to pay Paul would not be an effective use of funds. The e-health strategy that the minister outlined has my full backing. Some of the controversial issues, which include neurosurgery and cancer services for children, have perhaps been misinterpreted in the press. My understanding from the plan—I would like the minister to clarify the matter when he winds up—is that, rather than services being provided on one site, a single service akin to a managed clinical network will be delivered across several sites. The minister must get that important message across, because there are genuine fears on the issue. The key is implementation and delivery and the minister must win public trust. If health boards rush ahead with proposals to reduce accident and emergency services, for example, public trust will be lost. The public must see community casualty units proving themselves in operation. That has to happen, otherwise the public will become more sceptical and cynical. If the minister ensures implementation and delivery, he will have our full backing on the broad thrust of Kerr. We will wait to see the detail and look forward to further debate. I move amendment S2M-3468.3, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: ", and considers that more needs to be done to bring down waiting times for patients including the introduction of individual patient waiting time guarantees based on their particular needs, the expansion of diagnostic and treatment centres within the NHS and the introduction of an element of activity-based payment for hospitals to encourage greater efficiency and utilisation of spare capacity in the NHS."

Will the minister acknowledge that there are 30,000 people on that waiting list who are yet to have treatment? If the list is so irrelevant, why has he accepted that it should be abolished by the end of 2007? Rather than wait until the end of 2007, why does he not do the right thing and abolish it now?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Every time a Liberal Democrat stands up to speak in the Parliament, they claim that the fact that the sun rises in the morning and sets in the evening is down to what was in the Lib Dem manifesto. That gets very tiring. I say to Andy Kerr that at least the SNP has some right to make such claims. He acknowledged Stewart Maxwell's work on pushing forward the smoking agenda. Similarly, my proposed bill on nutritional standards in schools has in no small way led to some of the measures in the Executive's programme. We have no qualms about making claims about that. In opening the debate, the minister made claims about the health improvement element of the legislative programme. However, most of what he was talking about has already been legislated for, albeit that that legislation may not have been implemented yet. It has to be acknowledged that the new legislative programme is limited in its proposals for health improvement. We all agree that the ban on smoking in enclosed public places is important, but that legislation is already in place and is to be implemented next year. Many areas were not covered in the First Minister's statement yesterday and are missing from the Executive's priorities. As has been said, for all the claims that have been made about the health service, it is still the case that median waits are up and that thousands more patients than ever before find themselves on hidden waiting lists. Those lists are to be abolished in 2007, but that raises the question why they cannot be abolished now so that we can have a true reflection of the state of waiting in our health service. As I said yesterday, one of the crucial areas in the health improvement debate on which we must  seize is the Kerr report. However, we are still waiting for time in the Parliament to debate the report's important findings. That means that individual health boards—whether Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board or boards elsewhere—are left to do their own thing. That is not the way to implement a blueprint for the future of the health service. We have to have a national debate in the Parliament about the type of health service that we want. If we do not, health boards will do their own thing and it is difficult to blame them for that. Likewise, we are still waiting for the detail of what is to be proposed on dentistry, particularly in relation to fees. Dentists are fed up with waiting. Many are on the cusp of deciding whether to remain working in the health service or to return to it—they need to know the detail of the proposals and we need to see that detail quickly. The Executive's proposals for health improvement are to be welcomed—as I said yesterday, many of them will find support on the SNP benches. The specific proposal that I lodged in June last year was to prohibit the sale of certain food and drink in schools. It is important that the health message that children get in the classroom is not undermined by what they see when they walk out into the corridors of their school, whether that is through advertising or though the products that are being sold in the vending machines and other outlets in the school. Children do not react well to mixed messages.

The ping is quite convenient for all of us sometimes, but the member's point is well made. The issue comes back to the number of home economics teachers in our schools. The fact that women and men do not know the basics of how to cook simple, nutritious food is a genuine problem. We must ensure that, when children leave the school environment, they have that basic set of skills. The proposed bill on nutritional standards in schools is important because of what it will do in the captured school environment where children might have their only nutritious meal of the day. However, what happens when children walk out of the school gates is not in our power. All we can do is try to educate them to make informed decisions, so that they do not go to certain outlets outside the  school. When they get home, perhaps they will even demand of their parents more nutritious food, so that the message is passed back into the home environment. The issue is certainly not easy to tackle. In addition to that, we would like an extension of the free school meal programme, to pilot free school meals to primaries 1 to 3 and to extend the eligibility of those on low incomes. The hungry for success programme is an important tool, but it could be much better.

I welcome the proposed health promotion, nutrition and schools bill, which bears a remarkable resemblance to my member's bill—the bill for using those proposals will be in the post, although, as the First Minister said, we like to share good ideas in the Parliament. One of my main concerns is what was not contained in the First Minister's statement. The statement was very light on health, with no mention of the key challenges facing the health service. It did not mention how and when the Executive plans to respond to the report that was produced by Professor David Kerr before the summer recess. Given the significance of that report for the future of our health service, will the First Minister say when the Parliament will have the opportunity to debate its contents?

It is difficult to address every aspect of the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill, because the bill is so wide ranging. As I have said before, the Executive should reflect on that, because the wide-ranging and complicated nature of the bill has at times given rise to difficulties. I certainly agree with the minister that the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill is probably the most important piece of public health legislation that could be passed in Scotland to address the health concerns that plague our nation. The ban on smoking in enclosed public places will have an immediate health benefit for people who work in pubs, restaurants and other enclosed public places and for people who visit those establishments. Just as important, it will also have long-term benefits, because it will denormalise cigarette smoking. I have said all along that, for me, that is probably the most important element of the bill. The ban will have a huge impact on future generations. We know that far too many children perceive smoking as a normal activity because everyone around them smokes. It is important for society to put across a different message and tell those children that smoking is not a normal activity and that they should not take it up. The bill provides that important counterbalance in those children's lives. The bill also creates an environment that will encourage many people to give up smoking. We know that a huge percentage of smokers want to  give up smoking. The evidence from New York shows that, after the smoking ban was introduced in that city, there was an 11 per cent increase in the number of people who gave up smoking; there has been a similar success in Ireland. The ban will give people who want to give up the impetus to do so. It will also make it much easier for them, because when they are out socialising they will not be sitting in an environment in which everybody around them is smoking. The ban will have that benefit for a great number of people. There has been much discussion about the economic impact of the bill and evidence has been put forward by those on both sides of the debate. What is true is that the bill provides the opportunity for Scotland to promote itself as a smoke-free destination for many who wish to come here. We must harness that to promote Scotland abroad. For example, my local hotel introduced a smoking ban in advance of the bill being implemented and its takings have increased, so there is evidence that, when people are ahead of the game and promote their establishment, particularly to families and so on, that can have an economic benefit. That is not to say that some will not have difficulties—we must be honest about that. However, opportunities are available for those who are able and willing to take them. Addressing Scotland's poor health record must be the Parliament's overriding priority and concern. It is telling that the vast majority of members agree with that. I am afraid that only the Tories are left as an isolated rump on the issue, although, even among them, some are not entirely comfortable with their party's position. The Tories should reflect on their position.

Frankly, the Tories do not represent a majority view on anything. I will deal with other important issues in the bill. We have long supported the introduction of free eye and dental checks but, if the checks are to be effective, services must be provided for people to take them up and for follow-up work to be undertaken. We are not convinced that that will be the case, particularly in dentistry, because people in many parts of Scotland do not have access to a dentist. More work has to be done. People will in principle have free oral health examinations, but we will need people on the ground to deliver that  policy and to undertake follow-up work that an examination may identify. We have just debated a hepatitis C issue and a vote has been taken, so I will not reopen the argument. However, the fact that we have not delivered justice as we should have for families of those who have died from hepatitis C has taken a bit of the gloss off the bill for me and some of my colleagues, as John Swinney said. That would have been the icing on the cake of what is otherwise a good bill. I will say no more about that. On behalf of my party, I have great pleasure in supporting the bill, but it is work in progress. We will pass the bill today and it will come into force next year, but we must do far more to address Scotland's chronic health problems. We can do more on smoking. We must ensure that smoking cessation opportunities are available to far more people. When people want to give up smoking, the services must be available to help them. We require to take many other public health measures to ensure that Scotland no longer has the tag of the sick man of Europe. However, the Parliament can be assured of our support for this important bill.

I rise to speak in favour of amendment 65 and against amendment 24. Amendment 65 would remove the arbitrary date of 29 August 2003 in relation to those infected through secondary transmission and would provide consistency with the rest of the bill, as amended at stage 2. Frankly, the issue comes down to justice, fairness and consistency. If the minister gets his way with amendment 24 and the date of 29 August 2003 is reinstated in the bill, the family of someone who died on 29 August 2003 will be entitled to receive financial assistance from the Skipton Fund, whereas the family of someone who died on 28 August 2003 will not. There is no consistency, fairness or justice in that. Let us consider the significance of the date of 29 August 2003. It is the date on which the previous Minister for Health and Community Care, Malcolm Chisholm, happened to announce officially the establishment of the Skipton Fund by issuing a press release. It is an arbitrary date that is not meaningful in any way to the families of those who have died as a result of contracting hepatitis C through NHS treatment. As Mike Rumbles said at the Health Committee's meeting of 31 May 2005: "As it stands, the bill is neither just nor fair."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 31 May 2005; c 2001.] The bill was not just or fair on 31 May, when the  committee agreed with me and voted by five votes to two to remove the date of 29 August 2003 from the bill. If that date was not just or fair on 31 May, it is not just or fair today. I urge those members—particularly the Liberal Democrats—who supported me on that day to remain consistent to fairness and justice and to ensure that that date does not return to the bill. I touch on two of the minister's arguments for proposing the date of 29 August 2003 that I notice he did not focus on today particularly, although he has done so in the press and in the letter to the Health Committee. The first concerns the numbers. The minister has stated that 4,000 people in Scotland could have been infected with hepatitis C, that there would be hundreds of claims and that the cost could be £20 million. Those figures are totally inaccurate. I refer the minister to a 2002 minute from the expert group that emphasised the fact that the 4,000 figure that generated the estimates of the cost of the scheme in the preliminary report was a projection of the number of people who were likely to have been infected. The minute said that the actual number of people who had been identified was 568. That is a seventh of the number to which the minister referred, so the cost would be significantly lower than the minister has led people to believe. He could also look to other sources of information for the figures. The Skipton Fund has received only six applications from the families of those who died prior to 29 August 2003. He could look at the number of deaths reported to the procurator fiscal—the minister should have those figures since, from 1998, hospitals have been supposed to report every case of someone dying of hepatitis C. One can get an accurate idea of the levels from those figures, so perhaps the minister can tell us how many such deaths have been reported to the procurator fiscal in that period. The second reason that the minister has given for why we cannot have such a change in Scotland is that it would undermine consistency with the UK scheme and that that would almost pap Scotland out of the scheme. However, his argument is undermined by the fact that he does not intend to put back into the bill the second date of 5 July 2004. Therefore, we will still have a different set of arrangements in Scotland from those down south. However, all those arguments together are nothing compared with the issue of justice for the families who have had no public inquiry. I say to the minister that I know that compensation is not the issue, but financial assistance is so important because it would acknowledge the families' loss as a result of their loved one contracting hepatitis C through NHS treatment.  On this last day of Parliament before recess, I urge members throughout the chamber please to do the right thing by the families of hep C sufferers and not to put the date of 29 August 2003 back into the bill. Members should support the Health Committee's position by rejecting amendment 24 and supporting amendment 65.

I will make a short speech in support of amendment 63. It is totally unacceptable—I was not previously aware of the fact—that 20 per cent of primary and secondary school pupils have an undiagnosed sight problem. Of course, the problem is that that can severely impact on their education. The system fails to screen children consistently after age four and five. There are very patchy sight-screening programmes in some schools. That is not good enough. We need a comprehensive school-age screening programme. I believe that Kate Maclean's amendment 63 will ensure that.  Duncan McNeil's amendment 64 is much weaker and non-specific. For that reason, we hope that members will support Kate Maclean's amendment 63.

I will be brief. I oppose amendments 55 and 56 for two reasons. First, the bill's whole purpose is to take public health measures based on concerns about the health impact of environmental tobacco smoke in enclosed public spaces. To try to extend that to outside areas undermines the argument. The second issue is almost as important. As far as possible, we must try to take the public with us. We know that the move is controversial and that views on it are mixed, but I believe that a majority of people in Scotland support the bill and that we would lose public support by trying to extend the ban into outside areas. That would be a step too far. It would be overly zealous, it is not required and the SNP will certainly not support the amendments.

In response to the statement made by the minister on 27 January this year, the Scottish National Party gave a broad welcome to the Executive's strategy and action plan, "Respect and Responsibility". I give a similar welcome to today's debate. However, it is difficult for us to acknowledge the progress that has been made to date in implementing the action plan, as set out in the Executive's motion, when we have seen very little evidence of that progress so far. I was concerned to note in today's press release from the Executive that it has taken six months to announce the membership of the national sexual health advisory committee. I would have thought that that could have been done much more quickly, so that we could start to see some action being delivered. However, we have an opportunity today to question the Executive about those matters and to look more closely at the targets and the timescales for the delivery of the action plan. As was acknowledged, the strategy was well overdue, given Scotland's poor sexual health record, with sexually transmitted infections such as chlamydia on the increase, not just among the young, but among the over-40s, where the incidence has doubled in the four years to 2003. Teenage pregnancies are a worry and rates in Scotland are among the highest in Europe. As a Dundee member, I am acutely aware that we have a particular problem in the city and that it is linked to social deprivation and lack of opportunity. Tackling teenage pregnancy has as much to do with tackling poverty as it does with improving access to medical and support services. Research tells us that confident girls and young women are less likely to become pregnant or  contract a sexually transmitted infection. Conversely, those with low self-esteem are more likely to be persuaded into having early sexual experiences. We must ensure that our young people are confident enough to delay sexual activity until it is right for them and that when they become active, they are well informed about safe sex. I support the Executive's message of "Delay until you're ready, but be safe when you are active." There is much to commend in "Respect and Responsibility", such as the important commitment to ensure that high-quality and accessible information services are provided equitably throughout Scotland. We know how difficult it can be for people of all ages, but for young people in particular, to access services in more remote and rural areas. Often, the family general practitioner is the only provider of services, and that can put many people off seeking the help that they need. I welcome the commitment that all schools will be expected to provide high-quality sex and relationships education. However, it is important that, in delivering the strategy, we try to take parents with us. Parents must be consulted on the sex and relationships education that is offered to their child, because if they are not comfortable with what is being taught, the measures in the strategy will be very difficult to deliver. There must be a partnership. If schools fulfil those requirements and if parents play their part by showing an interest in this area of their child's education, the concerns raised in the Tory amendment will prove unfounded. Of course, parents have the primary role in ensuring that children are brought up to have respect for themselves and others. However, schools also have that duty. The Tories seems to be saying that we should do nothing and leave everything to parents. Most parents want assistance in dealing with such difficult and sensitive issues and welcome a bit of help with their child's growing-up process. How on earth can we do nothing to address the high levels of teenage pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections in Scotland? We would be abdicating our responsibility if we did not help parents to ensure that their children grow up respecting themselves and others. As I said, there is much to commend in the action plan, but the focus now moves to delivery. In response to the minister's statement in January, I raised concerns about the lack of specific targets and timescales. I am still concerned about that gap, and my amendment seeks to address it. At the time, in response to those concerns, the minister said that the centre for change and innovation was due to "get all the clinicians and experts in the field together".—  [ Official Report , 27 January 2005; c 14028.] That was to happen the following month, with the purpose of ensuring that the strategy could be rolled out and delivered—indeed, he referred to that in his opening speech today. He also said in January that, as soon as that event had been held, the Executive would begin to work on "reasonable" timescales. I wonder whether, in his winding-up speech, he will tell us about those "reasonable" timescales and whether they will be published, so that we can use them to measure the changes and results on the ground. The minister mentioned that, as part of delivering the strategy, he wrote to health board chiefs and local authority leaders. What progress has been made on that front? How far advanced is the development of the local strategies and plans? Moreover, in January, he said that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland would "set out a regime of monitoring the performance of health boards as they deliver the strategy". [ Official Report , 27 January 2005; c 14033.] Is that regime now in place? After the minister's statement in January, I paid tribute to his decision to chair the national sexual health advisory committee. I was going to ask him about the number of times that it has met; however, given that it has not yet been established, I take it that the answer to that question is "none". In that case, will he tell us how often it will meet after its initial meeting on 28 June and how those meetings will be reported back to Parliament? As well as the absence of timescales, we were—and are—concerned about the level of funding for the strategy. The minister announced an additional £5 million over three years on top of the existing £10 million budget for specific sexual health initiatives. That figure is somewhat less than the £300 million over three years announced by John Reid, the then Secretary of State for Health in England. Have people who work in the field, specifically those who have been appointed to the advisory committee, raised the issue of resources with the minister and will he keep the level of funding under review? I notice that, in today's press release, he announced that £4.5 million will be allocated to implement the sexual health strategy. Will he confirm whether that is simply a re-announcement of the same funding that he announced in his statement in January? Scotland's future sexual health well-being is dependent on the strategy delivering a much-needed change in attitudes, better access to services and improved sex education. The minister has our support in trying to deliver that transformation.  I move amendment S2M-2958.2, to insert at end: "and calls on the Executive to publish reasonable timescales for the implementation of the action plan as soon as possible."

At the next Cabinet meeting, will the First Minister discuss the content of the "Frontline Scotland" programme that was screened last night? The programme was about Scottish haemophiliacs being infected with hepatitis C and HIV as a result of national health service treatment. Will the First Minister give a commitment today that the Executive will examine the evidence that was  contained in the programme and reconsider establishing a public inquiry into the worst medical disaster in the history of the NHS? Such an inquiry has been called for by those who have been affected and their families.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve the care and treatment of older people in acute hospitals. (S2O-6838)

In this morning's debate on age discrimination, the deputy minister said that the Executive would learn the lessons of the independent inquiry into the care and treatment of patients by NHS Lothian. Will she say in more detail how she will do that and apply those lessons throughout Scotland, to acknowledge that older people's care and treatment are a concern not only in Lothian, but elsewhere?

I accept, as I am sure the minister does, that there are lots of documents that say what should be done. However, does she agree that the problem is that what should be  done is not necessarily what is being done in many wards in too many of our hospitals? What will she do to make sure that it is done?

I thank the many families throughout Scotland who have written to me about the experience of their elderly relatives. It is because of their concerns that the SNP has secured this debate. Age discrimination in the NHS can affect health care in many ways, from explicit age limits for health services to hidden discrimination by professionals with regard to a policy that disproportionately affects older people. However, although those are important matters, I will focus on the needs of vulnerable elderly people in our acute hospitals. I have heard so many similar stories that it sometimes seems to me that there is hardly a family in Scotland—including my own—that has not had the experience of worrying that the personal needs of an elderly relative in hospital are not being properly met and that their dignity is not being maintained. Over the years, many members will have dealt with cases involving the lack of care of vulnerable elderly people in our hospitals. The question that the Parliament must ask is whether those are isolated cases, involving a breakdown in care and communication that is outwith the norm, or whether there is a more widespread system failure in the care of our most vulnerable elderly people in our hospitals. I believe that the evidence suggests the latter. The cases of Anne Irons and Prudence Dick, who were both patients in the orthopaedic ward of the Edinburgh royal infirmary, were highlighted by the Edinburgh Evening News . That led to a barrage of similar concerns being raised in the newspaper by relatives. The deaths of those two previously healthy elderly ladies must be a wake-up call to us all. Although I welcome the independent inquiry that NHS Lothian has set up into the standards of care, I recognise that the problem is not confined to Lothian, as was demonstrated by the hard-hitting "Frontline Scotland" programme that highlighted cases of neglect throughout Scotland. "Frontline Scotland" carried out a survey of 130 care home managers throughout Scotland, asking about the experience of their residents while in hospital. Although the survey was not scientific, its results were startling, showing that 69 per cent of care home residents had experienced serious  clinical problems, which were, in essence, the result of a failure to provide food and drink and adequate hygiene. The survey also showed that 74 per cent of care home residents expressed concern that their care needs had not been met and their dignity had not been maintained while they were in hospital. Those care tasks are crucial; they are not a luxury add-on for elderly people. If someone is not fed, their chances of recovery and their ability to fight infection are severely reduced; if someone becomes dehydrated, that can make their dementia worse and lead to bed sores; and if someone's dignity is not maintained, they can lose the will to live. Meeting those care needs is an essential part of the care and treatment that elderly people must receive while they are in hospital. Most staff in our hospitals do the best that they can. Nevertheless, as in any profession, some health professionals are better than others. We must be honest about that, as James Kennedy of the Royal College of Nursing was on "Frontline Scotland", when he stated that "in some parts of Scotland, nurses are failing the elderly. Standards of fundamental human care are not being met". That is a strong statement from someone who represents nurses' interests. However, I do not believe that the problem lies with individual members of staff, albeit that they can make a difference with individual acts of kindness. The problem is that the system is failing to provide the necessary personal care and dignity to older people within busy acute wards. That is partly a staffing issue—nurses in particular are run off their feet because they have little time and may have had inadequate training to be able to cater for those crucial personal needs. With the radical changes that have taken place in the nursing profession, some nurses might question whether dealing with those needs is a task for them to perform. It might not be, but it is clear that someone must carry out those tasks. Much can be done to avoid admission in the first place if vulnerable elderly people are treated within the community. I am heartened that Professor David Kerr's report deals with that matter in some detail. However, when bones are broken, some form of hospital care will be required, although we need to consider whether that care should be given in a busy hospital ward. I do not believe that such a ward is the best place for a frail elderly person with a broken bone. Once the bone is fixed, perhaps the patient should be transferred immediately to a rehabilitation ward specifically for elderly people, where the staff have the necessary skills, experience and time to meet the elderly person's needs. Indeed, many of those staff could be care assistants rather than nursing staff.  We also have to ask whether the closure of so many beds for the care of the elderly is wise. The number of geriatric beds has been reduced by more than 31 per cent since 1998. Too often, that means that a more appropriate bed cannot be found for the older person to recover and be rehabilitated in. Moreover, the number of vacancies in nursing care for the elderly has risen. There are no nurse consultants for older people in Scotland, when there should be one in every health board area to provide important clinical leadership in care for the elderly. Staffing is one factor, but age discrimination is as much about attitudes. Too often, elderly people in busy acute wards are seen to be a problem; they are almost regarded as faceless bedblockers whose presence is to the detriment of more needy cases. Attitudes need to change. That is why we require an independent inquiry. These problems are sensitive and older people and their relatives are often reluctant to complain. An independent inquiry is more likely to elicit responses from elderly patients and their relatives, who are more likely to talk to someone who is not seen to be part of the health service. I do not want to dictate the terms of that inquiry but I suggest that, as well as assessing the true extent of age discrimination in the NHS, it should consider the real experience of older people in acute wards, how older people can avoid coming into hospital in the first place, what other options are available for older people and whether we have enough beds to care for the elderly in Scotland. It should also examine whether the regulatory powers of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care should be extended to cover care of the elderly in acute hospital beds. The Executive's amendment welcomes the independent inquiry that was established by NHS Lothian. Does the minister really believe that the problems experienced by older people in Lothian are not being experienced elsewhere in Scotland? She would be most unwise to do so and I hope that she will reflect on that point. We have an opportunity today to send out a message to all those concerned that we acknowledge the problem of age discrimination in the NHS and that we are prepared to do something about it. I urge members to support the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament is concerned about the lack of personal care and attention given to older people in some acute hospitals in Scotland and believes that the Scottish Executive should establish, as a matter of urgency, an independent inquiry into direct and indirect age discrimination within the NHS.

I welcome the report and pay tribute to those who have been involved in its production. Does the minister agree that it is unfortunate that it has taken six years to finally have a blueprint for the NHS in Scotland? That should have been the starting point for health boards, rather than a panic measure in response to public pressure. Does the minister agree that the report is a vindication of the campaigns to keep health services local? However, given that many health boards are already quite far down the road of centralising services, which may run counter to the thrust of Professor Kerr's plan, what does the report mean for the individual hospitals in which services are under threat, but where no final decisions have been taken? How will the recommendations apply to maternity services, given that they are barely mentioned in the report but are a key concern in many communities? Finally, given the importance of the report, why will the minister not hold a full debate on it before the summer recess?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of the statement. The decision that has been taken is probably the only one that could have been made given the sorry saga in Argyll and Clyde, which has culminated in the projected deficit of £100 million and the recent damning report by the Audit Committee. Why, after 22 meetings between the board and the Health Department, was there a failure to agree a financial plan until only this week? What improvements will the minister make in his department's ability to monitor the finances of health boards adequately in the future? Given his comment that "Spending reductions ... cannot be made without service change", what guarantees can he give the public in Argyll and Clyde that they will not suffer further losses of services because of the incompetence of either local managers or his department? Will he assure Parliament that the current senior managers will not be given the same grotesque pay-offs as the previous senior managers received, as that would surely add insult to injury to the people of Argyll and Clyde?

Is the minister aware of the concerns that the FBU raised about the impact on the safety of firefighters and the public if the number of fire control rooms is reduced, including in Tayside? Can she confirm whether that decision has already been made, given that the Executive included the reduction in its savings that were published on 31 March? If so, would that be a breach of parliamentary trust, given that we were assured that the decision would come back to the Parliament?

I welcome this stage 1 debate. I thank all those who gave evidence to the committee; I also thank the clerks for all their hard work in helping us with what has been at times a rather difficult bill. The bill is perhaps a lesson in why bills with miscellaneous provisions are generally not a good idea and should, if possible, be avoided. The bill is dominated by the proposals to ban smoking in enclosed public spaces; however, it also contains  very important provisions that relate to the regulation of the workforce, the introduction of free eye and dental checks, compensation payments to hepatitis C sufferers and the introduction of new powers to allow the formation of joint ventures for the provision of facilities or services in the NHS in Scotland. The minister did not have an awful lot of time to address all those issues in his speech. Similarly, the Health Committee found effective scrutiny of the bill's component parts to be an extremely difficult challenge, although I must say that it made a valiant effort to do so. I want to start with the part of the bill that focuses on smoking. It was fortunate that the committee had heard a great deal of relevant evidence during our consideration of Stewart Maxwell's Prohibition of Smoking in Regulated Areas (Scotland) Bill, because otherwise we would have been faced with a very tight timescale in which to take that evidence. The committee took evidence from both sides of the argument and went to Ireland to see how its ban was working out. Throughout this debate, claims and counterclaims have been made about, for example, the dangers of passive smoking and the impact of a smoking ban on health and on the economy. For me, the question is very simple: on the balance of probabilities, will this measure improve public health? Having listened to all the evidence and having seen for myself the impact of a ban in Ireland, I feel that it will.

To be perfectly honest, that is a silly analogy. The member and his colleagues must assess whether, on the balance of probabilities, the measure will improve public health. I have to say that, at the start of the process, I had to be converted to support the measure. However, if we really listen to the evidence, we can conclude only that the measure will improve public health.

I will give way in a moment. One important aspect of the measure is the denormalisation of smoking. So many children in so many communities see smoking as a normal activity, because people all around them do it. If we denormalise such activity, particularly in enclosed public spaces, we will give the next generation a real fighting chance in not taking up smoking at the levels that we have seen in the past. That can be only a good thing, and I hope that Brian Monteith will at least acknowledge that.

Could it be that John Reid is wrong? I will be very interested to see the absolute mess that the Westminster Government gets itself into when it tries to implement a partial ban and to decide, for example, whether a premises that serves microwaved food should be included in a smoking ban. It will be a dog's breakfast. The courts will be full of rulings to determine matters one way or the other. Because that approach will be such a nightmare, I was persuaded that an all-out ban was the way forward. I think that John Reid's assessment is simply wrong. However, we need to consider a number of important issues. For example, people have argued that smoking will be displaced into people's homes. I do not agree that that will happen—indeed, the evidence from Ireland does not support such an assertion—but I think that the situation should be monitored effectively. In addition, because the number of people who want to give up smoking will increase as a result of the legislation, smoking cessation opportunities must be available when and where those people want them. We must also think about enforcement. I listened to the minister's comments about the concerns that must be addressed, but the matter is crucial. After all, the ban's success in Ireland was in no small measure due to the way in which it was enforced. Enforcement was handled in a non-confrontational manner after the event. For example, if an instance of smoking in a public house was reported, that was dealt with later rather than at the time, so there was no up-front confrontation between enforcement officers and members of the public. We must avoid such situations. The Health Committee was concerned about the fact that it appears that individual local authorities will be able to determine local enforcement strategies. The minister and the Health Department must give clear guidance on what is expected in that regard. Another ace card that the Irish have had is the Office of Tobacco Control, which was the driving force behind the package of measures that the Irish Government introduced. I believe that we need an equivalent body in Scotland to oversee the proposed changes. I look forward to hearing what the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care has to say on that.  I realise that time is pressing, so I turn quickly to the other elements of the bill. Free eye and dental checks are welcome and have long been supported by members of the Scottish National Party. However, the committee received strong evidence—especially from the British Dental Association—that the workforce would struggle to deliver free dental checks. The minister has been questioned about that in other debates. We must acknowledge the BDA's concerns that there will not be sufficient numbers of staff to deliver the free checks. I want to highlight the Finance Committee's strong concerns about the bill's process. It said: "the Committee is deeply concerned that it is being asked to scrutinise the financial implications of a Bill where the staffing and service implications which crucially determine the cost do not appear to have costed in a manner that gives the Committee confidence in the figures." We are talking about a classic cart-before-the-horse situation. When we considered the bill, we had not seen the minister's action plan or a statement of his intentions. That is not a good way in which to proceed with legislation or financial memorandums. The Finance Committee expressed very strong views on that. I will deal quickly with hepatitis C payments.

I have a number of concerns, of which the minister will be aware. I would like him to reconsider the exclusion from the compensation scheme of those sufferers who died before 29 August 2003. The committee has expressed sympathy with the view that that matter should be re-examined and I hope that Andy Kerr will do that. I also ask that the issue of residence be looked at. If someone was affected by hepatitis C as a result of receiving contaminated blood or blood products through the national health service, it should not matter where they live now; if that is how they became infected, they should get the compensation payments as of right. I am being asked to wind up, so I will just make a brief comment on joint ventures. I am pleased that Helen Eadie welcomes the public investment trust model, on which we will seek to lodge an amendment at stage 2. Although I have expressed reservations in certain areas, I support the bill's general principles and look forward to the amendment process at stage 2.

A year.

Will the member take an intervention?

The point is that, although we welcome that scheme, we would like it to be extended to medical students, a proposal that was unfortunately opposed by Jim Wallace. Does Helen Eadie now support that proposal?

I pay tribute to those who worked on the report and to the committee clerks for their input. The report is an excellent piece of research, which has informed the committee's thinking and provided important statistical evidence on the challenges that we face in tackling the crisis in NHS dentistry. The report found that 42 per cent of primary care dentists who currently treat children are not accepting new child patients or are using a waiting list. A quarter admit to scaling down their NHS commitment and only 3.5 per cent of primary care dentists say that they intend to increase the amount of time that they spend treating NHS patients over the next two years. If one statistic in the report should make us sit up and take notice, it is that one, because it shows what the future holds unless the situation is turned around. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the report concluded that the Executive's flagship pledge to give free dental checks to everyone by 2007 will be difficult to meet without a significant increase in the number of NHS dentists. The report also made it clear that the minister's plans to use incentives to lure retired dentists back to work in the NHS were unlikely to be successful. It stated: "A significant increase in NHSScotland provision required to meet pledges to improve access to dental services is unlikely to be achieved with the type of incentives currently available". That is a very strong message to the minister. Since the report was published and since the SNP held a debate in the Parliament on NHS dentistry, we have had the long-awaited response from the Executive to the consultation, much of which was to be welcomed. The investment promise for NHS dentistry was certainly welcome,  because one of the key problems has been the chronic underinvestment in NHS dental services over the years, including the years of this Executive. Nevertheless, the investment that has been announced is welcome and I hope that it will deliver improvements in the areas in which we need to see improvement. The crucial question is whether the negotiations with the dental profession will result in agreement being reached to recruit people to, and retain them in, NHS dentistry. The negotiations on the fee level are particularly important, because the issue comes down to a basic economic argument that, unless NHS dentistry becomes more attractive and rewarding, more and more dentists will leave the NHS to go to the private sector where they can do less for more money. The intemperate language that was used by the minister in attacking the dentist in Stranraer who has left NHS dentistry is not at all helpful. We need to persuade dentists to remain within the NHS. Persuasion is the way forward, rather than launching an attack on an individual dentist.

That is not the point. If we are to persuade dentists to stay in the NHS and persuade dentists who have left the NHS to come back, it is not helpful to castigate those dentists and put them all in the same boat by saying that they have deserted the NHS. The minister has a job to do to persuade all those dentists to come back. The Scottish NHS Confederation stated: "more of a challenge will be persuading established and more experienced GDPs to return to or to continue treating NHS patients." How will the minister's intemperate language achieve that?

The minister misses the point. The individual dentist is not the issue. The issue is those who have gone before and those who may come after and make the decision to leave the NHS. The minister must get to grips with that issue, rather than shout at an individual dentist. That is not the point: the issue is dentists who may  leave in the future. The minister must focus her priorities on persuading dentists to stay within the NHS. Her language today has not helped.

The two go together. Those dentists do not have quality time with their patients and they are run off their feet. If dentists can do less work for more money in the private sector, that situation must be addressed; if it is not, the problem will continue. The British Dental Association has made it clear that unless there are major changes in remuneration for work that is done, there will not be enough dentists to implement the report's proposals, which are very good. How are the negotiations going with the dental profession on the fee level? They are crucial to the delivery of the many good things that the minister announced last month. Many premises urgently require to be improved, and another mechanism to encourage dentists to remain or do more within the NHS is to provide assistance with infrastructure costs. For many dentists, the overhead costs do not make it financially viable to do more NHS work. That issue must be addressed. The Executive's commitment to provide more assistance for premises is certainly welcome. We must ensure that that is delivered as quickly as possible. We must increase the dental workforce. Comparison with other small European countries, such as Denmark or Norway, which have double the dentist to population ratios that Scotland has, shows that Scotland is lagging behind. The BDA estimates that at least 215 additional dentists will be required if the Executive is to keep its pledge on free oral health assessments. We have had a commitment from the minister on the number of salaried dentists. How many additional salaried dentists does she hope will be delivered by the end of the year and what progress will be made after that? We need to expand the workforce numbers, not only of dentists but of professionals complementary to dentistry, because they can take on much of the work—particularly the preventive work that we have all been talking about—and leave dentists to do the more complex work. Investment in training and education is required to achieve that. Workforce shortages are the key. I was particularly pleased to see the golden handcuffs  proposal to commit dentists to working for the NHS in return for being given a bursary during their training. That is exactly what the SNP proposed for medical students, but the proposal was criticised and dismissed by the Deputy First Minister. I am glad that the Executive has changed its mind on that and has seen the sense of the proposal.

No. I am running out of time. The SNP believes that more needs to be done to expand the workforce and therefore supports the development of a third full dental school in Scotland. If we require evidence of the need for that, the total number of applications for entry to dental schools in 2005 was 1,044, but 152 places were available. There were 550 applications for 85 places at Glasgow dental school and 494 applications for 67 places at Dundee dental school. Those applicants are all potential dentists of the future. It is clear that they are qualified to train as dentists, but they cannot do so because of a lack of places at dental school. That highlights the need to secure an extra dental school. The SNP is committed to doing that. The preventive measures that the minister outlined in her plan are important. I highlight one that jumped out at me, which is to "Implement new schemes to promote registration and associated preventive activity from birth". We need to get children registered with a dentist at as young an age as possible, but that will happen only if there are more NHS dentists to do the work. The situation is a classic catch-22, which the minister and the Executive must resolve in order to deliver some of the good things that are in the plan.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to review the operation and effectiveness of fatal accident inquiries. (S2O-6251)

The minister will be aware of the cases that I have raised of my constituents James Mauchland and Nicola Welsh, and their families' concerns about the FAI system. Is she aware that the system can be very lengthy, intimidating and costly for families who wish to be represented in court and that, because the conclusions and recommendations of an FAI are not legally binding, they do not need to be  implemented? Will she agree to meet both families to discuss their views and concerns in more detail and ensure that those are fed into the process that she has outlined?

Will the member give way on that point?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of the statement and welcome the £50 million a year—that is exactly the estimate that the SNP gave last week of the minimum that is required to make a difference. It is a pity that that funding was not delivered six years ago. First, I ask the minister to elaborate on the funding package that is available to get more dentists doing more NHS work. Specifically, on the oral health assessment, the dental profession has said that free dental checks will not be achieved for £7.05. What is the new fee under these proposals for that important preventive measure? Finally, with this investment, will the minister guarantee to everyone who wants it access to an NHS dentist by 2007?

Despite all the bluster, is the First Minister not concerned that the increase in the number of people taking up private medical insurance in Scotland, which is faster than the increase south of the border, reflects people's frustration and concern about waiting too long for treatment? My colleague Nicola Sturgeon pointed out that frustration earlier, but the First Minister did not respond to the point. Given the Executive's pledge to decrease out-patient waiting times to no more than six months by the end of 2005, will the First Minister explain why 35,058 people were waiting for more than six months at the end of last year? How will he meet his pledge and reassure people, so that they do not have to turn to private medical insurance because of the NHS's failure to get to grips with waiting times?

The Executive can increase the level of fees and the amount of infrastructure support that it provides by as much as it wants. What I am saying is that if we are to start to make a difference, a minimum of £50 million is required. If the Executive's figure is bigger than that, we will be the first to welcome it. I am sure that Mike Rumbles knows whether that is the case because he decides Executive policy on such matters.

Does the member think that it would have been best to give the Daily Record its exclusive after next week's ministerial statement?

Will Nanette Milne give way?

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care rightly outlines some good things that have been done, which we accept. However, the fundamental problem is that not enough dentists will do NHS work because they are not remunerated for it. What will the Executive do to ensure that dentists will carry out oral health assessments? Will the remuneration for oral health assessments be increased?

The state of our nation's teeth is one of the biggest public health challenges facing Scotland, with 55 per cent of children having dental disease by the age of five. For many people in Scotland, getting access to a national health service dentist has become an impossible quest. Hardly a day goes by when there is not a story in the press about another dental practice closing its doors to NHS patients. We know that 40,000 dental patients have been taken off NHS lists in the past two years and that dozens of dental practices have closed. This is an opportunity for the Parliament to have its say on what the Minister for Health and Community Care must include in his statement next week if we are to rectify the situation and ensure that NHS dentistry has a future in Scotland. The power of Scottish National Party debates is clear for everyone to see this morning, with the minister's announcement in the press that "Every child in Scotland is to be guaranteed access to an NHS dentist". That is an excellent result for a morning's work, as I am sure all members will agree. The question for the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, however, is where the Executive is going to find the dentists to carry out that work. A report recently commissioned by the Scottish Parliament's Health Committee found that, among primary care dentists, 42 per cent of those "currently treating children were not accepting new children for NHSScotland dental care or were using a waiting list." With respect to adults, it was reported that "only 37% of Scottish dentists are prepared to accept all categories of adults as new NHS patients. One-quarter admit to scaling down their NHS commitment and only 3.5% of primary care dentists say they intend to increase the amount of time spent treating NHS patients over the next two years. The study ... concludes that the Executive's flagship  pledge to give" free oral health assessments "to everyone by 2007 will be difficult to meet without a significant increase in NHS dentists." The report made it clear that "ministers' plans to lure retired dentists back to work in the NHS with incentives were unlikely to be successful." The report also stated: "A significant increase in NHS Scotland provision required to meet pledges to improve access to dental services is unlikely to be achieved with the type of incentives currently available". That all comes at a time when our chief dental officer is allowed to go part-time. That is just not good enough. The key problem has been the chronic underinvestment in NHS dental services over the years, which has led to NHS work becoming less and less attractive to dentists, both financially and in terms of the quality of service that they can offer their patients. The pledge to introduce free dental checks—or oral health assessments, as they should be known—by 2007 must involve more than a cursory look in the mouth. Dentists must have time to spend with patients to carry out a proper assessment of their needs. The British Dental Association has made it clear that, without major changes to remuneration, there will not be enough dentists prepared to carry out oral health assessments for the current princely sum of £7.05, which does not even cover their cost. If we are serious about shifting the focus of NHS dentistry to preventive work, there must be financial incentives for carrying out that work. The Health Committee's report states that nearly 56 per cent of dentists said that an increase in the fee level for such work was required to get them to treat more NHS patients. That is the reality that we are faced with, whether members like it or not. Consideration must be given to linking oral health assessments with a screening programme to ensure that those who are less likely to access oral health assessments for themselves or for their children are targeted. Many of those who live in our most deprived communities are already entitled to free dental checks, but they do not take them up. We must address that problem if we are to deal with the horrendous dental health record in those communities. A screening programme can help to achieve that. Another mechanism to encourage dentists to remain and to do more within the NHS is the provision of assistance with infrastructure costs. Many premises urgently require to be improved. For many of them, the overhead costs do not make doing more NHS work financially viable. That must be addressed. Such support would help  to improve the quality of service provided; it would also improve the level of commitment that a practice gives to the NHS. We need to reduce bureaucracy and simplify the fee scale, which currently contains more than 400 items of service. We must also increase the dental workforce if such an approach is to work. The dental workforce has never recovered since the Tories closed the Edinburgh dental school in 1996. Other small European countries, including Denmark and Norway, have double the dentist-to-population ratio of Scotland and, of course, a much better dental health record to go with it. The British Dental Association has estimated that at least 215 additional dentists will be required if the Executive is to keep its free oral health assessment pledge. We need to increase the number of salaried dentists from the 90 posts that are currently filled. Such posts must be targeted at places where lack of access to NHS dentists is most acute. We also need to expand the workforce further by increasing the number of undergraduates on training places and, crucially, by expanding the number and role of professionals complementary to dentistry. A lot more work could be carried out by dental nurses, hygienists and technicians to free up dentists to carry out more of the complex work. That would require a bigger investment in training and education.

As a minimum, we require £40 million to £50 million of funding in addition to the money that is already going into dental services. The oral health assessment will not be carried out for £7.05; it requires at least £20, plus investment in infrastructure and more money towards salaried dentists. A minimum of £40 million is required. I hope that the minister will listen to the views of members across the Parliament on the best way to address the dental crisis in Scotland. As many dentists have told me, next week's statement provides a one-off opportunity to get it right for NHS dentistry. The challenge for the minister is to get it right, for the sake of Scotland's oral health. I move, That the Parliament is concerned about Scotland's poor dental health record; notes that only 3.5% of dentists anticipate increasing their NHS provision in the foreseeable future; recognises that if access to NHS dentistry is not improved, then the commitment to provide universal free oral health assessments by 2007 may not be met, and therefore believes that, in order to meet this pledge and safeguard the future of NHS dentistry, the Scottish Executive must provide incentives for dentists to undertake more preventive work including a significant increase in the  fee level for oral health assessments, assist dentists more with infrastructure costs in return for greater NHS commitment, reduce bureaucracy and simplify the current fee scale and expand the number of NHS salaried dentists and address dental workforce shortages by increasing the number of dental undergraduates and expanding the role and number of professionals complementary to dentistry.

To ask the First Minister why top-up fees are being charged in care homes. (S2F-1480)

I welcome the inquiry into top-up fees in care homes that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care announced, but does the First Minister think that we also need an inquiry into the reasons for top-up fees and the increasing financial pressures on care homes? Is he aware that the Church of Scotland has just increased its charge for residential care by £106 per week to try to cover the increasing costs of care? Does he agree that until the long-running dispute over funding levels between the care home sector and the Executive is resolved, older people will continue to be caught in the middle and will end up paying the price?

I want to ask about local delivery, although the issue is not covered by the bill itself. The minister will be aware of concerns about local control rooms. In the debate on 18 November, he gave an assurance that there would be further consultation on control rooms and that the issue would be referred back to the Parliament through the proper mechanisms. What further consultation has been carried out? What will the proper mechanisms be? Will the Parliament have the final say on local control rooms?

Is the minister concerned about the growing number of NHS dental patients who have had to go for private treatment? More than 91 per cent of dentists say that they will not increase the amount of NHS work that they do in the next two years. If he is concerned about that, what is the reason for the delay in the Executive's response to the consultation which, the minister will remember, was launched in 2003? That was two years ago.

Will the First Minister agree to revisit at the next meeting of the Cabinet the policy proposal by his Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport to close the dedicated tourism convention bureau in Dundee, which has brought millions of pounds into the local economy in Dundee and Angus? Will he personally intervene in the matter and speak to the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and VisitScotland to ensure that that good asset for the city can continue?

I thank the minister for providing me with an advance copy of his statement. Given the poor state of Scotland's sexual health, as outlined by the minister, it is disappointing that we have had to wait such a long time for the statement. In fact, it is five years since it was first mooted by Susan Deacon, when she was Minister for Health and Community Care. However, we welcome it now that it is here. In particular, we welcome the fact that the minister is prepared personally to oversee the national sexual health advisory committee and to chair it. What are the timescales for implementation of the strategy? It appears that no timescales at all are given in the action plan. For example, when will health boards and local authorities be expected to have their local strategies in place? Does the minister believe that the £15 million additional investment for the next three years will be adequate to deliver the strategy, particularly given that John Reid announced £300 million for the sexual health strategy in England and Wales? Will the minister keep the level of funding under review as the strategy is implemented?

In the past two years, 40,000 patients have been thrown off NHS dentists' lists. Is the minister aware that the north-east has one of the highest levels of deregistration? That information was revealed in answer to a question from my colleague Roseanna Cunningham. Given the urgency of the situation that I and many other members have highlighted, why—14 months after the launch of the consultation process on modernising NHS dental services—are we still awaiting a response from the Scottish Executive? Last summer, we were promised that the Executive's response would be published shortly; the minister has just repeated that. Instead of saying that the response will be issued shortly, can he give a date for its publication?

Will the minister give way?

What are the current vacancy rates for nurses and doctors in the NHS?

Will the member take an intervention?

I do not disagree with a word the member has said. My only question is this: why does he believe that such services cannot be delivered within the national health service, but can be delivered only with the help of the private sector?

One of Duncan McNeil's pet subjects is the consultant contract. When the consultant contract was introduced, we were told that one of the big benefits—

We were told that one of the big benefits of the consultant contract was that it would commit consultants more to the NHS. Does Duncan McNeil think that their working in the private sector through the private centres will do that?

I remind the member that we called for a long time for waiting times to be measured. Does he acknowledge that even if  waiting times are the measurement, the coalition Government has completely failed to make a reduction?

Will the member give way?

On that point—

Like my colleague Tricia Marwick, I am strongly of the view that the content of the minister's speech, which signalled some major policy changes, should have been given to Parliament in a ministerial statement rather than being presented to the press in extensive briefings in advance of this debate. We have arrived at this debate following numerous failed initiatives of one sort or another, with the announcements today being only the latest twists and turns on the part of the Executive. The only consistent factor has been the failure of the Executive to deliver the necessary stewardship of the NHS to deliver on waiting times and lists that are now at record levels. Time and time again, we have heard the same old promises and have been told that targets have been set. However, it is not the setting of targets but the meeting of targets that matters. Is it not strange that all the targets are set for the period beyond the next election? That is convenient, is it not? Let us examine some of the promises that have been made. Members might remember the promise to buy back the Health Care International hospital for the public sector at a cost of £38 million, following the bung from the public purse that the Tories gave HCI in the first place to enable it to be set up. The minister might remember that the previous Minister for Health and Community Care announced with great fanfare that that renationalisation would be the solution to waiting time problems across Scotland. Two years down the line, however, we are told that the latest wheeze from the latest Minister for Health and Community Care is that large parts of the Golden Jubilee national hospital will be rented out to the private sector. The minister tells us that we should not believe everything that we read in the press but should we believe everything that we hear him say on "Newsnight"? Speaking about the Golden Jubilee hospital on that programme, he said that if we have assets lying empty, we can staff them using the private sector.

If the minister does not know what he was talking about on "Newsnight", that is not my problem.  The minister's proposal adds up to a triple whammy for the public purse and a triple bonus for the private sector.

I want to move on. I will give way later. Many other initiatives have come and gone. What has been missing, however, is a sustained, coherent national strategy to sort out the NHS.

As the minister will know from our amendment, we recognise the progress that has been made. However, we will not acknowledge that the Executive has made any progress on reducing waiting times and waiting lists. If the Executive has been as successful as Mr Kerr tries to make out, why are waiting lists at record levels? Mr Kerr is turning to the private sector out of desperation. That is a dangerous road to go down.

No—sit down. The problem with that move is that it will be dangerous to the NHS and hard to reverse. The role of the private sector can expand only at the expense of the NHS. The private sector in Scotland is very small and for it to expand, the staff can come from only one place—the NHS. The minister is robbing Peter to pay Paul. The SNP is not alone in saying that; the same concerns are being expressed by the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Nursing, Unison and others. The minister talks about having anti-poaching conditions in the contracts. He might want to listen to what I have to say, because he might learn something. Although the same assurances were offered in England, it has now been admitted that there are limitations on the extent to which legal safeguards can be achieved. A helpful researcher provided us with an interesting briefing from the Lib Dems down south, which is entitled, "Flagship Government private health scheme exposed as rigged and a threat to patient care". It uncovered problems that were associated with a private treatment centre that was being planned in Oxford—a proposal that is very much along the lines of what the minister is considering. It was revealed that that centre would replace rather than  add to NHS activity and reduce rather than add to NHS capacity and that it would be allowed, quite freely, to employ NHS staff—all breaches of so-called Government promises. The Lib Dems down south referred those plans to the National Audit Office for investigation. Their health spokesperson said: "It is unacceptable that the best interests of politicians and private companies are being put before the interest of patients". I could not agree more. What a shame it is that the Scottish Lib Dems do not take the same view. They will support the Executive's proposals to keep their bums on ministerial seats.

I shall do just that. From some of the minister's comments, it is clear that the Executive is prepared to allow NHS staff to work within the private sector. I will again quote what the minister said on "Newsnight". He stated: "We can also have a contract that says you can use people who work in the public sector, as long as we understand the level of their engagement with the private sector." That still means that they will not be working in the NHS while they are working in the private sector.

I will come to that. The member knows my views. I have said time and again that the only solution to the problem in the NHS is to build capacity in the NHS. I will say more about that in a minute. The idea that it will be possible to stop staff working in the private sector is a farce and cannot be enforced. The minister has already acknowledged that it will be okay for staff to work for the private sector in their spare time. I want to return to the point about building capacity in the NHS. If NHS staff have spare time or if there are doctors and nurses to be recruited from abroad—we have heard that the private sector will be doing that—why on earth are we not taking advantage of that within the NHS in Scotland? If that capacity exists within the NHS or can be provided by  doctors and nurses from abroad, surely we should be using it in NHS in Scotland? Why is the Executive so keen to pay the middle man and to boost the profits of the private sector? Capacity building can and should be done in the NHS.

If the Lib Dems do not believe in building capacity in the NHS, we will have to differ on the subject. It is unfortunate that the Scottish Lib Dems did not listen to the warnings from their colleagues down south about what would happen if the private sector model was used in Scotland. Is it not strange that the Lib Dems say one thing north of the border and another thing south of the border?

No, thank you.

No, thank you. The member should sit down. The important thing is to focus on building capacity in the NHS. I agree that the diagnostic and treatment centre model has a lot going for it. Because those centres are able to concentrate on elective procedures, they are not affected by emergency demands. To date, the 20 centres in the NHS in England appear to be working well—indeed, another 25 are planned. It can be argued that the reduction in waiting times in England is due to keeping the diagnostic and treatment centres within the NHS—only two or three of the centres have been developed in the private sector. If the minister has not been given that information, perhaps he should have been before he embarked down this road. The fact that most of the centres in England are in the public sector tells me that that model could be very important to the NHS in Scotland. All that we have so far in Scotland is one centre at Stracathro and one in Leith. Surely we should be looking at what works. The minister is shaking his head, but why are we not doing that in the NHS? Why will he allow the private sector to do something that could be done in the NHS? The evidence from England tells us that the approach is working. Instead of going down the private sector route, the minister should have looked at the evidence. The minister should think again about going down the private sector route. Instead of siphoning off NHS staff to boost the private sector, he should use the spare capacity at the Golden Jubilee hospital for NHS work; establish diagnostic and treatment centres throughout Scotland—but keep  them in the NHS; utilise the spare capacity in NHS staff; and recruit doctors and nurses from abroad, which he has not been doing. That is how he will build capacity in the NHS. I move amendment S2M-2155.3, to leave out from first "supports" to end and insert: "recognises the progress made in reducing mortality rates from coronary heart disease, cancer and stroke; believes in putting patients first by expanding capacity in the NHS to tackle unacceptably high waiting times for out-patient appointments and hospital admissions, and is concerned that any expansion of the private sector in Scotland can only be achieved at the expense of the NHS."

During the minister's extensive briefing of the press, it was suggested that part of the Golden Jubilee national hospital would be leased back to the private sector. Is that true?

Is it the case that, as with other health service pay deals, agenda for change will not be fully funded through the Scottish Executive's allocation to health board budgets?

When the First Minister next meets the Prime Minister, will he raise the findings of the recent Joseph Rowntree Foundation report, which highlights some of the challenges that the city of Dundee still faces, in particular the fact that it has the worst record of mental health problems and teenage pregnancy in Scotland? Will he commit today to meet me and other representatives in the city to discuss how we can respond to some of those challenges?

To ask the Scottish Executive what targets it has set for reducing levels of obesity. (S2O-4080)

Does the minister agree that it is strange that the Executive has no specific target for reducing levels of obesity, given that one in five 12-year-old children are classed as clinically obese? Given the money that the Executive is rightly investing in improving diet and levels of physical exercise, surely there must be a target on the back of that to measure that improvement. Will the minister commit to setting a clear target for reducing obesity among children and adults?

The minister mentioned that 23 of the 32 local authorities came down on the side of having three control rooms. The question that Mott MacDonald asked was whether there should be three control rooms or one but, if the question had been whether there should be eight, three or one, there might have been a different response. Does the minister acknowledge that the responses were determined by the question that was asked in the first place?

I will refer to some issues that Stewart Maxwell raised in his speech. We should consider the bigger picture—the opportunities that the proposal will bring to Scotland—rather than the threats and problems. One benefit that he highlighted and which is worth repeating is that of Scotland becoming a tourist destination because of the healthy atmosphere and its public health achievements. To change our record of being the sick man of Europe, as we are always described, to one of being at the cutting edge of public health and public health policy would be an achievement for Scotland and for the Parliament. The concerns about the process that Stewart Maxwell expressed are worth repeating. This opportunity should be handled with great care. I suggest that the Minister for Health and Community Care examine closely what else goes into the miscellaneous provisions bill. Members of different parties are concerned about organ donation, fluoridation or whatever else will be in the bill. If we have only one opportunity to vote for or against the bill and many other controversial issues are lumped into it, barriers will lie in front of that important legislation. Those barriers do not have to exist. I plead with the minister to take that on board. David Davidson has a difficult job. I know that he is sympathetic—perhaps more so than some of his colleagues—to tackling smoking and smoking in public places. Like us all, he must endure Brian Monteith on the television and in other sections of the media undermining some of the arguments that he makes.

Unlike David Davidson, I do not believe that we have the luxury of time to allow more people to die of smoking and passive smoking. He talks about choice, but there is no choice for non-smokers or the staff who are working behind the bars. As other members have said, minimal progress was made with the voluntary code—Margaret Smith mentioned the figure of 1 per cent. An opportunity was given to  move forward but it was not taken, so we are where we are and further action is required. The proposed ban is the action that is required. No other comparable activity so affects those around the people who do it and spurious comparisons do not stack up. Mike Rumbles, as always, claims the entire credit for the proposal for the Liberal Democrats, but I point out that the Scottish National Party has put the issue firmly on the parliamentary agenda.

No. However, Mike Rumbles made an important point that is worth reiterating. The research into passive smoking exists, if members want to read it, and I advise some of the Tories to have a good look at it. Smoking is the major preventable cause of death in Scotland and that is why we have to take this action. I know that some in the tobacco industry have acknowledged that passive smoking is detrimental to health, but many others continue to argue that it is not. That is reminiscent of the arguments that people from the industry put forward previously that smoking was good for health. Those are the arguments that we heard 40 and 50 years ago, but time has moved on and we know that smoking is bad and that Government action is required. Margo MacDonald made an important point about what else needs to be achieved to address the issue of people smoking at home. I believe that the bill will go some way towards addressing that issue, because it will de-normalise smoking as an activity. In too many communities, smoking is seen as a normal activity. Removing smoking from public places sends out a message to children throughout our society that smoking is not a normal activity. That can only be good for future generations in this country.

Will the member take an intervention?

Last night, the member's colleague, Brian Monteith, seemed to question whether passive smoking was harmful to people. Does the member think that there is evidence—I think of what he has heard in the Health Committee—that passive smoking can be dangerous to health?

Some of us would never dream of leaving the house without washing our hair. I sincerely welcome the First Minister's statement, which is a landmark for the Parliament. The First Minister referred to the proposed system of fines and he will be aware that Ireland's system of fines is directed towards licensees rather than individuals. Why has the Executive decided to go down the road of fining individuals as well as licensees? Will the First Minister clarify what persistently breaking the law means, and how many breaches of the law would be required for the £1,000 fine to kick in?

To ask the First Minister whether a change of Minister for Health and Community Care will mean that there is a change of health policy. (S2F-1131)

As there will be no policy change, how will the First Minister explain to the people of Lanarkshire why they have to lose emergency surgery from Wishaw general hospital  in his constituency, Hairmyres hospital in the constituency of the Minister for Health and Community Care, or Monklands hospital in the constituency of the Secretary of State for Health, John Reid? How on earth does he expect his constituents to take seriously the forthcoming public consultation on a national strategy for hospitals when, at the same time, Lanarkshire NHS Board is proposing cuts to those hospitals?

Will the First Minister take an intervention?

Is the minister aware that the rationalisation proposals would lead to the loss of more than 100 benefits-processing jobs in Dundee? That would undermine attempts to relocate civil service jobs to the city, which, as the minister will be aware, is under-represented in relation to civil service jobs. I have made representations to Alan Johnson, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. Will Mr McCabe do likewise, with specific reference to the proposed job losses in Dundee?

Will the First Minister give way?

Will the First Minister give way?

Mr McConnell will need to start practising Johann Lamont's name. I have no personal grudge against Rhona Brankin, although her appointment shows the benefit of asking ministers no-brainer questions at question time, but the way in which her appointment came about symbolises everything that is wrong with the Executive's approach to the  health service. First, we were told that the reshuffle was kicked off by one deputy minister resigning due to—wait for it—hospital cuts in her area. We were then told that the so-called new team, which is anything but new, is the right team for the right time.

I find that hard to understand, as I am sure Mary Mulligan's constituents will, because the same Labour-led Executive is causing the problems that her constituents face in the hospital services. I will let Mary Mulligan try to explain that to her constituents; I am sure that she will have a good time doing so. We have been told that the new Cabinet is the right team for the right time, which one national broadsheet translated into: "The shortage of talent shines through". As I prefer to say, the sacked are back. We are expected to believe that the appointment of one of Jack's lads—the straight-talking Mr Kerr—with assistance from Rhona Brankin, will sort out those pesky members of the public who simply do not listen hard enough to the Executive's explanations of why it is closing down their local services. We are expected to believe that, if the Executive says those things a bit louder, all will be well. We are told that Mr Kerr and Ms Brankin are a team that will be able to explain better to the public why services are being cut—presumably in the same way as Ms Brankin explained to the fishermen why they should lose their jobs when she was in control of the fishing industry. We are expected to believe that, if the public would only listen a bit harder, they would understand why all the cuts are necessary and would meekly accept their local hospitals' fate. I suggest a different tack: perhaps the public are right and the Executive should listen to their views and change policy direction. The problem is that, even among Mr McConnell's back benchers, many do not believe that the change of face matters. As Bristow Muldoon said, the issue is the health policy, not the face in the job. I could not agree more. As we know, Mr Kerr could not wait to get in front of the cameras to tell us that there would be no change in policy, which raises the question of the point of the reshuffle in the first place. We are supposed to believe that a fresh—or, in Mr Kerr's case, not-so-fresh—face is enough to turn round a health service that faces major problems and a lack of strategy.

I certainly agree with Mr Swinburne that no one party has all the answers. Every party has issues to bring to the table. What I would say is that we will never agree to hospital cuts. That is where any cross-party co-operation stops. If Mr Kerr refuses to listen to the views of the people, it will be his Westminster colleagues who will suffer the effect at the elections next year—something that they are acutely aware of and jumping up and down about. Some have gone further and have suggested: "Even if the executive had a vision, Mr Kerr would not be the politician to advance it. Health needs a skilled, confident, articulate politician to enunciate policy ... He is no communicator." While that may or may not be true, the issue is whether there is a coherent strategy even to try to articulate. There is not. There is a complete lack of Government strategy and vision. Despite having been in power for five years in Scotland, the Executive has no strategy for the health service. At the Health Committee yesterday, we heard that there is no national strategy for work force planning to ensure that we have the right staff to do the right jobs. Today, it has been revealed that the Executive will not meet its target of recruiting 600 new consultants by 2006. The Executive has no clear way of meeting the pledge for 12,000 nurses, which will hardly match the number leaving the profession, as the Royal College of Nursing said yesterday. The common failing, whether on hospital closures and downgrading or on the lack of work force planning, is that the Executive has not developed a clear national strategy and plan for delivery. Ministers are flailing about, having to deal with one crisis after another. [ Interruption. ] I can tell Mr Kerr that merely changing the faces and shouting louder will not change a thing. Only a change of policy will do that. I move amendment S2M-1823.2, to leave out "Rhona Brankin and".

Will the minister give way?

Can Annabel Goldie explain how on earth the trusts, if they had been retained, would have saved any of the services that are currently under threat? What difference would the trusts' being in place have made when most of them were in place when the decisions were being taken?

I begin by welcoming the news that the Queen Mother's maternity hospital will remain open, if that is what the minister means. He seemed to indicate that he thought that the consultation process was flawed. I say to him that many consultation processes the length and breadth of Scotland have been equally flawed. I hope that he will examine those other flawed consultations and review the decisions that were made. Throughout Scotland there is widespread concern about the centralisation of our health services. Today, the Parliament has an opportunity to listen to those concerns and act on them. When we came into this new building, there was a sense of change and of being able to do things differently. We want to build consensus around issues of great importance to the people whom we represent and the amendment in my name seeks to do just that. The fact that Jean Turner will close the debate is significant because it signals a departure from the usual party politics  in the chamber, but the very fact that she is here should remind every one of us how important the issue of hospital closures is to communities throughout Scotland. From Caithness to Fort William, from Greenock and Inverclyde to St John's in Livingston, to name but a few, communities are seeing their hospitals close or be downgraded by unelected, unaccountable health boards under a health minister who seems powerless or unwilling to intervene. We are where we are, and this is the best opportunity that the Parliament will have to do what Robin Cook said and stop the madness. We should make it clear to the Executive that the Parliament has a different view on the way forward for our health service. I heard the minister's pledges this morning, but to admit that reform can lead to centralisation is to admit only that there is a problem. I say to him that we are looking for solutions. To say that it is good for health boards to work together across boundaries is to state the obvious. The minister reiterated the contents of a letter on new proposals that was sent to the Health Committee two weeks ago, but that was just a restatement of what we already know. Everyone knows that there is nothing new in the minister's pledges. There must be a halt to any further dismantling of our health service until we agree what type of health service Scotland—with a population of 5 million people in urban and rural areas—actually requires. If one started with a blank sheet of paper, one would not design the health service that we have or the way that it is going. It does not have to be this way; there are plenty of international examples of different health service models. We must start to challenge the perceived wisdom of those who tell us that they know best. The SNP amendment in my name gives the Parliament the best opportunity to speak with one voice on the subject and signal that the Parliament is listening. The amendment uses the wording of motion S2M-1656, as amended by Bristow Muldoon. Jean Turner lodged motion S2M-1656 on 7 September and it was signed by 35 members representing six out of the seven political parties and independent members.

I hope that we still have the chance to do that; the Tories could rally around the amendment in my name and I call on them to do so.  My amendment seeks to suspend—

I will take an intervention later. My amendment seeks to suspend all planned reorganisation while a national strategy is developed. Bristow Muldoon's amendment, which leaves Jean Turner's motion intact—

I should think so too, given that it was not my point of order. I return to the important issue in the debate. Bristow Muldoon's amendment S2M-1656.1 leaves Jean Turner's motion intact, but takes it a stage further and calls on the health minister to reinstate any services "that have been withdrawn without full public consultation and ministerial approval." That amendment was signed by several members, including Margaret Jamieson. Members from every party in the chamber, and members of no party, support my amendment. I say to the Tories that the terms of their motion, which involve a vote of no confidence in the Minister for Health and Community Care, make it impossible for the Executive parties to support it. It excludes too many people. If the Tories' motion is voted down, as I suspect that it will be, I urge them to support  the amendment in my name to try to salvage something from this debate. I say to the Scottish Socialist Party that although its amendment is well intentioned, it will not attract the necessary support in the chamber. I say to Labour and Liberal Democrat members that the Executive amendment provides, at best, only some comfort on some new proposals for service change—such as those in Argyll and Clyde—that will come before the minister between now and March, when the expert group will report. Although I welcomed that at the time as evidence of some movement from the health minister, it does not go far enough. It is clear that Bristow Muldoon and Margaret Jamieson do not think so either, and the Executive amendment provides no comfort to hospitals such as St John's, which has just lost its emergency surgery provision. The minister's letter provides no comfort to services that could close without ministerial approval or services where ministerial approval has been given but service cuts have not been implemented. It is impossible to have a debate about the future of the health service in Scotland when local communities are seeing cuts to their local hospitals go ahead at the same time. As Duncan McNeil said, this is not just about Argyll and Clyde; it is about services across Scotland. For the sake of those services, I urge every member of this Parliament to support the amendment in my name so that a clear signal is sent to the health minister that the Parliament speaks as one voice on the matter and supports communities the length and breadth of Scotland that are concerned about the future of their health services. I move amendment S2M-1784.2, to leave out from "is opposed" to end and insert: "is concerned about the centralisation of health services across Scotland; believes that there must be a clear national strategy for the future structure of the NHS in Scotland; therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to suspend all planned reorganisations while a national strategy is developed involving the public and health professionals, and calls on the Minister for Health and Community Care to issue instructions to NHS boards to put in place appropriate arrangements to retain services faced with centralisation and reinstate any that have been withdrawn without full public consultation and ministerial approval."

Gordon Brown will be disappointed that Wendy Alexander failed even to mention his speech. That will not go down at all well. When is an announcement not a new announcement? It is when it has been announced time and again. It is absolutely ridiculous that some of the announcements today go back for what seems like decades. It is unfortunate that the minister has left the chamber. I noticed a familiar tone in the talk of a step-by-step change—there were echoes of the most recent Westminster elections. Perhaps for the coming Westminster elections it would be more appropriate not to talk about step by step, but cut by cut, given that hospitals throughout Scotland are to be closed or downgraded. Many Labour and Lib Dem MPs are raising that issue with the Executive. Of course, the leader of the Lib Dems has gone further than that and has tried to say that his party has had no role in the hospital closure programme in Scotland. There is no doubt that there have been increases in the health budget. We have heard today that the budget will rise to more than £10 billion a year. That is welcome, but it is what we do with the money that is important. The Executive has failed absolutely to get a grip on the health service and to ensure that it delivers for patients. The public want to know what they have received for that investment and what they will receive for the additional investment, given that they are seeing their services close around them. In case the minister is in any doubt about the failure to get that cash to the front line, I shall share with members an e-mail that I received from a staff nurse last week. She says: "Essential equipment such as hoists ... are not available due to budgets; gloves, wipes, aprons and incontinence pads are in short supply due to budgets, and most worryingly for the current media interest, mops are regularly not available between the hours of 15:45 and 07:00 hrs. Nurses are regularly required to go down on their hands and knees to clean up excrement and urine. This has severe implications into the spread of MRSA and other so-called hospital acquired infections. Having discussed my concerns with several Infection Control Nurses I am  repeatedly told that mops are too expensive and departments are restricted in the amount of disposable mops that are available." It is all very well for the minister to speak fine words about infection control and plans and targets, but how can hospital staff meet those targets if no mops are available in our hospitals to clean up excrement and urine, as nurses are telling us? The minister needs a reality check. That is the experience of all too many staff on the front line in our health service and the rhetoric from the minister will offer them no reassurance whatever. I welcome some of the public health measures that the minister announced. I do not disagree that fresh water and healthy eating choices in schools are good things, but turning on the cold water tap is not enough to improve the health of our children and it is not enough to tackle childhood obesity. We need to be far more radical and bold. I commend to the minister the SNP's action plan on tackling childhood obesity—perhaps one of the other ministers will tell him about that when he comes back into the chamber. Our action plan merits consideration. It is comprehensive and will work. I also welcome the 16-week target from specialist referral to treatment for cardiac intervention. That is a good thing, but what about the time that it takes to see the specialist in the first place? How long are patients required to wait for that? Nothing at all has been said about that issue. In fact, I got the impression that the whole health section of the minister's speech was tacked on at the end, which is not good enough, given the state of our health service and our public health. I end by asking the minister a specific question, about which I am curious. There seems to be a significant increase of some £20 million in the legal aid budget for 2004-07. How much of that will Gordon Jackson get?

Yes.

As a West of Scotland MSP, what is Ross Finnie's message to the local hospital campaigners in his area?

Is that the member's definition of raising her game?

I wonder how many constituents Mike Rumbles has seen who have complained about the time that they have had to wait to get treatment.

I will begin by welcoming the forthcoming health bill, which will include measures to provide a better legal framework for organ and tissue donation and transplant. As the First Minister said yesterday, it is vital that families are treated with respect and that their loved ones are treated with dignity. Along with many members in the chamber, I have been involved in too many constituency cases in which that has not been the case. Moves to ensure those changes are all to the good. I also noted that the First Minister referred to payments to people with hepatitis C who had contracted the disease from blood or blood products. Although that is welcome, I state yet again the SNP's belief that those payments are inadequate. I also want to make the minister aware that many people continue to wait for payments from the Skipton fund. That is despite the fact that its website includes a pledge that payments will be made within three weeks. I know of one individual who has not received a single penny as yet and is about to be made bankrupt. I hope that the minister is willing to intervene on behalf of the individual concerned. If so, I would be happy to pass on his details. I also welcome the legislation to introduce free eye and dental checks, which is yet another longstanding SNP policy. However, I want to inject a note of caution: it is all very well to introduce free dental checks, but that will mean nothing if people cannot access a dentist in order to get the free check-up in the first place. If the measure is to be worth while, we must solve the crisis in dental services across Scotland. Yesterday, the First Minister said that over the coming weeks the Minister for Health and Community Care would outline the action that he intends to take to reduce waiting times. I got a real sense of déjà vu when he said that. How many more times are we going to hear the same promises of action only to have them followed by a complete failure to deliver? The Parliament has some real challenges to respond to in respect of the health service. The SNP is often accused of wanting to solve  problems by throwing money at them. We acknowledge that by 2005-06 a record £8.6 billion will have been put into the health service. The question is, what is the return on that investment? Surely a commitment on performance should have been on the table. My colleague Christine Grahame received answers to parliamentary questions and highlighted that in 1999 when the Executive came to power 13,000 people were waiting more than six months for a first out-patient appointment with a consultant. By 2004, that number had soared to nearly 30,000—an increase of 129 per cent. Minister, we need to see the public services deliver and you have to drive a harder bargain, whether that be over consultant contracts or general practitioner contracts, both of which gave good deals for doctors. I agree that change was necessary to tackle problems of recruitment and retention, but sometimes it seems awful like a one-way deal. I think that it is fair to say that the new GP contract was railroaded through the Parliament and that it is creating more problems than it is solving. There are real concerns in many communities about the delivery of basic out-of-hours cover. We need to drive a harder bargain on behalf of the patient and the public. Unfortunately, you, so far, have failed to do so. We must challenge the accepted wisdom of the royal colleges, who state that only through specialisation can we deliver improvement in health services. Is that really true when there is a lack of generalists being trained, which puts our district general hospitals at risk? I do not think so. We know that clinicians want to work in big specialist centres, but we also know that the public want their health services delivered closer to where they live. We need to redress the balance in order for the public's voice to be heard. I have spoken about investment in health. We had an opportunity to showcase what devolution could do for public services. Instead, to quote a leading broadsheet newspaper from this week, Scotland is "in revolt over its vanishing hospitals". The public are at a loss to understand why their health services are being cut when there is a record level of spending on health services. It is not just members on this side of the chamber who are saying that. As Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, members of the Labour group from throughout Scotland have been raising real concerns. The centralisation of health services is taking place without any clear national strategy to direct unelected local health boards. For the Executive to talk about some future national plan that may or may not arise is frankly not good enough. Too many hospitals will have closed without reference  to one another or to a national picture. That laissez-faire approach cannot be allowed to continue.

Jamie Stone raises a valid point, and that is the debate that we need to have, so that we can decide what levels of service are appropriate across Scotland. The problem at the moment is that things are happening in an ad hoc and piecemeal way, without any reference to a national picture of where we think hospital services—whether they be consultant-led maternity services or neurosurgery—are best based. We must have that debate. If we do not, we will end up with a picture that no one wants. We must take responsibility. We are in a new Parliament, and we need some new politics and new thinking. You will have the SNP's co-operation on that. We know that there will be difficult decisions to make, but we, as a Parliament, have to take responsibility. The Minister for Health and Community Care has to meet that challenge and has to take that on board. If you are willing to take that on board, health minister, I will support you in that. The people you saw in the public galleries today represent just the tip of the iceberg of the public's feeling about their local health services. The public have put us here to do a job. They have put us here with trust to look after their interests. If we fail them over the health service, we will have failed to live up to their expectations of the Parliament.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

In addition to designating areas as pressured areas, would the minister consider giving housing associations the right to apply for an extension to the opt-out from the right to buy in 2012? If they can prove that there is a shortage of affordable housing in their area, should they not be able to apply to the Executive to be exempted from the right to buy, for a period to be agreed, so that such housing can be protected until the situation is better in that area and the right to buy can be reinstated?

If the minister had listened to what I said, she would have heard me ask whether, in 2012, when the right to buy is extended to housing association tenants, if a housing association applies to the Executive to say that there is a crisis of affordable housing in the area, it would not be responsible of the minister to consider postponing the implementation of the right to buy in that area until affordable housing is less under pressure. That is not about removing rights; it is about balancing rights against the affordable housing crisis in that area. Is that not a sensible way to proceed?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review its policy on housing stock transfer. (S2O-2732)

Is the minister aware of the Westminster select committee report that was published last month calling for a level playing field to be created for tenants who vote against transfer, so that they are not penalised? If tenants in Dundee or in other parts of Scotland all vote no to stock transfer, why should they then be denied the necessary investment in the housing stock? If they vote no, is not the minister duty bound to review the current policy on stock transfer in order to give those tenants a level playing field, which is surely nothing less than they deserve?

I do not disagree with a word that the member has said about the situation for the Palestinians, but I would like him to explain why there is no mention of it in the Labour amendment and what on earth his Government is doing about it. Given that it has the power to do something, why is it doing nothing?

Will the member give way?

Given the member's comments about the need to remove Saddam Hussein, could he explain why the Conservative Governments under Thatcher and Major sold weapons to Saddam Hussein? Does he not feel hypocritical to stand up in the chamber and condemn Saddam Hussein when his own party sold weapons to the man?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does the minister recall a debate last month at the University of Edinburgh during which, in answer to a question, he outlined his personal commitment to homeopathic services? Would it not be better for him to intervene in the situation now instead of waiting for the plans to arrive as a fait accompli on his desk?

To ask the First Minister why the Scottish Executive has not met its 2001 target on waiting times for breast cancer treatment. (S2F-896)

Is the First Minister aware that the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign stated that it was very unlikely that one in five women diagnosed with breast cancer would delay her treatment through choice, as was alleged by the Minister for Health and Community Care? Therefore, in addition to what the First Minister has said about contacting hospital managers, will he instruct the Minister for Health and Community Care to launch an investigation into the 700 cases that involve people waiting longer than one month for breast cancer treatment?

During our informal discussions with Audit Scotland, we have talked to it about its investigation of the NHS. At the end of that process, Audit Scotland is likely to recommend that a far more in-depth study be conducted, to investigate all the concerns about the NHS. That is why we are calling for such an inquiry. Does the member acknowledge that that is what is required, as opposed to the current overview?

Here we are again, debating problems in the health service. I place on record again the SNP's support for the efforts of hard-working staff in the NHS. During their conference in Dundee—I hope that they enjoyed some good Dundee hospitality while they were there—the Tories said that they had learned some humility and that they would never again impose their ideas on an unwilling Scotland. However, today they are attempting to push the privatisation agenda, which shows that actions speak louder than words. Mr McLetchie gave the game away when he was interviewed on Radio Scotland last week. Apart from insisting that the interviewer should refer to Thatcher as Lady Thatcher, he tried to extol the virtues of what Thatcher achieved for Scotland. Rather than Stalinist devotion, Mr McLetchie still has Thatcherite devotion in spades. It is clear that some Tories, including the Tory leader, have never really changed their spots.  The Tory motion repeats almost word for word a Tory motion that was debated in the chamber only six months ago and was overwhelmingly rejected as the way forward for the health service by the Parliament and by the people of Scotland, so it feels a bit like groundhog day. Only yesterday, we heard from House of Commons Health Committee members that that committee—including its Conservative members—is united in its concern about the negative impact of foundation hospitals south of the border. There is no appetite for privatisation in Scotland. Although I do not take issue with the first part of the Tory motion, which is a statement of fact, at the end of the motion the Tories yet again try to argue that foundation hospitals and the independent sector are somehow an easy solution to the ills of the health service—even though there is absolutely no evidence to support that claim. I have no doubt that foundation hospitals would drain even more resources from the NHS, which would be paying for people to be treated in the private sector. However, neither is the status quo acceptable for patients in Scotland. There is not simply a straight choice between the status quo and privatisation; I believe that it is possible to have a public health service that delivers for patients. For that to happen, we have to be honest about the extent of the problem. We must not pretend that everything in the garden is rosy, as does today's amendment from the Executive. The Minister for Health and Community Care cannot ignore the facts—or, indeed, the concerns of his own back benchers, to whom I will return. In a letter to the Health Committee dated 10 May, on the subject of comments that he had made in evidence to the committee the previous week, Mr Chisholm provided information on the use of agency nurses. The information shows that, although the number of hours worked by agency nurses has declined—which we all welcome, because they cost more than NHS nurses—the overall cost of agency nurses has risen from £24.5 million in 2001-02 to more than £28 million in 2002-03. It is incredible that it is actually costing the NHS more to pay for fewer agency nurse hours—nearly 168,000 fewer hours. How can that be? Further explanation is required. If we are to look after the public purse, there must be further investigation. I do not want to bombard people with statistics but I wish to highlight some key figures. Despite increased revenue expenditure, the total output of in-patients and day cases, of new and return out-patients, and of general practitioner consultations, declined significantly between 1998-99 and 2002-03. That also requires an explanation. The performance of the Scottish NHS declined relative  to the English NHS between 1990 and 2002—despite increased funding. That also requires an explanation. Between 1998-99 and 2002-03, revenue expenditure has increased by some £800 million in real terms. That increase has been accompanied by a 6.2 per cent fall in in-patient and day case episodes, a 4.3 per cent fall in out-patient consultations, and a 6 per cent fall in GP consultations. That cannot just be brushed under the carpet, as the minister is attempting to do. There has been a substantial fall in productivity and efficiency in NHS Scotland. This Parliament has a duty to investigate that. To move forward, the Parliament has to acknowledge the problem and then do something about it. The minister cannot dispute the facts any longer. Looking around the chamber, I see members of all parties who have raised concerns time and again about where investment in the NHS has gone and about the fact that patients have not seen the improvements in care and treatment that that investment should have led to. It is not heresy to say that; it is merely a statement of fact. There is widespread concern across the chamber about delivery in the NHS. My colleagues on the Health Committee have spoken about their concerns on a number of occasions. During the budget process, it has come to our attention time and again that the Executive itself cannot answer questions on what resources are spent where, and cannot give evidence to support decisions to spend in one area and not another. It also cannot say what output it expects to achieve for its investments. The complacency of the Executive amendment is in stark contrast to the real concerns that are being expressed by Labour back benchers. The amendment takes us no further forward. The minister must know that many members sitting behind him do not believe what he is saying either. Duncan McNeil was quoted in April as saying: "Across Scotland, from Inverclyde to Ayrshire, to the Highlands, to Glasgow, to Perth and beyond, staffing pressures are collapsing—or are being used as an excuse to collapse—maternity and paediatric services. Communities are left outraged, MSPs frustrated, and patients short-changed." Kate Maclean has also raised her concerns. At a Health Committee meeting she said: "I think that your answer is a bit glib and does not acknowledge how serious the additional pressures are."—[ Official Report, Health Committee, 4 May 2004; c 812.] She was talking about pressures on health boards. As I say, there are concerns across the chamber. That is why I make a plea to all members to join me today in taking some action to  address the problems. My amendment calls for a root and branch inquiry by Audit Scotland into the performance of NHS Scotland. Audit Scotland is presently conducting an overview inquiry but, in informal discussions, it says that it is likely to call for a more detailed investigation of what is happening in the NHS. That is exactly what we are calling for. Rather than waste any more time, let us all agree that that is a way forward. We need to know why additional resources invested in the NHS do not appear to have improved outcomes for patients. I move amendment S2M-1326.2, to leave out from "the current" to end and insert: "the productivity and efficiency of NHSScotland is declining, and therefore calls on Audit Scotland to undertake a full root-and-branch inquiry into why the performance of NHSScotland has not improved given the substantial increase in funding."

All parties tend to bandy about statistics in health debates in the Parliament. We all take responsibility for that, but does not that underline the need for an in-depth root and branch inquiry into what lies behind those statistics and who is telling the truth?

Will the minister give way?

I understand Mr Swinburne's point that there might not appear to be as great a problem at Motherwell as exists elsewhere. However, does he agree that it is important that the campaign be taken to all fans because, no matter how small the problem, certain things can still be getting said on the terraces and that it is important to counteract any form of racism, no matter how small it might be perceived to be?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of the statement. I associate myself and my party with his comments about the appalling nature of the case. The report makes appalling reading. The conclusion is that there has been total institutional failure by the social work department in Scottish Borders Council. However, total institutional failure is only a product of the failure of individuals within the institution. My questions are about that. What will be done to address those individual failures? The report states that although Scottish Borders Council staff have not been identified in the report, they are named in the findings of fact and so are known to Scottish Borders Council. Responsibility for staff management, development and discipline rests with Scottish Borders Council as the employer. Obviously, the council has failed to take any action in that respect to date. The minister says in his statement that the Scottish Social Services Council has the role of deregistering individuals if they are found not to be worthy of being registered any longer. If any staff are found to merit being deregistered, will that lead to automatic disciplinary action on the part of Scottish Borders Council? What about the senior managers who have either left or are in the process of negotiating retirement packages? Surely action must be taken against those individuals if they are named in the findings of fact. Will the minister assure us that that will be the case?

Will the minister give way?

I thank all those who gave evidence during the passage of the bill. I also thank the Health Committee clerks, who did a great deal of work in getting us to the stage 3 debate. I welcome the main thrust of the bill. As I have said throughout the process, the Scottish National Party has been keen for a long time to abolish trusts, because we want to remove the artificial barriers that exist between primary and secondary care and which have hindered the delivery of an integrated system of health care across Scotland, and because we want to simplify the system and get rid of the bureaucracy in the NHS that has been a major barrier to change and progress. However, structural changes alone will not be enough. As I said when I spoke about my amendment 12, on direct elections, we have not seen enough of the real reform that is needed if the public are to be empowered. However, that will have to wait for another day. We need to address the fundamental issues in the NHS, such as capacity and financing, which I will deal with later. As the minister said, the bill has many positive aspects, such as regional working and community health partnerships, which must be dynamic organisations responding to local needs. I do not believe that they represent in any way a cheap option, as was suggested by some during the evidence-taking sessions. I agree with the NHS Confederation in Scotland, which said: "The creation of new bodies almost inevitably has additional costs attached ... and Ministers should be aware of this." Public involvement is another important element of the bill and we all support the idea. However, as I have said, we need to have real public  involvement through direct elections. As the NHS Confederation in Scotland said, "continuous public involvement is not cheap, as NHS organisations have found through experience". We have had a debate around the independence of the Scottish health council and the abolition of local health councils. My concern about those two aspects remains and, although I will support the motion, I want that concern to be on the record. On finance, I was interested to hear the minister say that he has heard it all before. I think that he is going to hear even more about the issue. I am sure that the minister is aware that, according to senior civil servants, three health boards are in dire financial straits at the moment and seven others could go either way. The minister will hear a lot more about the financial problems that are facing health boards. Legislators have a responsibility not to make the situation even worse by passing legislation without ensuring that the resources will follow. Health boards will have to find the money from somewhere to fund the public involvement elements of the bill such as community health partnerships; the powers of intervention; the duty of co-operation; and the duty to promote health. I do not believe that there will be no overall additional expenditure as a result of those provisions, and I do not think that many health boards will believe it. The money will have to come from somewhere, but from where? Given that all the new responsibilities will have to be funded, the money will inevitably have to come from services and patient care. Surely we all want to avoid that situation. The purpose of my amendment is to say that we remain concerned that the financial provisions in the bill are inadequate; I hope that members who share those concerns will support the amendment. I move amendment S2M-1095.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, remains concerned about the lack of detail in the Financial Memorandum regarding potential additional costs arising from the Bill."

I seek the retention of local health councils, but that does not mean that I do not recognise the importance of the new national body, the Scottish health council. The two are not mutually exclusive—they have distinct roles. I will say a bit about the independence of the Scottish health council in a minute. Throughout the passage of the bill, I have expressed concern about the dissolution of local health councils and the loss of their important role, particularly their advocacy work. The councils help some of our most vulnerable people to complain or to find their way round the health service. People have given years of service to their local health council, but the local expertise that has been built up is, unfortunately, in danger of being lost. I have spoken to a number of people who have been involved in local health councils, and they are disappointed and feel that they have been cast aside because their services are no longer required. Although the intention is to try to involve some of those people in the new local advisory councils, those councils will not have the same role, and so a number of people will choose not to be involved. As I have said throughout the process, I cannot understand why the establishment of the Scottish health council should lead directly to the dissolution of local health councils. It is unfortunate that the Executive has linked those  two measures. The Scottish health council and local health councils would have distinct roles. I urge members not to throw the baby out with the bath water and to retain the role of local health councils. I share David Davidson's concerns about the independence of the new Scottish health council. It would be unfortunate if the message that the public received was that the council was not fully independent or able fully to protect their interests. It is difficult to argue that the council will be independent when it is to be located within NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which is an NHS body. There are arguments for establishing a different structure to guarantee the new council's independence. I am happy to support David Davidson's amendment 13 to achieve that end.

We all agree about the importance of public involvement, but we are talking about the abolition of local health councils and the independence of the new Scottish health council. As Carolyn Leckie said, the previous incumbent of Mike Rumbles's post as health spokesperson had strong views on the retention of local health councils. What is his view on their abolition?

The minister will be aware that there have been concerns about who meets the costs of interventions. The Health Committee had a lot to say about that because we are talking about health boards that are already under severe financial stress. I am pleased that the minister has said that, when the costs would lead to a material  reduction in services, the Executive could help to meet those costs. That is to be welcomed. However, we require a bit more information about what would constitute a material reduction in services. At what level would that be measured? How would it be assessed whether services had been reduced to that extent? It would be helpful to have more information on that.

Amendment 12 is necessary because we cannot have a debate on NHS reform without talking about one of the most important reforms that could and should take place in the health service, which is to redress the balance by tackling the lack of public say in and power over the decisions that are made locally about people's health services. We know from all our patches that the public in constituencies throughout Scotland feel dislocated from the decisions that are made by health boards. In Caithness, the west of Scotland, Glasgow or wherever, there are feelings of disempowerment and a sense that the health boards will do what they want to do in spite of the public's opposition. If we are to address that concern, the public will be able to regain their trust in health boards only if they are given a direct say in the decisions that health boards make. In my opinion, the only way in which to do that is to have direct elections for at least half the places on health boards. I am aware that Bill Butler has made a proposal for a bill on the subject and I look forward to hearing about what is happening on that front and what the timescales are for the bill's introduction. We cannot afford to wait for such change forever. The time is now right to send out a signal to the public that we recognise their disillusionment with the  decisions that have been made and so we are prepared to take real action to address the imbalance of power. I move amendment 12.

I will be brief. I thought that it was important to keep the issue of direct elections to health boards on the agenda, so I lodged amendment 12 as a probing amendment, to find out what was happening about Bill Butler's proposed member's bill. I am grateful to Bill Butler for his commitment to proceed with the consultation before the summer recess and I look  forward to that process. I am sure that there will be a large response from people throughout Scotland and we will certainly encourage people to respond. Given Bill Butler's commitment, I will seek to withdraw amendment 12.  Amendment 12, by agreement, withdrawn.

I support amendment 9, in the name of Duncan McNeil. We should be prepared to take the step that he proposes for a number of reasons, the most important of which is that, currently, a number of health boards are under considerable financial pressure. We are concerned that that could lead to an erosion of the waiting times guarantee. We know that health boards are under pressure and that, in some areas, waiting times will be impacted on. Giving patients the right to recourse if health boards fail to meet the waiting times guarantee would prevent that happening.  Duncan McNeil made a strong case when he spoke about the patients' interests being protected in the same way that others' are. At present, the public and patients feel that the health service is not always run in their interests and that is a perception that we all want to change. Accepting amendment 9 would send out a strong message to health boards that failure to fulfil their duty to patients would empower the patient to use the law to get what they should be getting from the health board in their area. I am happy to support Duncan McNeil's amendment 9.

I support Duncan McNeil's amendment 6, which is reasonable. I remind members that it says that "all reasonable steps" should be taken "to provide information, in such formats as may be reasonably requested ... about ... the health services to which" people "are entitled ... the timescales within which such services will be provided, and ... any alternative sources of treatment which they are entitled to access in the event that such a service cannot be delivered within such a timescale". I do not understand why the minister is reluctant to accept the amendment. People should be fully informed and should receive information in a format that they understand. That is not too much to ask from our health service. In answer to Mike Rumbles's question, the reason for putting the provision in the bill is simple: it would state from the start the principle of what we expect from the new bodies that are being established. That would send out the right message about what we expect from community health partnerships. I hope that the minister will reflect on that and accept Duncan McNeil's amendment.

Does the minister appreciate that those of us who  supported NHS 24 are finding it harder and harder to do so? The average cost of a call is more than £130 and the service has apparently failed to reduce pressure on accident and emergency departments or on general practitioners' surgeries. How will the minister persuade the public that NHS 24 offers value for money?

I thank Mary Scanlon for securing this important debate. My concern is that, as with so many other important services, we are yet again seeing a postcode lottery of chiropody and podiatry services in Scotland. As Mary Scanlon said, the service is driven by local access policies. She also mentioned the shortage in trained podiatrists. Obviously, that means that the number of podiatrists does not meet the demand for the service. It is also worth putting on the record the fact that the public value the service, which has one of the lowest did-not-attend rates of any service—that gives a sense of how much the public value and want access to podiatry services. As members know, it is crucial that people with diabetes have regular access to chiropody and podiatry services in order to prevent serious complications from arising. Diabetes creates a special challenge for podiatry services. Under the Scottish diabetes framework, people with diabetes should have appropriate access to identified key health services, including podiatry. In a recent overview of services, it was found that provision of and access to podiatry services for people with diabetes were generally good across NHS Scotland. Same-day or next-day access to services for urgent podiatry problems was found to be available in the majority of health board areas. Of course, that is to be welcomed. However, as Mary Scanlon suggested, the concern is that, by meeting the framework's standards, resources could be moved away—indeed, I understand that they are being moved away—from other people who require the services. Meeting the framework's standards could mean that podiatry services are taken up almost wholly by people with diabetes. I have a number of questions for the minister, the first of which concerns the roll-out of the diabetes framework. How are crucial podiatry needs to be met? What funding will be available? How many more podiatrists does the Scottish Executive aim to have employed in the NHS in future? How will it ensure not only that people with diabetes have prompt access to podiatry services—as seems to be the case at the moment, which is to be welcomed—but that other groups of people can access those services? I am thinking in particular of the elderly, who rely greatly on the service. I look forward to hearing the minister's answers at the end of the debate.

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing this important debate. I will strike one note of discord. Elaine Smith referred in glowing terms to the role of Labour members. Her comment elicited a sharp intake of breath from somewhere in the chamber. I do not think that any more has to be said on that matter.  I welcome the nursery nurses who are in the public gallery, particularly the ones who have come all the way from Dundee and Angus. To put the record straight, I should point out that dressing in Victorian clothes is not some strange Dundonian tradition: they are dressed like that to mark the 90 th anniversary of the first forced feeding of a hunger-striking suffragette in Scotland. The link with the suffragette movement, and with international women's day, which was a few weeks ago, is important, because it shows that equality for women is still some way off, particularly on equal pay. The figures speak for themselves. Women are still earning far less than men and they are likely to be in low-paid, undervalued work. Even if the nursery nurses get their full settlement, it will still be around £7,000 less than the average male wage. The nursery nurses are chronically low paid and undervalued. Their work is not given the recognition it deserves. They do a crucial job that has been transformed by the additional responsibilities and duties that have been given to them by the Scottish Executive. Today, with the passing of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, yet more responsibilities will be given to nursery nurses. The question for the Executive is, will it pay them for those additional responsibilities? If it does not, we will continue to see disputes such as the current one. There is no point in members tutting: if the nursery nurses are not paid for the work they do, how will the dispute be resolved? It is not good enough to give nursery nurses more responsibility and not pay them, and it is not good enough for the Scottish Executive to wash its hands of the matter and try to pass the buck to COSLA. Yes, COSLA is culpable and irresponsible for refusing to engage in national talks, but members should not try to squeeze out of their responsibility. There is a Labour-led Executive and a Labour-led COSLA. Why do members not use their influence to try to settle the dispute? No amount of sabre rattling by the First Minister on this issue, and no amount of saying that people should get round the table, is good enough. It is not enough. He should have used his influence long before now to bring the dispute to a conclusion. While we support a national review, a national review does not equate to a national settlement. We need a national settlement, because only that will end the dispute. I hope that the talks that are beginning today will lead to a national settlement, for the sake of the nursery nurses and the children. We all hope that the dispute will be brought to a speedy conclusion.

To ask the First Minister whether people who contracted hepatitis C through contaminated blood products will have to waive their right to legal action in order to receive an ex gratia payment. (S2F-803)

I very much welcome that response. However, what is the status of the Scottish Executive briefing paper that is referred to in a Sunday newspaper? The briefing paper reads: "People who receive payments under the scheme will be asked to sign an undertaking not to institute proceedings against the NHS or ministers in relation to their having been infected with hepatitis C from blood, blood products or tissue received from the NHS before September 1991". Given the alarm among those who have contracted hepatitis C, what action will the Executive take to reassure them that they will not be debarred from seeking compensation through the courts?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement. I know that the Executive is keen on producing documents and, in particular, on consultations, but it has surpassed itself today, with a bumper issue of three documents and two consultations in one go. I will focus my questions on affordable housing, which is an important issue. The minister is aware of cross-party calls for better planning guidance, more up-to-date local plans and the need to address land availability and price in order to deliver more affordable housing in many parts of Scotland. How will she avoid confusion and duplication and ensure that there is a consistent and coherent approach to the reform of the planning system, given that all those separate elements relate broadly to the same issues? Specifically, how will the new national planning framework and the consultation paper "Making Development Plans Deliver", which have been published today, link with the current review of affordable housing that the Scottish Executive Development Department is carrying out?

Will the member give way?

I begin on a consensual note by paying tribute to the work of the strategic group on women. I also want to acknowledge the good work that the Parliament has carried out on domestic abuse in particular. It is commendable that that area has received a higher profile and additional resources because of the existence of this institution. However, little progress has been made in other areas. I will focus on equal pay, on which we still have a long way to go. Women who work full-time earn 19 per cent less per hour than men; they earn even less for part-time working. Sixty per cent of employers still have no plans to have an equal pay review to check that their employees are being treated fairly. There is also a disparity between Scotland and England—Scottish women have a gross weekly income of only £371, whereas the income of their English counterparts is £401. We have a problem, because the Parliament has no powers to address those issues. The review group's report said: "a number of the key levers of influence in women's lives are reserved to the UK Parliament at Westminster e.g. employment and equality legislation, tax, benefits, pensions policy and minimum wage levels." That is a compelling reason for the Parliament to have control over those key levers; having such control would allow it to deliver real change for women in Scotland. In relation to women's pay, there is one area in which the Executive and the Parliament can lead by example. The report recommends that the Executive should have gender pay gap targets to meet and that there should be better child care provision with increased funding. I could not agree more. The Parliament could make a good start by implementing both those recommendations and ensuring that Scotland's nursery nurses get a fair settlement to their pay dispute and receive fair pay for the hard work that they do. Even if their full claim were met, nursery nurses would still receive many thousands of pounds less than the average male wage. The debate could go in two directions. Late on a Thursday afternoon, we could have a nice, worthy  debate about gender equality, in which we all dust down our pro-women credentials and talk about the need to urge for this or that, but we would end up changing nothing for Scottish women before we went home to have our tea. Alternatively, we could make the debate real for people by tackling gender equality here and now. That could be done by people putting their money where their mouths are and acting to end the inequality of the wages earned by nursery nurses—an almost exclusively female work force, which is undervalued. The Scottish National Party's Michael Russell first raised that issue in the Parliament in 2001. Is the debate about theory or practice? Are people going to talk a good game but, when it comes to doing something about the issue, be nowhere to be seen? Members have that choice. Through the national child care and education strategy, the Executive has given nursery nurses new responsibilities and it is about time that it awarded nursery nurses the pay adequately to carry out that work. The Executive should intervene now to ensure that there is a national resolution to what is an increasingly bitter pay dispute. I know that the Labour Party is very sensitive about the issue—so much so that there have been two attempts, both unsuccessful, to lodge amendments to my amendment. That shows the level of Labour's sensitivity. I can understand Cathy Peattie's sensitivity, given that she is a Unison-sponsored MSP. I am sure that she came under—

That is even better—Cathy Peattie is a Unison member who should be taking account of her fellow Unison members who are in dispute. She should show solidarity with them.

No, thank you. I have taken one intervention.

Cathy Peattie is getting a bit hot under the collar because she should have done the right thing last week by backing nursery nurses. I afford her and her colleagues another opportunity today to do the right thing.

No, thank you.  Instead of talking a good game in the Parliament, we should do the right thing. We should back a fair pay deal for nursery nurses, so that the Parliament can be taken seriously in wanting to tackle low pay and gender inequality. I move amendment S2M-1052.2, to insert at end: "and, in recognition of the problem of low pay for many Scottish women, agrees that Scotland's nursery nurses have a just claim for a fair, nationally negotiated settlement to their current dispute."

I find it astonishing that, in a debate about gender equality, which is about low pay, the minister would deal with the nursery nurses issue in such a frivolous manner. Rather than being so frivolous, will she tell us whether she believes that, to address the gender pay gap, nursery nurses should get a fair pay settlement? If so, what will she do about it?

Will the minister give way?

The First Minister and his Executive are always keen to claim credit for good news. Will he now have the courage to accept some responsibility for the fact that the gap in life expectancy between the richest and poorest people has doubled in 10 years, leading to the low life expectancy figures in Paul Martin's constituency and others? Does not that prove that the policies of the Executive and of Mr McConnell's party's Government at Westminster have failed to tackle poverty and deprivation in Scotland? What change in policy direction can we now expect to address that failure?

Will Nora Radcliffe clarify what her personal view of GM crops is? Is she for or against the growing of GM crops?

Is the minister aware of the proposal in England and Wales no longer to provide blood glucose test strips on the national health service, on the ground of cost? As those strips ensure that diabetics can monitor their blood sugar levels and address any problems that arise, will the minister give a commitment that Scotland has no similar plans and that those strips will continue to be made available on the NHS in Scotland?

Will the First Minister condemn the actions of Dundee City Council's Labour and Lib Dem Administration, which, in its comments to parents of children with special needs, encouraged them to go to the press to criticise nursery nurses who are in dispute? Does the First Minister believe that such action will lead to the dispute being cut short, or does he believe, as I do, that it will prolong the dispute and make it last longer than it needs to?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive intends to respond to the issues raised in the report by Professor Arthur Midwinter and the Scottish Parliament information centre, "Key Trends in the Scottish Budget 1999-2003". (S2F-713)

So did I. Did the First Minister note Professor Midwinter's comments on health? Is the First Minister satisfied with the Scottish Executive's stewardship of the NHS when, according to Professor Midwinter, the NHS received 15 per cent extra funding between 1999 and 2003, yet it gained only a 5.3 per cent increase in staffing? Does the First Minister believe that that represents good value for money, given that we have more people waiting for treatment and fewer people being treated in the NHS and that we therefore desperately require more staff to tackle those problems?

Will the minister join me in condemning the shameful actions of Dundee City Council's Labour-Lib Dem administration, which phoned the parents of children with special needs to encourage them to go to the press to criticise nursery nurses for going on strike? Does the minister agree that that is a shameful action for a local authority to take during the dispute?

rose—

I welcome this morning's debate and thank John Swinburne for bringing such an important topic to the Parliament. John Swinburne has already outlined some statistics, but the one that sticks in my mind is that one in five pensioners lives in poverty—a ridiculous and unacceptable situation in a country such as Scotland, which has so much potential and is so energy rich. However, to make those resources work for pensioners in Scotland, we need control over the real levers of power that can affect pensioner poverty, such as pensions, tax and benefits. Without that control we can only tinker at the edges of pensioner poverty, but with it we could do so much to tackle the real issues. The Parliament could begin to address those, such as restoring the link between pensions and average earnings. It is somewhat ironic that the Conservatives now want to restore that link, given that they broke it in the first place.  I suppose that the Conservatives are at least trying to make amends, which is more than Labour has done. Labour has well and truly ditched its manifesto commitment to restore the link between pensions and average earnings. The SNP will hold true to its commitment to restore that link, but the Parliament requires the powers to be able to do that. If the situation is not turned round, we will be heading for a pension crisis, with many more thousands of pensioners living in poverty. The situation will be made worse by the failure of the Pensions Bill at Westminster to give compensation to employees whose pension fund has collapsed—an opportunity well and truly missed. As John Swinburne has already alluded to, another important issue that will impact on pensioner poverty is the abolition of the council tax. The council tax has been the bane of many pensioners' lives. Thousands of pensioners end up being caught in the poverty trap. They lose out on council tax rebates and have to pay full whack, perhaps because they took out an occupational pension. They thought that they were doing the right thing, but they have ended up being punished for that. We want to end that situation by abolishing the council tax and bringing in a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay.

The minister should read our policy for herself instead of believing the spin that comes out of her department. Our proposal would replace, penny for penny, the money that the council tax raises, but it is based on the ability to pay. That compares with a system that punishes pensioners. Our system would take half a million pensioners out of local taxation and help to end pensioner poverty—it would replace the unacceptable and indefensible council tax system, which the minister is obviously happy to try to defend. I look forward to hearing her defend it in her concluding remarks; her defence of it will be of great interest to Scottish pensioners. I would like the Parliament to focus on ending pensioner poverty, but in order to do that we need powers over pensions, tax and the benefits system. When we have those powers I look forward to joining John Swinburne and doing something to end pensioner poverty. I move amendment S2M-1020.2, to insert at end: "and that this can only be achieved if the Parliament has a full range of powers including control over pensions, tax and the benefits system."

Is the minister aware that, according to the Royal College of Nursing, the number of nurses who are joining the NHS from abroad may be starting to decline, yet the number of nurses who are leaving  Scotland is very much on the increase, which, together, means fewer nurses for the Scottish NHS? Does he accept that in a global nursing market we will continue to lose experienced staff to other countries if we do not give them appropriate terms and conditions to retain them here in Scotland?

The SNP will have to oppose the financial resolution, given that ministers have not taken the opportunity to agree to revisit the issue. The reasons for our opposition were given in my speech. There is no funding for the establishment of community health partnerships, despite the reservations expressed by the NHS Confederation in Scotland and by others. No money will be received to ensure that public involvement is done properly. The costs of the powers of intervention will be pushed on to health boards, and there will be no resources to ensure that the Scottish health council is established. It is not just the SNP and other members, including some on the Executive's own benches, who are raising concerns about the costs of the bill. Influential and important organisations such as the NHS Confederation in Scotland, which represents managers in the health service, are also concerned. It is just not good enough to say that costs can be met from within savings, because those savings will not be seen immediately and yet there are immediate costs from the bill. The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care said—and I hope that I am quoting him accurately—that there will be no immediate poverty in health boards. He should tell that to the health boards and to the patients who see cuts to local services across Scotland, and to the MSPs who sit at health board meetings listening to the financial savings that are having to be made and implemented over the next few years because resources are being stretched to meet the new responsibilities, particularly those of junior doctors' working hours and the rise in drugs budgets. All the resources are being stretched to meet those new responsibilities, so any new responsibility that  the Executive puts on to health boards that is not fully funded will, yet again, put further pressure on budgets so that those resources will have to be met from patient services. That is not good enough. Legislation that is made in the Parliament should receive funding to ensure that it can be implemented without the funding having to come out of money in the health budget that is designated for other services. I urge members to follow their consciences, to listen to members such as Kate Maclean and to support our amendment to the motion on the bill. I ask the Executive to go away and think again about the financial resolution.

Will the member take an intervention?

We all hope that savings will be made and that the money will be reinvested in services, but is it not the case that it will take some time for that money to come through? The up-front costs of establishing community health partnerships and the Scottish health council, and of ensuring public involvement, will be immediate. Where will those funds come from?

Will the member give way?

I bring to Mike Rumbles's attention the other section in the committee report that deals with that issue. It says—

It is section 62. It says: "The Committee would not wish to see the initial phase of change compromised in any way due to a lack of funding." That raises the committee's question about the potential lack of funding for the bill. Given the comments of the NHS Confederation—the managers who know—and its concern about the lack of funding, does not Mike Rumbles recognise that there is a potential shortfall?

I begin by thanking those who gave evidence to the Health Committee and the clerks who, as ever, did a great deal of hard work to enable us to get to this stage 1 debate. I welcome the bill's principles, which have been the thrust of SNP policy for some time—it has taken the Executive approximately five years to catch up, but better late than never. The SNP has been keen for a long time to abolish trusts because we want to remove the artificial barriers that exist between primary and  secondary care and that have hindered the delivery of an integrated system across Scotland. It is important to simplify the system for the public, patients and staff. There is too much bureaucracy in the NHS, but we are slowly getting rid of it, which is to be welcomed. Structural changes alone will not cure the ills of the health service. We need to address more fundamental issues and to build capacity in the NHS to respond to the needs of the Scottish public. That does not mean that the bill is not necessary, however.

I hope that there will be cost savings as a result of the reduction in bureaucracy—I would be concerned if that were not the case. The bill seeks to simplify bureaucracy and to deliver a better service. As the trusts have no role in that regard, their abolition is long overdue. The bill deals with other important matters, such as regional working. The severe lack of co-operation across Scottish health board boundaries and the lack of regional planning have been highlighted by the debacle in maternity services in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. I know that Stewart Maxwell will have more to say on that in his speech. We have to ensure that such a debacle does not happen again. Community health partnerships are another important development. Such partnerships have great potential, but we need to know more about the Executive's thinking on how they will operate and what they will do. I do not think that all is clear on that front. It is fair to say that LHCCs have been something of a mixed bag. Some of them work well; some not so well. The difference is that community health partnerships are to be statutory bodies, unlike the LHCCs, which are voluntary. CHPs must be dynamic organisations that can respond to local needs. I do not believe that that will be a cheap option. The NHS Confederation in Scotland, the body that represents the managers to whom the minister referred, is raising concerns about that. It has stated: "The creation of new bodies almost inevitably has additional costs attached ... and Ministers should be aware of this." Where is the money to meet those additional costs to come from if not from the Minister for Health and Community Care? Is it to come from other  budgets? If so, from which budgets? We need to know that. Public involvement is an important element of the bill. As John Swinney highlighted, there has been widespread dissatisfaction about the quality of public involvement in many areas. Many members of the public feel that public consultation is a sham and a game played by those in power to get the result that they wanted in the first place. If we are to change that perception, we need to ensure that the bill's provisions, as well as other measures, bring about change and that health boards consult the public properly on the planning and development of services. Crucially, there must be changes in the way in which health boards take decisions once they have listened to the public. The jury is currently out on that. The Executive's assertion that public involvement can be entirely achieved without any additional resources is a matter of concern. The financial memorandum states that the public involvement duty will involve "no additional expenditure" by health boards. The NHS Confederation, which represents managers—those who know the financial constraints in the health service—stated: "continuous public involvement is not cheap, as NHS organisations have found through experience". If the experience of managers is that public consultation is not cheap, either we will end up having public consultation on the cheap, which will not work and will not deliver the change required, or, yet again, other budgets will have to be used to fund adequate public consultation. Either way, the situation is not acceptable.

I am a bit tight on time, otherwise, I would do—I am sorry about that. I have no problems with the new Scottish health council monitoring how well health boards engage with the public—that is all well and good. However, I have concerns about the independence of the health council, as it is located within NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which is an NHS body. There is a strong argument that that does not send out a message to the public that the Scottish health council will be truly independent and able to protect their interests. There are arguments for a different structure to be established so as to guarantee the new council's independence. I would urge the minister, even at this late stage, to reconsider the matter. There are further concerns about the abolition of the local health councils, which have carried out an important advocacy role in their communities. The local advisory committees, we are told, will  not take on that role, although they may have to if no one else can fulfil it. That is extremely confusing—the role should be taken on by one body or the other. Local health councils have fulfilled an important role in directly assisting the public to take up issues with the local health boards. The loss of that important advocacy role is a retrograde step and I urge the minister to reconsider the proposal. The bill also covers health improvement, which is important, and powers of intervention, which are welcome, although concerns have been raised about them. I agree that the bill must be clear about what "intervention" means and under what circumstances the powers will be used. If the bill is not clear on that point, situations could arise in which there is a lack of clarity about when the powers should be used. The financing of intervention is also a crucial issue. If a financial problem is being investigated and the health board has to pay for the costs of the intervention, is that not a double whammy for our already financially stretched health boards? The minister must consider that issue. The focus of my amendment is the independence of the Scottish health council and the lack of detail in the financial memorandum. We cannot have a situation where additional responsibilities are put on health boards, which are already strapped for cash—they are trying to meet junior doctors' working hours and are facing additional drugs costs—without funding those new duties fully. The money has to come from somewhere; if it is not coming directly from the minister, it will have to come from other budgets, as NHS managers and other organisations are telling the Executive. The Executive must have another look at the financial memorandum and come back with something a bit more realistic. I move amendment S2M-215.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, believes that there must be safeguards in place to ensure the independence of the proposed new Scottish Health Council and is concerned about the lack of detail in the Financial Memorandum regarding potential additional costs arising from the Bill."

It is right that we take the opportunity in such debates to praise the work of the staff in the NHS. I join the Minister for Health and Community Care in doing that: those staff work in difficult circumstances to deliver the best service that they can within the resources that are made available to them. It would be churlish of me not to welcome the increase in the number of staff in the NHS in Scotland, so I do so unreservedly. However, it is also important that we use such debates as an opportunity for a bit of honesty about the state of the NHS. It is strange that when there is a good news story about the NHS, ministers are always willing to appear in the media and claim credit for it, but when there is bad news either no one is available for comment or—if they are—they blame the health boards for the problem. A little more honesty and a little less spin would be welcome. Although the minister welcomed the increase in the number of staff in a flurry of excitement, he failed to mention that half the posts are administration jobs. Although I accept that some—perhaps a good many—may be required and desirable, is not it interesting that not one word in the minister's press release is about the fact that some of the posts are for administrative staff? The press release is all about staff on the front line. If it is something to be applauded and welcomed, perhaps he should have mentioned it in his press release.

I like good management, but I do not think that we necessarily require more managers to have good management. The Minister for Health and Community Care accepted that. The minister failed to mention the fact that although staff numbers are up, which we welcome, numbers of vacancies are also up. Consultant,  nurse and allied health professional vacancies are at an all all-time high and vacant posts are left unfilled for increasingly long periods. Consultant vacancies have increased by 82 per cent since 1999, and 52 per cent of vacancies remain unfilled for more than six months.

Yes, but we still have vacancies that are causing the contraction of services the length and breadth of Scotland. Before I discuss that further, I want to put the issues in context. The most important point to consider is the impact on patient care. I suspect that we will hear this afternoon what it means for patient care when there are vacancies and their consequent effect on waiting times. On a number of occasions in the chamber, I have acknowledged the increases in the health budget. The figures are up by 43 per cent since 1999. That is indisputable and it is absolutely right that we should welcome that. However, it is frustrating that, for every £1 million of increase in the health budget since 1999, only five additional staff have been employed in the NHS. No one is going to tell me that each of those people is receiving £200,000 as a salary, so the question has to be this: Why is not more of that money reaching the front line? Only the minister can answer that. Work force problems are, without doubt, the most fundamental issue in the NHS. Shortages are having a profound effect. More staff are required to compensate for the increased pressures on working times. The NHS in Scotland is, for a variety of reasons, failing to attract enough new consultants, nurses or allied health professionals. The pressures are the driving force behind many of the service changes that we see in Scotland. The pattern is familiar: issues relating to clinical governance and safety arise in a locality, often because consultants are not seeing enough patients to keep up their competence and skill levels. Once a question mark hangs over a service, there tends to be a knock-on effect and more staff are lost from the service. Reviews then undermine the stability of the existing work force, which leads to a catch-22 situation in many parts of Scotland. That was the situation in the Belford hospital in Fort William, where only the force of public opinion—3,000 people turning up for a meeting on a dreich night—led to a pulling back from the proposal to downgrade the hospital. There are also concerns about the possible withdrawal of consultant-led maternity services from the  Caithness general hospital in Wick. I know that that issue is dear to the heart of Jamie Stone. Real issues are affecting people throughout Scotland. We have to address those issues. Not for a minute would I try to play down the importance of clinical governance and safety, nor would I say that services should never change or relocate, because sometimes they should. However, we have to acknowledge the geography of Scotland. If we want to attract people to come and live and work in Scotland, we have to have health services for those people in all our localities. We want people to move to localities such as Wick and Thurso, but people will not do that if they cannot access health services. We have to develop more flexible ways of delivering specialist services. Surely, in this day and age, with modern technology and perhaps with good will, we should use the opportunity that is provided by the new consultant contract to link consultants with others in larger hospitals. Technology can help people to maintain their skills and competence. It should not always be the case that lack of patient numbers within a particular locality leads automatically to withdrawal of services, but at the moment that is what is happening. That is why the substance of my amendment is that there should be a pause for reflection that would allow us to consider the national picture that we want in Scotland. If one was to start with a blank piece of paper, one would not end up with what we are going to end up with—a fragmented service. We need to take national control of the situation to ensure that we have a truly national health service, regardless of where in Scotland a person happens to live. I move amendment S2M-944.2, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "is concerned that consultant, nurse and allied health professional vacancies are at an all-time high and that these healthcare workforce shortages are resulting in the ad-hoc and arbitrary centralisation of services across Scotland without adequate public consultation and often to the detriment of patient care, and therefore urges the Scottish Executive to carry out a national review of service planning and redesign in order to ensure equality of access to acute and primary care services in all parts of Scotland."

I thank the minister for giving way. I certainly agree with what he said about delivering the right people to the right places. However, nearly half of the new posts for the health service are administration posts. Does the minister believe that that is delivering the right people to the right places?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the reasons are for it not achieving its target of ending mixed-sex wards in hospitals by March 2002. (S2O-1301)

Does the minister agree that it is totally unacceptable for any patients in Scotland to have to be accommodated in mixed-sex wards? Was all of the £4.8 million that was allocated to resolve the problem indeed spent on addressing it? When will we finally see an end to mixed-sex wards in Scotland?

In the light of that comment, perhaps the First Minister will join his Minister for Health and Community Care in slapping down his former colleague, Sam Galbraith, for the disgraceful comments that he made about free personal care. Will the First Minister reassure the Parliament that the views that were expressed by Mr Galbraith are not held by any of his Cabinet colleagues?

I was going to start by saying that I am by no means an expert on football, but hearing Donald Gorrie has made me feel quite knowledgeable about the subject. I am pleased to be taking part in the debate both as a member with a constituency interest in football, given the plight of Dundee Football Club, and as a health spokesperson. I can see the huge potential of football to improve our nation's health, particularly among young people of both sexes. I will say more about that later. The situation at Dundee means that all concerned are experiencing a difficult time. I pay tribute to Dundee supporters who have rallied round and raised considerable amounts of money for the club. The Dee 4 Life campaign is hoping to raise enough money to secure the cost of Dundee's youth programme and the wages of the ground staff for the rest of the season and I am sure that we wish it the best of luck in achieving that. Every encouragement should be given to Dundee and to all the other clubs that are facing difficulties at the moment. However, I see the  present crisis as being short term, although I do not think that we should underestimate the scale of the problem, given that the figures involved are significant. Today we should be focusing on the long term. I do not believe that the public in Dundee or anywhere else would support the use of public money to bail out clubs—to be fair, the clubs have not been demanding that. We need to set Scottish football on the right course for the longer term so that the clubs do not find themselves in a similar crisis in the future. Part of the debate about the future of Scottish football must be to consider the role of supporters clubs and trusts. We must consider ways of ensuring that supporters have more influence over the game by broadening ownership of clubs. As recommended by Dr Stephen Morrow of the University of Stirling, more emphasis should be put on community ownership, which would help to concentrate efforts on developing grass-roots football. As has been said, Scottish football must find its appropriate financial level. We need a bottom-up approach, not a top-down one. We need to harness home talent rather than spend huge amounts of money on international players we cannot afford. Scottish clubs cannot compete in the inflated wages war to attract international players, which is why focusing on home-grown talent makes far more sense. However, to do that, we must invest in grass-roots football, which means not selling off playing fields but keeping them for kids to kick a ball about in. We must develop facilities in communities to encourage young players, which should be linked to, and supported by, Scottish clubs. Kenny MacAskill talked about the need for restructuring. I countenance that, given that when I looked at the internet last night, it took nine pages to print off the structure of Scottish football. That structure must be honed down because if change is to happen it will require a clear focus. It would be better to have only one body. There is huge potential for creating health benefits by encouraging more people to play football. Obesity levels among young people have been highlighted yet again today. We must do more to get young people active. Football is an accessible game; it does not require a huge outlay. If we stop selling off playing fields, open spaces will still exist on which people can play football. Nearly three times as many people play football in Norway as do in Scotland—320,000 people play the game in Norway. Norway achieved that through investment in grass-roots football and getting more people to participate. Yet again, lessons can be learned from our Scandinavian neighbours.

No, thanks. I am going to finish soon. Politicians cannot dictate what changes should happen in Scottish football, but we can kick-start a national debate and send a clear message to the football community that change is necessary for the long-term good of the game. If we are to avoid future crises at clubs throughout Scotland, we must hope that the national debate will lead to a consensus on the changes that are required to give Scottish football a new lease of life.

I congratulate Kate Maclean on securing tonight's debate and I commend the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on visual impairment for all its hard work. Although I do not want to repeat many of the points that have been made, I must say that it seems to be very strange indeed that only 150 of the 650 people who contract wet AMD each year are treated. That leaves 500 people to the fate of losing their sight. In this day and age, that seems to be completely unacceptable, given that there is a treatment available. As has been outlined, photodynamic therapy is thought to be suitable for between about one third and one half of patients who have wet AMD, but it is suitable only if the condition is caught early. Of course, any delay in providing the treatment means that the chances of a person's losing their sight are increased. As we have heard, Scotland has three treatment centres; in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen. However, residing in one of those areas is no guarantee that a person will receive the treatment under the NHS. For example, although Edinburgh has a treatment centre, the treatment is not funded by Lothian NHS Board. Although patients from Dumfries and Galloway can be treated in Edinburgh under the NHS, a patient who lives in Edinburgh needs to go private to receive the same treatment because of the health board's funding policy. We have also heard that PDT is fairly cost effective: it costs £6,000 per patient to save someone's sight. As has been pointed out, we need to compare that with the cost of not treating someone, which might involve benefit payments or community care services or lost productivity. The Executive's policy is to keep people living in their own homes for as long as possible, but by not treating people to prevent their losing their sight, we lessen the likelihood that they will be able to be  maintained in their own homes. That undermines that element of Executive policy: not particularly joined-up thinking. Although investment would be required, I agree with Janis Hughes that we would achieve good value for money, in comparison with the cost of not doing that. As Eleanor Scott said, PDT is not some new-fangled treatment that has not been proven. It has been assessed for over two and a half years. It has been well evaluated, so there should be no dubiety about its effectiveness. What we have here is a classic case of postcode prescribing, which the minister previously made a commitment to end. Although that commitment technically covered only new drugs and treatments, I would have thought that whether someone's sight is saved should not depend on where in Scotland they live. We cannot allow that to continue, so I sincerely hope that the minister will give us a positive response tonight.

I congratulate the minister on at long last adopting Scottish National Party policy on housing capital receipts. However, has she visited councils that are using those resources to invest in their stock and, perhaps, to add to their stock by once again  building quality homes for rent to help meet the Executive's pledge that there will be 18,000 new homes for social rent by 2006?

I add my voice to those passing on their deepest sympathies and condolences to the families and, of course, the staff and residents at Rosepark. In her statement, the minister referred to the visits that the fire brigade will make to the 1,800 care homes in Scotland not only to check on fire safety, but to provide reassurance, which is important. How quickly does she expect that to be done?  Without prejudging the investigation, will she tell us whether specific attention will be given to the practice of keeping residents' doors open? Does she think that, as a precautionary measure, the advice should be that residents' doors should be closed, as I understand fire safety experts recommend?

Is the minister aware of the Dundee accessible transport action group's petition, which calls for affordable and accessible local transport for disabled people who cannot access public transport? Will he ensure that disabled people are given due consideration during the consultation period and that, in all parts of Scotland, options for door-to-door travel for disabled people will be properly explored?

Will the minister tell us in advance of the announcement that will be made tomorrow whether he has decided to recognise the plight of the families who have lost loved ones to that terrible disease and accept that he has a moral obligation to those families to include them in the financial assistance package?

On the basis of that definition, would the minister be minded to include those who work in accident and emergency departments in our hospitals, where life and death are clearly major issues.

I begin by paying tribute to the expert group's work in producing the report. The incidence of sexually transmitted infections continues to increase in Scotland, while our teenage pregnancy rates remain among the highest in western Europe. In response to growing concerns about Scotland's sexual ill health, the Executive rightly set up the expert group to report on a strategy for improving Scotland's sexual health. Of course, that is not the first time that the Executive has considered strategies to deal with our nation's sexual health. In 1999, Susan Deacon, when she was Minister for Health and Community Care, spoke of "helping our young people to grow in maturity and self-confidence" and having "a culture that is not about ignorance, low self-esteem and furtive sex." On the Executive's targets, she argued: "We will not meet these by not talking about this, we will not meet them by sticking our heads in the sand, silence is not a solution—we will only meet them if everyone—healthcare workers, parents, politicians, churchleaders and young people face up to these hard issues openly and honestly. We need to respect each other's views but different views mean we should HAVE the debate not avoid it." I could not agree more. Now we are having that debate. Unfortunately, it is five years on from when those comments were made, and we will have to wait some time before we see what the Executive proposes, which is the important aspect of the debate. We will have to consider that when it is produced. The report contains a number of important recommendations, some of which I will touch on.  The link between deprivation and sexual ill health, to which the minister referred, is a key element of the report and we believe that examining that is crucial in developing the sexual health strategy, as is how to communicate the message. The mass communication strategy that the minister mentioned is important in getting the message across, removing the stigma and stressing the importance of contraception to reduce the number of sexually transmitted infections and unintended pregnancies. The expert group's call for the Executive to fund a consistent approach to implementing the strategy throughout all health boards is crucial in ensuring that, no matter where someone lives in Scotland, they can access sexual health services. The group's call for resources to be provided so that health boards can implement the strategy is, of course, the litmus test in all this, because there is no point in developing a strategy if it is not going to be funded adequately. We have yet to hear any of the detail of how much money the Executive is prepared to invest in making the strategy work. It is not just about money; it is about agencies talking to each other and working together to provide the best services. It is right that, as the report recommends, all children in Scotland have access to sex education and sexual health services and that current links between schools and sexual health services are improved in order to achieve that. We agree on much in the debate and I am sure that there will be much consensus this afternoon, but I want to turn to the three areas about which I am concerned. The minister has had problems supporting the expert group that he set up; in some ways he has tried to distance himself from it.

I will come on to say a little bit more about that. The minister has tried to distance himself from the expert group, because he obviously wants to decide what the Executive does and I understand the reasons for that. It is difficult to have another debate without knowing  what the Executive's thinking is and how far it is prepared to go; we are left with a fairly unclear picture of its thinking. One of my concerns is that even before the expert group reported back, the Executive made decisions on Scotland's sexual health strategy when it suited. It ruled out the supply of the morning-after pill in schools without waiting to see what the expert group had to say on that. I do not think that the morning-after pill should be supplied in schools; I do not believe that that would be necessary or desirable if accessible, quality services that young people felt comfortable accessing were provided within the community. As Susan Deacon said, we should have a full debate and not avoid any of the difficult issues involved. It was an over-reaction for the minister to try to remove from the debate the issue of the supply of the morning-after pill in schools before we got to this stage. If we are serious about being mature enough to have a debate on these matters, the minister should not have ruled that out before the group's report was published. My second important concern is that the Executive does not appear to know the scale of the problem that it has committed itself to addressing. In answer to several parliamentary questions that I asked, the Executive could not tell me the median waiting time for people to see a sexual health specialist or a sexual dysfunction specialist; how much funding goes to providing the public with information on how to access sexual health services; how much funding goes to promoting sexual health to patients, parents or schools; what proportion of funding of sexual health promotion is geared towards men and towards women; the extent to which the incidence of pelvic inflammatory disease is caused by chlamydia; or what services are available to men and women following an abortion, a miscarriage or a stillbirth. In highlighting those points, my point is that, if the Executive is committed to a sexual health strategy—which I am sure that it is, and I would not take that away from the minister—it must surely have some estimate of the problems that have to be faced and of how much funding is therefore required. A lot more data collection is required. My third concern is to do with costs. The minister laid out a number of new positions that are going to be created. There will be sex tsars and an advisory committee, plus many local co-ordinators. Those people may well be necessary and I would certainly accept the need for a strategic approach. However, that should not be at the expense of maximising the resources that are put into front-line services. If we are to adopt the proposal within the report, which says that all children in Scotland should have access to sex education and sexual health services, it will be  crucial that resources are deployed to the front line. Even though the sexual health strategy has tried to avoid controversy—and I think that it has—the nature of the issues means that the strategy will be controversial. Views vary on how to tackle the issues and on what the best approach will be. A parents group, not with my child, was upset prior to the publication of the consultation document that the expert group did not give enough importance to the views of parents. The group wanted more money to be diverted from sexual health services into educating parents on how to talk to their children. One parent argued that sex is pushed all time and is used to advertise the most trivial of things, and that it is not explained to young people that there is a moral side and an emotional and psychological side to a sexual relationship. It is clearly essential that we listen properly to what is being said in our communities, so that we can address the concerns that are raised by such parents and can shape our sexual health strategy around the needs of Scotland's society. We must overcome any embarrassment that we feel in discussing sexual health, so that we can promote a culture of respect, equality and self-esteem. We should remember that people have the right to independent thought and that adults should be allowed to make their own decisions on sexual health. The need to empower individuals to make the right choices is of key importance. Easy access to quality information and advice—no matter where someone lives—will be crucial. Although the thought of quicker access to abortions and the thought of greater condom use might upset some, it will be of comfort to others to know that parents themselves are to play a greater role in educating their children about sex. However, where parental advice is not an option, it is essential that young people have easier access to sexual health services to help them to make informed decisions about their own sexual health.

I welcome the report of the housing improvement task force, which was published last March. I have some concerns about the time that it has taken for us to get to this point, given the fact that the task force was established back in January 2000 and that its draft report was available in January last year. Although I accept that some progress has been made with the single seller's survey, it seems to have taken an awfully long time for us to have this debate on the report. Nevertheless, we are where we are and today we are here. There is a lot to commend in the housing improvement task force's recommendations. They are certainly badly needed, given the challenges that Scotland faces in ensuring that adequate, affordable housing is available; in radically improving standards in the private rented sector; and in resolving the many problems that are faced by owner-occupiers and private tenants. As the minister said, more than 70 per cent of Scotland's housing is privately owned, yet the sector contains some of the poorest-quality and worst-managed housing in Scotland. I say in a spirit of co-operation that I am slightly disappointed that the amendments from the Tories and the Scottish Socialist Party seem to miss the point of today's debate. The private rented sector and the private sector generally are important areas for the Scottish Parliament to discuss. It is not too much to expect that we should focus our attention on those areas in the debate. The third Scottish house condition survey, which was published last year, reaffirmed the fact that many of Scotland's homes are in a poor condition. The Executive should be concerned about the fact that, in this day and age, 360,000 homes in Scotland are affected by dampness or condensation and 34 per cent of all houses have at least one problem with urgent disrepair. The problems are mainly concentrated in the private sector. Shelter estimates the total repair and improvement bill for Scottish housing to be in excess of £10 billion, so there is a big challenge ahead of us. The impact of poor housing conditions on our nation's health is well documented. If damp is present in a dwelling, there is a greater chance of at least one member  of the household having respiratory problems. The Scottish National Party supports the main thrust of the task force's report. However, we want to highlight areas in which we believe the Executive should go further. It is right to encourage home owners and private landlords to maintain and repair their properties. However, where they do not, local authorities should have powers to oblige them to do so. Only then will we see the improvement that we require. We are pleased to support the updating of the tolerable standard to improve further housing conditions. We agree that the introduction of statutory guidance is important to ensure a consistent approach to the interpretation of that standard. However, we have sympathy for the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland's view that serious disrepair should also be included in the updated tolerable standard. We urge the Executive to consider that. We also welcome the introduction of the cross-tenure Scottish housing quality standard to help raise the overall quality of the stock. The question is whether that should be extended to involve the passing or failing of individual properties within the private sector. I understand the difficulties in doing that, but it could be done at the point of sale. It would certainly encourage owners to take responsibility for the upkeep of their property. Again, that is something for further consideration. As the minister said, improving the information that is available to buyers and sellers is important, particularly information about the condition of a property and the associated responsibilities for common or shared maintenance. The single seller's survey will be important in achieving that. As the minister said, people have had to rely on a valuation report in the past. I am pleased that Dundee will be one of the pilot areas for the single seller's survey. A key issue that the task force addressed was how to get agreement among owners about what work requires to be done. Owners associations are a good forum for making decisions on common maintenance and management issues. However, such associations will not happen by themselves. Local authorities have a key role in supporting and encouraging the establishment of owners associations. The tenements bill, which was first mooted back in 1999, should focus on establishing majority voting on repairs and maintenance and giving more effective powers to co-owners to pursue costs against owners who refuse to contribute towards repairs or property management. I look forward to the introduction of the tenements bill as soon as possible. We agree with the task force's view that there is a case for public intervention to  compel owners to undertake works and to provide assistance to them in doing so. My colleague Tricia Marwick will focus on what form such assistance should take. The role of local authorities is crucial and we support the recommendations for additional powers to address the physical disrepair of houses within their area, including powers to tackle problems arising from abandoned properties or absent owners. We also welcome the proposal to establish a new private rented housing tribunal to support tenants in enforcing their landlords' repair and maintenance obligations and, where necessary, to apply sanctions to landlords who do not maintain their properties. We should remember that there are many good private landlords, who carry out regular repairs to maintain their properties. However, there are a significant number of bad landlords who do not do so and who are responsible for giving the private rented sector its poor image. Therefore, we support the proposal for a new statutory repairing standard that will set out private landlords' obligations. On the important subject of private rented sector regulation, we feel that the task force does not go as far as it should. We welcome the work to develop a national framework for local accreditation schemes for landlords, but we believe that there is a strong case for going further by introducing mandatory regulation through a national self-certification scheme for all private landlords, to tackle bad landlords, to help the good landlords to follow best practice and to ensure that tenants' rights are upheld. The ultimate sanction that would be available to deal with landlords who failed to meet a minimum operating standard would be their not being permitted to continue trading. In conclusion, we need to know how and when the recommendations are to be implemented and what level of resources is to be committed to ensure that that happens. The Executive has said that it will publish a private sector housing bill in the current parliamentary session, but we need more detail on the time scale for that—we do not want to wait another two or three years for the bill. Shelter has called on the Executive to publish immediately an implementation plan for the task force's recommendations to ensure that there is no further slippage in the time scales. The Scottish National Party supports Shelter's call for an implementation plan, and that is the purpose of the SNP amendment. If the recommendations are implemented and enhanced, that could result in a thriving and well-managed private housing sector, and we hope that there will be no delay in introducing the measures to improve the state of Scotland's housing.  I move amendment S2M-761.3, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish Executive to bring forward a timetable for the implementation of the task force recommendations and to ensure that the necessary resources are made available for their implementation."

While he is on the subject, could Mr Rumbles tell us how many amendments he lodged on behalf of the Liberal Democrats as their health spokesperson?

Excuse me, so it is!

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to review the definition of household income that is used in the Scottish house condition survey. (S2O-990)

The minister will be aware that the survey's current definition of income may distort the true level of fuel poverty in Scotland, because it includes benefits such as free school meals, community care grants and maternity and funeral payments, which, in reality, people cannot use to meet fuel costs. Given the fact that Citizens Advice Scotland, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, Energy Action Scotland, Help the Aged and others all support the redefinition of income to exclude those benefits, will the minister commit to undertake that reform so that we can know the true extent of fuel poverty in Scotland?

I begin by thanking those who came to the committee to give evidence, and I thank the Health Committee clerks, who always keep us right when we are dealing with a bill of this nature. I start by restating that I believe that the thrust of the bill is not about privatisation, but about trying to resolve the GP recruitment and retention crisis. However, it is interesting to note that a person who did not vote for Carolyn Leckie's amendments was none other than Tommy Sheridan himself—perhaps he had a road-to-Damascus conversion  during the speeches, which made him see the light. We can only hope so. We have said on a number of occasions that we cannot underestimate just how great a crisis is being faced in the GP profession, in which there is an aging work force and low morale. That is why the legislation will be so important in trying to turn that around. However, the backdrop to the bill also involves training of general practitioners and some concerns remain, despite the bill. One of those concerns is about the lack of training places for students in Scotland, and of funding to go with them. That issue was raised by general practitioners and their organisations, and by others who expressed concerns. If we cannot produce enough GPs through our training system, we will not be able to solve the problem in the long term. The jury is still out on whether enough is being done to achieve that. I turn to the amendment in my name. The focus of a lot of the evidence to the Health Committee and of the concerns that were raised was on rural practices and GPs who are unable to opt out of the out-of-hours services. That is obviously where some of the biggest pressures on recruitment and retention fall. There are still areas of Scotland that cannot get GPs to go there and provide services, and there are still concerns about the need to address that problem. It is important that assistance is secured, and I welcome the additional funding for GPs in that situation. I do not know whether that will be enough to attract GPs to remote and rural areas; the jury is out on that question, too. I felt that it was important to restate in an amendment to the motion the principle that we must provide assistance for recruitment and retention of GPs in rural areas. Primary care is definitely the way forward to delivering services to the people of Scotland. It is the way forward in trying to turn around the state of the nation's health. I welcome the investment that has been announced today, but I expect primary care to deliver much over the next few years. We have huge expectations of community health partnerships and what they will deliver. The SNP certainly hopes that the investment will be enough and that such partnerships will be a success. We have discussed our concerns, but I am happy to support the bill. I move amendment S2M-698.1, to insert at end:  "but, in so doing, is concerned that rural practices unable to opt out of out-of-hours services will have serious difficulty in recruiting new doctors and therefore believes that it is imperative that the Scottish Executive ensures that NHS boards honour the principles of the Patient Services Guarantee in all areas, in particular in securing assistance for single-handed GP practices in the provision of out-of-hours services to remote and rural Scotland."

Where do I start? For the record, let me say that the SNP has never been backward in coming forward to defend our public services against privatisation. Our record in opposing the private finance initiative and public-private partnerships is consistent and long term. I will take no lessons from the SSP on that front. Let me get to the nub of the issue, which I think should be debated. I do not subscribe to the conspiracy theory that the SSP promotes that somehow the entire bill has been engineered to open the door to a mass influx of the private sector into the health service; that is just not the case. The paranoia exhibited by Carolyn Leckie is staggering even by SSP standards. It extends to suggesting a right-wing takeover of SNP policy.

No, thank you. The bill is about trying to reverse the real recruitment and retention crisis in our GP services that is there for all to see—all apart from the SSP. The jury is still out on whether that will be achieved. The SNP is prepared to give the bill the benefit of the doubt to try to turn the crisis around. That is why we have lodged an amendment to the motion to pass the bill. Let us pause for a second and reflect on what the result of the SSP amendments would be. They would stop community pharmacists—because they are private providers—providing services such as smoking-cessation services, diabetes checks and blood pressure checks in the deprived communities that the SSP claims to represent. Those services would stop overnight if the SSP amendments were agreed to. Are the community pharmacists the great private profiteers that the SSP talks about? They provide such important services to our most needy to try to turn around the dreadful health situation in Scotland. The health promotion and the prevention work that community pharmacists carry out is an essential part of our health service. The SSP members would have learned about those issues if they had listened to and taken part fully in debate on the bill. The SNP will be quite happy to vote against the SSP amendments on the basis that I have outlined.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of the statement. His prompt decision to make a statement this morning is to be welcomed Given that scientists have warned that people living in Scotland are twice as likely to develop variant CJD and that there is, as yet, no blood test for CJD and therefore no way of screening blood donations for the presence of CJD, what further precautionary steps will be taken to safeguard our blood supplies to ensure that they are not a means of spreading variant CJD? Furthermore, the minister said in his statement that the expert advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues for transplantation advised that it was not necessary to stop people who have received blood transfusions giving blood, but that that is now under review. What are the implications of excluding that group of people from giving blood and when will the SNBTS complete its assessment of the issue? Given the fears that will be raised about the issue in the public domain, how can the public be reassured that our blood supply is safe? What action will the Executive take to reassure the public?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, of which I have given advance notice. I seek your advice on how a ministerial statement can be brought forward tomorrow in the light of the announcement in the House of Commons by the Secretary of State for Health, John Reid, that a patient died of variant CJD after receiving a blood transfusion from a donor who was subsequently found to have developed the disease. The chief medical officer's conclusion was that the possibility that the infection was transfusion related could not be discounted. Given today's serious developments and the fact that we have almost reached the recess, would it be in order for business managers to meet again to consider making time available tomorrow for a ministerial statement on the matter and will you use your office to facilitate that?

Will the member give way?

Given that the member's facts are absolutely correct, how will the situation improve if doctors are taken out of the NHS and go into the private sector? Would waiting times increase under the Conservatives' proposals?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

There is a saying that a leopard never changes its spots, which is certainly true of the Tories this morning. Their answer to the crisis in the health service and failing standards in education is that the private sector will solve the problem. The Tories say that the staffing crisis in the NHS, which is the root cause of so many of the service's problems, will somehow be solved if we take more staff away from the NHS to work privately, using—I presume—NHS facilities. Given  the small number of private hospitals in Scotland, that policy is nothing short of total nonsense. Every pound that the Tories gave to the private sector would mean a pound lost to the NHS to try to build capacity to treat more patients and reduce waiting times. Under the Tories' proposals, we would have a shrinking, second-class NHS, which dealt only with life-threatening situations, and a burgeoning private sector for those who could afford to pay. On education, the Tories want parents to be able to send their children to the school of their choice, but they do not explain what happens when that school is full. Must schools then cram children into overcrowded classrooms? Will unpopular schools simply close as the market dictates? Will parents have to build schools if they want their children to attend a local school?

Mr McLetchie will not find me defending Labour councils in Scotland; however, neither will I accept the Tory policy that the survival of the fittest is the way forward and to hell with the rest. This debate has more to do with the new regime under Michael Howard being determined to pull the Scottish Tories into line and have Tories speak with one right-wing voice across the UK. Michael Howard may, finally, have apologised for the poll tax but, as he was a minister in the Tory Governments of the 1980s and 1990s, he has a lot more to be sorry for. The people of Scotland will not forget the damage that the Tories did to our public services when they were in power. This debate shows their desire to privatise our public services and will act as a timely reminder to the Scottish public. The real challenge in the debate is for the Labour-Lib Dem Executive. It is those parties' failure to provide adequate stewardship that has led to many of the problems that our public services face. They have happily continued with the Tory policy of PPP/PFI with great gusto, making Scotland the PFI capital of Europe—a legacy that will mortgage our nation's future for a generation. The £8 million overspend in Lothian because of the PFI at the Edinburgh royal infirmary is just one example of the major impact on patient care and the morale of staff. Hardly a day goes by without there being yet another problem at the Executive's flagship hospital.  Of course, with PFI, the risk is meant to be taken over by the private sector: that is what the private contractors are being paid their excess profits for. However, the Executive should try telling that to the pupils of the East Lothian schools that are asking the Scottish Qualifications Authority for special dispensation from the continuous assessment part of their courses because of the disruption caused over the past few months by the halt in works because Ballast plc, the PPP project contractor, has gone into administration.

Of course it would, because profits would not have been put before pupils. Pupils must come before profits—that is what people will get under the SNP rather than the Labour-Lib Dem Executive. Firms are laying off staff and are demanding the return of desks in payment for unpaid bills. Can Robert Brown imagine that happening in the public sector? I do not think so. The price and the risk of PPP have been laid out for all to see in East Lothian, and there is still no sign of a solution. When the minister is asked, he cannot tell us who owns the six secondary schools in East Lothian. So much for the private sector earning its excess profits by taking the risk; it is clear that it is parents and pupils who are taking the risk. The laissez-faire attitude of the Executive is staggering. That is especially evident in health issues, on which the Minister for Health and Community Care appears to have no strategy. A piecemeal approach is being taken, with individual health boards centralising their services, which is leading to an increasingly fragmented health service. Health boards are saying that they cannot cope with the pressures that are being placed on them. The impact of the working time directive on junior doctors' hours is causing huge difficulties. Health boards are saying that they have no money to implement the changes, although the Executive has known about the impact of the working time directive for years. Somehow, little or no preparation has been undertaken to cope with the pressures.

I will come on to a quote from  Duncan McNeil himself, if he just holds his horses. In Glasgow, we are being warned by hospital managers—in something akin to a softening-up process—that the number of hospitals in the city needs to be halved within three years to cope with drastic cuts in doctors' working hours. We are told that as many as 24 hospitals throughout Scotland face cuts as managers struggle to cope with the new laws as well as staff shortages and budget cuts. It is simply not good enough for the Minister for Health and Community Care to tell patients that bricks and mortar do not matter; they do matter when the lack of them means that patients have to travel huge distances to access a dwindling number of services. Duncan McNeil hit the nail on the head when he said: "It is crisis management right across Scotland". I ask Duncan McNeil who is creating that crisis. The Minister for Health and Community Care is creating that crisis by his failure to intervene. It is time that the minister intervened.

No, thank you. Instead of allowing the butchering of our health service by a thousand local cuts, we need to have a moratorium on the acute services reviews that are taking place throughout Scotland in order to have a national debate on the future direction of our health service. That process cannot be allowed to take place through a muddle of local health board initiatives with no reference to each other. We need a national strategic plan for our health service to build the capacity in the NHS. I urge the Executive to begin that process today by telling us that there will be a moratorium and that it will work towards a national strategy, which we do not have at the moment. I move amendment S2M-718.1, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "rejects the proposals by the Conservative Party to privatise our public services and deplores the continued use of PPP/PFI to fund our public services by the current Labour/Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive; believes that the developing crisis in the NHS will only be addressed by increasing the capacity of the NHS to treat more patients and reduce waiting times through effective policies to recruit and retain staff within the NHS in Scotland, and calls for a national debate on the way forward for the health service in Scotland."

Will the member give way?

I do not disagree with a word of the minister's analysis of the Tories. However, does the minister accept that he, too, is culpable because he accepted with gusto one of the Tory policies—use of the private finance initiative and public-private partnership projects? That has left schools in East Lothian in a state of chaos as a result of a private contractor going into administration.

The minister may be aware of the on-going correspondence that I have had about Broughty Ferry beach becoming a designated bathing water area. He may also be aware that in two seasons the beach has met the highest standard of water quality. Given that state of affairs, will the minister consider re-establishing the bathing waters review panel to examine beaches such as Broughty Ferry beach, which have made such significant improvements, so that they can have designated status and all the benefits that that would bring?

In the light of the shocking obesity levels in Scotland, does the First Minister now accept that, rather than spend money on setting up healthy-eating phone lines that no one calls, it would be more effective to remove unhealthy fatty foods and fizzy drinks from vending machines in our schools so that we stop giving our children contradictory and mixed messages about what it is healthy and unhealthy to eat?

I am probably in danger of incurring the wrath of the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care by saying this but, in response to his comments to  David Davidson and Dennis Canavan, I suggest gently to him that it might have been useful for the Minister for Education and Young People to have in advance of the debate briefed him on the continuing review of physical education and the progress that is being made in that review. We all agree that the level of physical activity among Scots needs to be improved. I am sure that we also agree that, if we fail to do that, even higher levels of obesity will occur in our population. Obesity is a fundamental factor in many of the diseases that plague Scotland—it has clear links to coronary heart disease, stroke, cancer and diabetes—and not only is the level of physical inactivity in the population a health risk for those who are overweight and suffer from obesity, but it increases the risk of health problems for those within the normal weight range. Sixty per cent of men and 70 per cent of women fail to meet the recommended weekly level of physical exercise, and physical inactivity is a problem not only for adults, but for children. I will focus for the moment on children. Thirty per cent of boys and 40 per cent of girls fail to take the minimum level of physical activity each week. Already, 20 per cent of our children are overweight and child obesity levels have more than doubled in the past 10 years. That impacts severely on children's health—25 per cent of Scottish children aged between 11 and 14 are beginning to show signs of heart disease that are not normally expected until middle age. Those are frightening statistics which, if they are not tackled, will lead to a generation of adults in Scotland that is even less healthy than the current one. Given that we already have the bad reputation of being the sick man of Europe, we cannot allow or afford for that to happen. There is a cost to the current situation. It has been estimated that people's lack of exercise will cost the NHS about £16 billion within the next 10 years—not to mention the number of lives that will be lost. What can we do to tackle the problem? We welcome very much the funding to improve children's physical activity levels. The active schools programme has received funding and the new opportunities fund is providing resources for physical education and sports in schools. Those developments are to be welcomed. However, for many of our children it is not easy to access safe ways of undertaking physical activity. Many schools do not have sufficient playing fields or sports pitches: 40 per cent of schools in Scotland do not have a football pitch and 14 per cent do not have access to their own grass playing field, another local authority facility or even private pitches. One reason for that situation is that schools have to raise much-needed funds sold off the lands that surround  them for housing developments and so on. Access to sports facilities is important for increasing and encouraging physical activity, not just by children but by the whole community; allowing and assisting community access to facilities is beneficial to everyone. The need to improve access to such facilities is the subject of my amendment. Access to sports facilities has been made worse by the use of PPP funding, which has led to extortionate rates' being charged for community use of many facilities. Access has been denied to many people in our most deprived areas because of financial barriers.

Many of the PPP projects that are alive and kicking in Scotland are as I have described. People are paying the price for them—that is the reality of the situation. Another problem with physical education is that rather than being expanded in many schools it is being contracted because of pressure of time, lack of teachers and so on. I look forward to the review of physical education and hope that it will be able to solve some of those problems. Without a major expansion of physical education in our schools, I cannot see how we will achieve the target of 80 per cent of Scottish children meeting the recommended level of physical activity. I want to bring another subject to members' attention—the anecdotal evidence that has been passed to me in advance of the debate by parents who are concerned about the threat of litigation in our increasingly litigious society, which has led schools to discourage children from being active. I have received a number of comments from parents who say that their children are being told not to run in the school grounds, for fear that someone might be hurt and the school sued. PE programmes are also being revised to make them safer by making them less active. I suggest that that anecdotal evidence must be investigated to ascertain whether such things are happening. If so, that clearly runs counter to the messages that are being given from the centre. We need to sort out the problem and to reassure schools that they should encourage children to take part in more physical activity, rather than less. There is no doubt that increased exercise can help to improve health. Exercise referrals are another way of doing that. More exercise referral schemes need to be established to enable health  care professionals to prescribe patients exercise as a means of improving their health. Has the minister issued national guidance on establishing exercise referral schemes? National guidance is important if we are to avoid the development of postcode prescribing of exercise that it is available in one area but not another. I look forward to hearing the minister's comments on that. The enormous benefits of increasing the percentage of the population who take more than the minimum recommended level of physical activity cannot be overstated. We need to aim higher than just trying to reach the minimum recommended level. If we increase the level of participation by just 1 per cent it is estimated that more than £85 million could be saved each year and that 150 lives could be saved, so there is an economic benefit to promoting physical activity. Even more important is the future of our nation's health, which we cannot allow to fall into an even more deplorable state. The Scottish Executive has pledged to turn the situation around, but I would like it to be far more ambitious in trying to achieve that. If it were, it would certainly have our support. I move amendment S2M-661.2, to insert after first "physical activity in Scotland": "; recognises that the physical activity levels amongst children and adults would be enhanced by improved provision and access to community sports facilities".

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the establishment of a fully devolved Scottish opportunities fund accountable to the Parliament. (S2O-827)

Does the minister agree that a devolved fund would provide the opportunity for a more strategic use of those resources to meet Scottish priorities? Moreover, will he make a commitment today to push for a fully devolved fund that is accountable to the Parliament and not to accept anything less from the DCMS?

When the minister is considering where to direct resources in relation to refuge places, will she take account of the recent figures that show that  Dundee has the highest rate of domestic abuse recorded by the police in Scotland? Information from Dundee Women's Aid indicates that of 153 requests for refuge places it was able to provide only 89.

According to the Greater Glasgow NHS Board, the EGAMS report says that there needs to be an on-site adult intensive therapy unit whereas, in fact, the EGAMS report says that the units such as the one at the Queen Mother's hospital should "have access to" adult ITU facilities. Does the minister agree, therefore, that Glasgow has been misleading people quite badly in that regard?

As Scotland generates so much fuel energy, warm housing should be a basic right here. The SNP recognises that the best way in which to take everybody out of fuel poverty would be to have control over that fuel energy.

Let me get going, please. Although the SNP welcomes the figures in the "Scottish House Condition Survey 2002", which show a reduction in the level of fuel poverty in Scotland, we must be cautious if we are to get a true picture of the extent of fuel poverty in Scotland. Before the Executive gets too carried away, we should remember that a full analysis of the figures can be undertaken only after the release of the survey's complete data, as Energy Action Scotland has highlighted. The report will be published in March 2004 and will contain information on the extent to which fuel prices and income levels have affected fuel poverty figures. Fuel price and income are two of the three fuel poverty factors and so have a major impact on fuel poverty figures. We should remember that fuel prices could go up again, which would have a huge impact on the fuel poverty figures and the Executive's targets. We should be cautious about the figures for another reason. As I said in my intervention on the minister's speech—and the point has been well made by Citizens Advice Scotland—the current definition of fuel poverty underestimates the number of low-income households that are suffering fuel poverty. That is due to the way in  which the house condition survey calculates overall household income, including benefits such as free school meals and community care grants. Those benefits cannot be used to meet fuel costs—in fact, it is illegal for community care grants to be used to pay for fuel—yet they are included in calculating whether someone spends more than 10 per cent of their income on fuel and can, therefore, be defined as being fuel poor. Clearly, if those benefits were not included as income, far more people would be defined as fuel poor. We should be cautious about setting targets against the current definition, as it gives us an accurate picture of the number of people who are suffering fuel poverty. We must address that. Despite the progress that is being made, which is recognised in the latest survey, fuel poverty remains a significant and deep-rooted problem. There is no room for complacency when one in six households is still living in fuel poverty—a national statistic that is compounded by the observation that I made in my opening remarks. Scotland is such an energy-rich nation that it is a scandal that we have unacceptably high levels of fuel poverty, with 17 per cent of Scotland's houses still affected by dampness and condensation. Although conditions have improved, too many people in Scotland still have to live in unacceptable housing conditions. Shelter's figures say that at least 102,000 families with children and 98,000 households including an older person are living in houses that are affected by dampness or condensation, with all the associated problems of respiratory difficulties, depression and the many other ailments that we know are directly related to people's housing conditions. We know that fuel poverty remains common in homes that have no central heating—especially those in the private sector—despite the central heating programme, the warm deal and other worthwhile initiatives. The SNP believes that the central heating programme should be extended to include families with young children, people with disabilities and pensioners with inadequate heating who are suffering fuel poverty. I look forward to receiving Bill Butler's support for my amendment at decision time. The main beneficiaries from that extension would be households in the private sector. We welcome the fact that local authority and housing association properties are being fitted with central heating through their improvement programmes. However, the huge gap in the private sector needs to be addressed. We should take the opportunity to be ambitious and seek to extend the central heating initiative to the groups that I have mentioned. If we do not, many families with young children, disabled people and pensioners who at the moment do not qualify for the central heating programme will still  have to make the choice between eating and heating. That is unacceptable in this day and age. I move amendment S2M-627.3, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "recognises that in energy rich Scotland one in six households are still suffering fuel poverty, and believes that in order to help meet the Scottish Executive's commitment to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016, the central heating programme should be extended to families with young children, people with disabilities and pensioners with inadequate heating."

Does the minister share the concerns that Citizens Advice Scotland has expressed about the way in which household income is calculated? The calculation includes benefits such as free school meals and community care grants that cannot be  used to meet fuel costs. Is it time to review how such calculations are made?

I thank the minister for an advance copy of his statement. I welcome much of his statement, but I will ask about the short-term measures that have been announced, many of which depend on an increase  in the supply of dentists. Where will the dentists to meet those short-term objectives come from? As the situation is urgent, what is the time scale for making proposals after the consultation period is complete? On the important matter of patient charges, will the minister say what proportion of dental costs the Executive thinks it reasonable for patients to pay and how the Executive will ensure that that is fair and equitable?

This has been an important debate in which there has been much consensus, as members have remarked. There have been many good speeches, and I apologise for not being able to refer to them all. We must remember the hard work that social workers carry out. Theirs is a thankless task in many instances, as was ably illustrated by Alasdair Morgan. We must give social work staff the resources and support to enable them do the job properly. As Tommy Sheridan said, on a day-to-day basis children are protected, their lives are saved and the quality of their lives is enhanced. We should remember that. But—and it is a big but—we must also make it clear that, when practices are not as good as they should be, action will be taken to address that. Above all other considerations, the interests and welfare of the child must be paramount. In his opening statement, Peter Peacock talked about child social work being a complex area of work—which is correct—and said that it is everybody's job to protect children. He also acknowledged the fact that the case of Caleb Ness revealed severe failings on the part of  several people, not just the social workers who were involved, that that was not an isolated case and that the key issue in that case was better communication. I welcome the programme of reform, which seeks to address a number of issues by improving communication, providing clearer leadership and putting the interests of the child first. The move towards a multi-agency inspection system is also to be welcomed. The key issue in the case of Caleb Ness was the fact that agreed procedures were not followed. I do not think that resources were the issue; the issue was communication. Lessons must be learned from that. Fiona Hyslop talked about there being too much crisis management. Her point was well made. In addition to focusing on the children who are on the child protection register, we must focus on the children who are not on the register and who may not even explicitly be at risk but who—without the work that is going on with their families and if early intervention does not take place—may end up in that situation. I remember from my experience, not as a social worker but as someone who was involved in the home care side of things, that, all too often, because of the limitation of resources, resources were allocated only to cases in which there was an imminent risk to the child. There were many other children who faced an element of risk—that is what I thought, and it was agreed—that was not of a high enough level to attract the limited resources. I suggest that, if enough work goes on with such families at an earlier stage, a lot of later crisis intervention could be avoided. That is something that we need to address, and it brings us back to the issue of resources. Let us not focus on meeting only the resource needs of children who are on the child protection register and those who are at risk, although we must do that; let us look beyond that to ensure that the resources exist for work with all the children and families who are identified as requiring that support. The important issue of drug abuse has been highlighted by several members. We cannot address this issue in isolation; we must ensure that the surrounding services are also resourced and that there are adequate drug rehabilitation services to ensure that people get the support that they require. Too many issues were raised to go into in the time that I have, but I will summarise the main ones. Vacancy levels and resources are key. There must be better communication between social work staff. As the Minister for Health and Community Care is present, I stress that the  removal of criminal justice workers from the social work team would be a mistake. We need to keep those workers together to ensure that there is good communication. Similarly, there must be better communication between agencies. We need to consider whistle-blowing and the proposal that Children 1 st made in that regard. We need to ensure that systems are robust. I do not know if they can be made failsafe, but they should be made as good as they can be. We need to ensure that we all understand that children's welfare is the responsibility of every one of us and that the interests of the child are paramount.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the minister for an advance copy of his statement and welcome the long-awaited report from the expert reference group. I am keen that urgent action be taken to reverse Scotland's sexual ill health, but I find it frustrating that a whole generation of teenagers has grown up in the time that it has taken the Executive to get to this stage. Why did it take from December 1999—when Susan Deacon first established a new group to develop a national demonstration project on teenage sexual health—to 2002 for the current Minister for Health and Community Care to commission a national sexual health strategy, and more time still to establish an expert reference group to develop the strategy and for the strategy to go out to consultation? Will the minister confirm that the consultation will not be completed before the end of February 2004? Will he tell us at what point after that we are likely to have sight of the Executive's strategy and when we can expect some action to be taken to begin to tackle the problem? On what basis will the Executive decide which elements it will pick and choose to form part of the final strategy that it will agree? Does the minister have any views of his own as to what should be in that final strategy and, if so, will he enlighten us as to what they are?

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing this evening's important debate. I will begin by declaring an interest. I am the president of the Tayside industrial safety association, which is an important organisation that does a lot of good work. Some of its work is to bring together local businesses and public sector bodies to ensure that they are up to speed with the most recent legislation and to share good practice. I attended a recent lecture that the association held on an employer's responsibility to provide its pregnant women workers with adequate ante-natal and post-natal care. It was extremely interesting to hear about the detail of the responsibility on employers from the very early stages of someone's pregnancy. I am certain that there are many employers who are not complying with their responsibilities in that area although provision should be being made. The debate raises awareness about the importance of health and safety through a recognition of European week for safety and health. It also raises awareness about the important role of improving health and safety in the workplace. Although we have come a long way, we have a long way still to go. As Karen Gillon mentioned, there are still unacceptable levels of  workplace accidents, with more than 11,000 work-related accidents taking place in Scotland in one year. There is no room for complacency. Unison has done a fair bit of work in the area, including the recent production of a new report on the subject. Dave Watson, who is Unison's Scottish organiser for policy and information, said: "Although in Scotland the level of results were better than down south, the targets set for local authority inspections are not always met, and the levels of HSE inspections here tend to be much lower than elsewhere in the UK. Employers in some other parts of the UK often have no real incentive to comply with regulations because there is no chance that they will get caught, investigated or prosecuted." We cannot rest on our laurels in Scotland. The days of workers' lives being put at risk every day that they went to their work are thankfully over and robust legislation is now in place. However, tragic events still happen far too often—whether it is the death of workers on our oil rigs or accidents in the construction industry. There is no room for complacency and there is always room for improvement. That will be achieved through keeping up the pressure on employers, whether they are in the public or the private sector. I look forward to hearing what the minister thinks the Scottish Executive can do to play its part in achieving that.

Can the minister clarify for the record what he means by Dundee being part of Stirling's city vision? Was that a typo?

Is the First Minister aware of the British Fireworks Association's statement that, in 2003, more than 2,000 tonnes of fireworks will have found their way to illegal premises for the purposes of being sold illegally? That figure constitutes approximately 10 per cent of the total UK fireworks market. Does he believe that the legislation and the powers that the police have at the moment are adequate to deal with that situation? If not, what further measures does he think need to be taken?

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I welcome the bill and indicate the party's support for its general principles. I should say from the outset that we will not support the Scottish Socialist Party's amendment. That is not because we are unsympathetic to some of Carolyn Leckie's arguments. In fact, I will raise some of the same concerns in a moment. That said, I think that some confusion runs through the SSP's comments on this matter. For example, in his intervention on Malcolm Chisholm, Tommy Sheridan was concerned that transferring out-of-hours services from GP practices to health boards would be a bad thing because of the boards' actions. However, the amendment and Carolyn Leckie's speech make it clear that the SSP wants to do that very thing and transfer all GP services to the health boards that Tommy Sheridan criticised. I do not think that Scotland's patients can wait for the complete overhaul of the system that the SSP has advocated. Instead, we require the immediate problems that face the health service such as the huge crisis in GP numbers to be addressed now. If that does not happen, patients the length and breadth of Scotland will suffer. GP morale is at an all-time low. Indeed, a recent job satisfaction survey that was conducted on behalf of the Scottish Executive echoed the results of previous BMA surveys, showing that GPs' morale is low, that there are high levels of stress, particularly among middle-aged GPs, and that the source of that stress includes excessive bureaucracy, paperwork, increasing work load, lack of time and increasing demand from patients. That is leading to GPs saying that they want to leave general practice, with 21 per cent saying that they want to do so within the next five years. That comes at a time when general practice is facing a recruitment crisis, with vacancies running at the highest level in years. Since 1995, the  number of full-time equivalent GP principals has increased by only 4 per cent, and worrying trends are developing in general practice, with many GPs retiring early, too few medical graduates choosing general practice as a career and an increasing number of those who do so choosing to work part time.

I agree with Alasdair Morgan on that point, and I shall go on to say more about that later in my speech. When he gave evidence to the Health Committee on the need for more training places, the minister stated that there has been an increase in GP registrars, but I have to tell him that that is not true. The number of GP registrars was 284 in 2002-03—exactly what it was in 1999, when the Scottish Executive assumed responsibility for health provision in Scotland—which represents a huge drop since 1990, when there were 330 GP registrars. Since 1999, there has been no improvement in the situation in relation to GP registrars. The new GP contract aims to address low morale within the profession, which is why we support it. It allows doctors to regain some control over their work load and to receive funding to enable them to deliver a wider range of services. It is hoped that, over time, that will improve recruitment and retention in general practice and, importantly, improve the service to patients. The contract will clarify for the first time what services the public can expect to receive from practices. Along with the Health Committee, the SNP welcomes the flexibility of the arrangements, but I would like to address the key issues of concern. First, there is some contention about the way in which the bill has been introduced. We understand the nature of the legislation and the fact that it is part of a negotiation process. However, the fact that most of the detail will be contained in regulations—of which no one in the Parliament, including members of the Health Committee—has had sight is a matter for concern. How can a committee be expected to scrutinise legislation and report to Parliament that it has done so adequately when members have not seen the detail? I welcome the minister's assurances that we will see the regulations before stage 2—which just goes to show that, where there is a will, there is a way—but the situation raises questions about  whether we need to examine the process to ensure that, in future, there is a better way of doing it. We cannot have committees signing blank cheques in good faith. That is not the way to make good law.

The purpose of the bill is quite clear. We know what the purpose of the bill is; it is to introduce the new GP contract. To try to widen the bill to include other issues of privatisation is not appropriate in this forum, as it is clear what the bill is trying to achieve. Another matter of concern about the way in which the bill has been introduced surrounds the lack of public and patient consultation. For the minister to talk about consultation from now on in is, quite frankly, not good enough. The Executive talks a good game about patient and public involvement, and the Parliament has that as one of its key founding principles, but the bill is an example of a situation in which there has been virtually no public or patient consultation. That matter must be considered in some detail. Essential, additional and enhanced services are another area of concern. I welcome the minister's attempts to clarify matters, but precise definitions of those services have not been included in the bill or in the associated documents. Again, we have been told that definitions will appear in the regulations. In evidence to the committee, the BMA agreed that the committee should see those regulations and have an input—in fact, it had strong views about the matter, which we welcome. Opting out of the provision of additional services was a key issue in the evidence to the committee. All contractors will be required to provide essential services, but the contract will allow practices to opt out of the provision of additional services and will provide for the responsibility for those services to be transferred to health boards. It is a concern that there are no clear data on the projected opt-out rates for practices. Given that the responsibility for the provision of such services will then pass to health boards, I would have thought that such data would be crucial to plan how those services can be provided differently, if that is required. A key issue that Carolyn Leckie raised is whether health boards have the capacity to provide those additional services. We need answers to such questions. There are particular concerns about out-of-hours services in remote and rural areas, which my colleague Alasdair Morgan mentioned. What happens if GPs in such areas opt out of out-of- hours services, but the health board cannot provide the service in any other way? It appears that those GPs will not then be able to opt out. That has severe implications for already over-strained and demoralised single-handed GP practices in remote and rural areas. The issue has not been adequately addressed by the minister. The Royal College of General Practitioners and others were concerned about the issue and it has been said that it remains unresolved. I understand that a working group has been convened to consider the issue, but it is very late in the day to try to resolve such a crucial issue. We are in the middle of debating the bill. Again, the matter should have been thrashed out well before now. The success of the bill and the new contract is totally dependent on the staff capacity of the NHS being able to undertake the changes that are involved. Recruitment and retention issues must be addressed not just for GPs, but for all other health care staff if the proposals are to be made to work. For example, without adequate numbers of new practice nurses, the move to redesign services and to change roles and responsibilities will not be able to happen. To tackle the shortage of practice nurses, I urge all GP practices to agree to sign up to the agenda for change terms and conditions as a minimum, as advocated by the Royal College of Nursing. I hope that many GP practices will go further, but that must be the minimum position. We are happy to support the general principles of the bill, but I urge the minister to respond to the points that I have made and to issues of concern.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing the debate. I join her in paying tribute to Macmillan Cancer Relief and Citizens Advice Scotland, not only in Lanarkshire, but throughout Scotland, where staff and volunteers work hard to provide good services. The project that has taken off in Lanarkshire is a coming-together of skills to ensure that patients get the best service. It seems obvious that such a coming-together and provision of good services would be good for patients. It is great to see the service developing in Lanarkshire, but I would like it to extend throughout Scotland. I am sure that it would benefit patients throughout Scotland just as it does patients in Lanarkshire. The case studies provided by Citizens Advice Scotland show that the time when people have the medical worries that cancer brings is often also the time when they have financial worries. We cannot alleviate the physical problems resulting from cancer and the difficult treatments that are required, but we can alleviate the psychological worries and financial concerns that a family faces  because of a diagnosis of cancer. That is what, I hope, this project achieves and I would like that to happen in the rest of Scotland. I note that Citizens Advice Scotland talks about its services in other health settings. Working with Macmillan Cancer Relief is just one example of the increasing role that Citizens Advice Scotland has in the health setting. I would like that role to be extended. We talk about joined-up working but, to make it real, we need such innovative ideas. In this case, the initiative was taken by Citizens Advice Scotland to ensure that patients get advice and information when and where they require it. Patients need that advice and information as soon as they have been diagnosed, not weeks or months later. It is important that Citizens Advice Scotland is prominent in the health setting, whether in primary care or in the hospital. Where patients are is where they should be able to find appropriate financial advice and assistance. We are talking about advice and information not just on financial matters, but on employment, housing and the other areas in which Citizens Advice Scotland has practical expertise. Such initiatives are a growing area of work. As Karen Whitefield, there is a huge requirement for support. There is the rub. In order for Citizens Advice Scotland to expand its services so that everyone in Scotland can access free, independent advice at times of ill health, it will require resources. That is not just up to the Scottish Executive; it is up to Citizens Advice Scotland, the health boards and local councils. However, the Executive has a key role in pulling everything together. I am sure that, if it says that it is willing to put in the resources to ensure that the model is introduced throughout Scotland, others will follow suit, fall in behind and put their money where their mouth is. I hope that the minister will give us a commitment on the matter tonight.

Does the minister share my concern about the exclusion of four Scottish cities, including Dundee, from VisitBritain's new short-break campaign? Will he join me in expressing concern about VisitScotland's statement that the promotion of  Dundee as part of that campaign would have been a waste of money? Moreover, does the minister agree that we need to promote Dundee in the European market to ensure that the city is put on the map as a destination for Europeans who come to Scotland?

To ask the First Minister whether he will reconsider the level of support to be given to those infected with hepatitis C through contaminated blood products in light of the recent comments by Lord Ross, chair of the expert group. (S2F-252)

Is the First Minister aware of the recent comments by Lord Ross, who has expressed concern about the level of financial assistance on offer? Lord Ross made the point that to compensate victims adequately to the level that he recommended would take a mere fraction of the £360 million overspend on the Holyrood building or of the underspend of the Executive's budget. To give people hope, will the First Minister make a personal commitment to meet representatives of those affected to discuss further the level of financial assistance, whether payments should be made to the families of those deceased and the continuing demand for a public inquiry in the light of new evidence, including recent allegations that people were being infected with contaminated blood products as recently as 1995?

I join others in welcoming the committee's report. I want to start by referring to the survey of Scottish public opinion that Margaret Curran mentioned. It is of concern that 26 per cent of people think that it is okay to discriminate. That shows all of us that Scotland has some way to go if we are to change the situation. However, that requires political leadership, which must challenge attitudes towards asylum seekers or any other group that is discriminated against. The good news is, I suppose, that 68 per cent believe that it is wrong to discriminate in any way. If a similar survey had been carried out 10 years ago, I do not believe that the figure in that category would have been as high, so we should welcome the progress that has been made. We need to practise what we preach. As Stewart Stevenson highlighted, there is a lack of employment opportunities in the Parliament for people who are disabled or from an ethnic background. The figures speak for themselves. I  also understand that we have a problem in the civil service, where a recent campaign that attempted to recruit more people with an ethnic background resulted in little progress being made, despite a rise in applications. We need to start from where we are and with what we all have responsibility for. The fact that there has been little change perhaps sends out a negative message. Let us get our own house in order. Cathy Peattie laid out the substance of the report and why it was produced. She highlighted that much of the report is about long-term aims and that the situation will not change overnight. She said that a culture shift is as important as a change to processes, and I certainly agree with her on that. Shiona Baird talked about the need to pay heed to equality in the wider world. That point was well made. The issue is not just about equality for citizens in Scotland but about the vast inequalities around the world and in the third world in particular. That was a pertinent point. Elaine Smith mentioned the fact that only 23 per cent of our local councillors are women. That is an important point that should be addressed. Local councils are often the first stage at which people come into elected politics, so it is of concern that so few councillors are women. However, the question that I would pose is whether the introduction of the single transferable vote would help that situation. The Equal Opportunities Commission certainly believes that STV would be helpful in addressing gender inequality within local government and I hope that that is the case. Donald Gorrie talked about equal opportunities for back benchers and the requirement to deal with age discrimination. I agree with both those points. Sandra White was right to mention the need to monitor mainstreaming processes. How on earth will we know whether progress is being made unless we monitor?

I hope that members will not all rush at once and that some will stay to listen to my speech. Frances Curran made some very pertinent points about the need for the message that goes out about what we say and do to be as important as what is on paper; that is absolutely right.  Whether we are talking about asylum seekers or equality of pay for nursery nurses, who are predominantly women, it is those issues that give the public a sense of what the Parliament and Executive think and we are found wanting in many ways. I have a vested interest in agreeing with Frances Curran's comments about a crèche facility for MSPs and staff and, which is important, for the public. Members of the public with children in tow have visited me and it is difficult for them to take part in the processes of the Parliament without such facilities. Christine May reminded us that those who are prejudiced often do not recognise that fact. It is for all of us to challenge those who show prejudices. Linda Fabiani said that grabbing people by the nose means that their hearts and minds will follow and we should support that. I agree with what Michael McMahon said about the comments made by some MSPs, no matter who those MSPs are. We are talking about political leadership. I say to John Swinburne with all sincerity that I understand why he has done what he has done, especially because it is tempting to take notice when people are clamouring at the door and wanting members to say one thing or another. However, for the long-term good, it is sometimes important to think first and act later.

No. I want to finish my point. If the people and political leaders of Peterhead had acted in that way, we might not have a prison in Peterhead that is full of people who have committed sexual offences. They fought tooth and nail to keep that prison. That is what long-term political leadership achieves in the way of changing hearts and minds. Equal opportunities is the business of the Parliament, of the committees, and of members in their constituencies. It should affect how we show leadership. I hope that all members in the Parliament can agree because equal opportunities should not divide us. I am happy to make the closing speech on behalf of my party.

In his speech, my colleague Stewart Stevenson asked how the Executive intended to respond to this form of debate, given the range of suggestions that have come from members on all sides of the chamber. Will the minister now answer that question? How does he intend to respond to the debate?

Is the First Minister concerned that, because of financial problems, the Church of Scotland is closing a care home in my constituency at the same time as Dundee City Council is telling me that it has a shortfall of around 30 to 40 places for elderly people? Does that make any sense to him? If not, what will he do about it?

I think that the jury is still very much out on the new debate format, in which there is no motion or amendments. I understand the reasoning behind the new format, but it means that the debate will be extremely wide ranging and unfocused. I am not convinced that it will necessarily take us further forward or produce any outcomes. It is a bit like saying, "Health: discuss." Nonetheless, the Scottish National Party is always happy to discuss health and how we rise to  the challenge of improving our health. I bring the SNP's input to the debate in a spirit of co-operation and good will. Jack McConnell said in his acceptance speech at the beginning of the new parliamentary session that he would listen to good ideas from wherever they came. I hope that that will be true for today's debate. We all agree that Scotland's poor health record is a matter of concern. The SNP welcomes many of the health improvement measures that are being implemented or proposed, such as free eye and dental checks, which are both long-standing SNP commitments. However, we have a different perspective on how much the Scottish Parliament can do to turn around Scotland's unenviable reputation as the sick man—or woman—of Europe. I will say more about that later.

I agree with that and will say something about it later. The state of our nation's health is well documented. Our figures for life expectancy are dreadful, being the second lowest for men and the lowest for women in Europe. The figures for Glasgow men, of course, are getting worse. No doubt my colleague Sandra White will return to that point later. Cancer, coronary heart disease and strokes account for 65 per cent of all deaths in Scotland each year. A high number of people suffer from mental health problems and Scotland also has high suicide rates, particularly among young men. My colleague Adam Ingram will have more to say about mental health in his speech. To tackle our health problems and meet the targets for reduction, we need to address smoking and alcohol consumption, the lack of physical activity and poor diet and, of course, we need to use the latest available technologies and drug treatments. However, we must go further than that and address the underlying causes of ill health, which are poverty and deprivation and a lack of self-esteem and confidence. I will return to those matters later. We know that our diet in Scotland is too high in salt, fat and sugar and that we have record levels of obesity—that situation is getting worse. Last week, Elaine Smith led a useful and important members' business debate on obesity, but that debate was not as well attended, particularly by members from the minister's side, as it should have been. We know that obesity is linked to many other diseases, such as coronary heart disease, cancer and diabetes. We also know that the rise in  diabetes among young people is directly linked to obesity in children, which goes back to diet and a lack of physical activity. We encourage children to eat healthily for the sake of their teeth and their health, but in schools all over Scotland vending machines are dispensing high-sugar drinks and snacks full of salt and sugar. We need either to get the vending machines out of schools or to change radically the content of the machines. Otherwise, we will continue to give children mixed messages about what is good and bad for them in their diet. I back Unison's call to remove the same products from vending machines in hospitals. Unison says: "It is absurd for the Scottish executive to promote healthy living on the one hand and then allow private contractors to install vending machines which sell mainly junk food in NHS hospitals on the other." We could not agree more.

That idea has some merit. My only concern would be that the tax would disproportionately affect the poorest in our society, who, unfortunately, are the people who tend to buy such products. We need to change attitudes. We need to educate people and get them to change their approach to their diet. The message that we send out is important and we should not undermine it by allowing vending machines. We need to go further. We need to extend the provision of free fruit in schools to every child in primary school. We need to extend the provision of free school meals to children whose parents are on low incomes. We need to consider, as Margo MacDonald said, how to stop the big food companies plying their unhealthy wares to our children in a multimillion pound effort to undo all the good, healthy eating messages promoted by Government. The minister referred to the low level of physical activity. Again, we need joined-up thinking on that. Some schools are reducing the level of physical activity for children because of pressures on the curriculum and teacher time. As Mary Scanlon said, sports co-ordinators are not being appointed because of local government finance issues. We support the idea of general practitioners being able to prescribe, where appropriate, physical activity rather than drugs. However, for that to work, the Executive must address the lack of leisure facilities in many areas. Again, the issue is the need for joined-up government.  On alcohol consumption, our binge-drinking culture is well known. The issue was discussed at length in yesterday's debate on licensing laws. Again, corporate responsibility, particularly among those marketing alcohol to young people, is crucial. The British Medical Association advocates the stricter enforcement of the advertising code on alcohol by the Independent Television Commission and the Advertising Standards Authority. We need to consider that. Moreover, as I will repeat in my comments on smoking, we need to allow test purchasing by under-18s to expose those who sell alcohol to young people; that would help to reduce young people's access to alcohol. I agree with the minister that reducing smoking is the single most important measure that the Parliament could take and I welcome his announcement of £1 million for action on smoking cessation. However, we need to do more. I make no apology for having quite a lot to say about smoking. I gave up smoking two years ago and I am now one of those reformed smokers who bang on about other people's smoking. However, I make no apology for doing that. The SNP was committed at the election to consulting on legislation to protect people from the effects of passive smoking. Two thirds of Scots do not smoke and they must be protected. We know that passive smoking exacerbates many conditions, such as angina, asthma and allergies. More seriously, the United Kingdom independent scientific committee on smoking and health reports that smoking increases the chance of a non-smoker developing lung cancer by between 10 and 30 per cent. Smoking in public places is regulated by a voluntary charter, but evidence suggests that the code is not working. Only 39 per cent of bars, pubs and restaurants have smoke-free areas. I would like, as a minimum, the introduction of legislation to provide for smoke-free zones in all public places. Smoke-free areas not only protect non-smokers; research indicates that they make it easier for smokers to quit. We should not forget that about 70 per cent of smokers want to give up smoking. We should make it easier for them to do so. I am sympathetic to the idea of going even further on measures to reduce smoking, but whether we do so remains to be seen. The tobacco action plan, which I look forward to seeing later this year, will of course deal with smoking in public places. I take this opportunity to praise my colleague Stewart Maxwell for pressing the issue and challenging all of us in the Parliament to consider a total ban on smoking in public places. Sometimes it is up to politicians to take a lead and make difficult decisions. I look forward to having that debate.  The SNP has a proud record of making smoking reduction a key priority. In the previous session, Nicola Sturgeon was instrumental in pushing forward a ban on tobacco advertising. At the recent election, we presented a number of proposals that I would like the Executive to consider, such as ensuring that the law against selling cigarettes to children is rigorously enforced; using test purchasing to catch those who flout the law and sell cigarettes illegally; and introducing a system of negative licensing, as there is no reason why retailers who flout the law should not be prohibited from selling cigarettes.

I would certainly support the banning of advertising that is directed towards young people and I think that there would be merit in banning alcopops. I know that this debate is about health improvement, but we cannot divorce that issue from the issue of the health service itself, as the success of many of the initiatives that we will discuss today will depend on how able the health service is to cope, particularly at a primary care level. Early diagnosis and treatment are equally important in improving our nation's health. The importance of screening services in early diagnosis and treatment is well known and is paying dividends in areas where those services have been extended. However, the problems of recruitment and retention, service redesign and joint working, among many other issues, all impact on the ability of the health service to push forward health improvement measures. The question remains where the minister will find the additional 12,000 nurses and midwives that he announced would be in the NHS by 2007. At a recent recruitment fair in Scotland, not one Scottish trust bothered to turn up.

I am pleased to hear that, but I think that the trusts should have been there as  well. Many health authorities from down south were there, so why were ours not? A shortage of radiologists could undermine the cancer strategy, particularly the ability to undertake early diagnosis and treatment. The shortage of NHS dentists will hinder the ability of the Executive to deliver free dental checks. The role of primary care is crucial, but its effectiveness is dependent on the ability of the new general practitioner contract to deliver enhanced and additional services. There are many ifs and buts and only time will tell whether those barriers can be overcome. Health improvement initiatives are worth while, but they will not solve our health problems if we do not tackle the underlying causes of ill health. The key priority of a single mum living day to day in poverty will not be giving up smoking. That does not mean that we should not try to convince people to give up smoking, but we have to be realistic and accept that such messages will have a limited impact. We need the powers to do more to tackle poverty and deprivation, the key underlying causes of ill health. However, the Parliament does not have those powers. Earlier, the minister talked about Scotland being a wealthy nation, which is true, and said that we need to use that wealth to tackle ill health. I agree with him. I want to use Scotland's vast resources to turn the situation around, but the Scottish Parliament does not have the power to do so. Given that Scotland has a population of only 5 million, it should be possible to turn our nation's health around, but it will be so only if we use all the same levers that were available to the Finnish Government when it set out to change radically the health of Finland. At a recent debate on health, involving the minister and a range of health professionals, it was stated time and again that health improvement measures would not be enough in themselves. Many people talked about the need to tackle the underlying causes. One idea that was suggested at that event was the extension of child benefit to pregnant women as an important health measure for both mother and unborn child. In our election manifesto, the SNP advocated introducing a scheme to give every expectant mother on income support additional income to spend on healthy food for six months before the birth of her baby. Both those proposals are surely worthy of further consideration, but the Parliament does not have the power to implement either of them. Until it does, we will continue to have a piecemeal approach to tackling Scotland's health problems. Something else contributes to Scotland's health problems: a lack of ambition and a dependency culture. Both are key factors in our poor health  record. I suppose that I would say that the Scottish cringe is bad for our health. The draft 2004-05 budget document says: "The Scottish Executive has a key role in helping to bring about a healthier community. However, it is the people of Scotland, who will need to make healthy choices in all aspects of their lives, who will ensure that we succeed in our aims." That is a statement of fact, but it also highlights the scale of the problem. Many of us point to Finland as an example of the way forward but, of course, it was the commitment of the Finnish people to change that helped to bring about that change. That same willingness appears to be missing in Scotland. Although our health record is poor, many Scottish people view their health as being "good or better". Despite the fact that Portugal and Scotland have comparable life expectancy figures, 77 per cent of people in Scotland say that they are in good health, whereas only 31 per cent of people in Portugal do. That difference in perspectives shows a worryingly complacent attitude among Scots towards their health, despite all the evidence that would suggest that that complacency is unwise. Dr Carol Craig, author of "The Scots' Crisis of Confidence", recently said: "A recent health report, based on focus groups, concludes that many of Scotland's burgeoning health and social problems are due to a widespread lack of ambition throughout Scottish life and a dependency culture". She makes a point that we should all consider.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate. I am sure that we will discuss the subject more in next week's debate on health improvement. I pay tribute to Dr Andrew Walker's work, which has been important in informing this debate and others. As Elaine Smith said, 21 per cent of adults are now obese, which has an immense cost to the NHS. One of the main issues that follows the rise in obesity is the rise in diabetes. More young people are becoming obese and more young people are getting diabetes, which contributes to Scotland's ill health and to the cost to the NHS. We must consider our poor diet along with the other health issues in Scotland. Those issues require a range of solutions and although some health improvement initiatives are worthy, they are not on their own enough. We must look beyond them. Elaine Smith outlined a project in her area that is worthy of further exploration. We must look across the issues of education, dealing with poverty and other issues for which the Executive is responsible. We need also to look into the areas for which the Executive is not responsible. In order to tackle poverty, which is one of the underlying causes of poor diet, we need to have control over other mechanisms. We need joined-up government in order to effect health improvement. Too often, we get the feeling that for everything that we try to achieve with one hand, there is another hand pushing against it,  which can be rather frustrating. For example, there is the issue of vending machines in schools, which has been raised in Parliament on a number of occasions. I am aware that action is being taken to deal with that matter, but the message that has been sent out to children is that crisps and fizzy drinks must be okay, because if they were not, people would not be selling them and encouraging schoolchildren to buy them. That runs counter to all the messages that the Executive has been trying to put out. The encouragement of children to take physical exercise can also be undermined. At a debate that was held on Monday evening and which David Davidson and Malcolm Chisholm attended, we heard from a woman about the physical education programme in her children's school being severely cut back because of curriculum and other pressures. That runs counter to any strategy that is being promoted or encouraged by the Executive. Unless such strategies are to be followed through at local level, and unless schools are resourced sufficiently to ensure that children have adequate physical education—and that there are enough physical education teachers, which is an issue that Margo MacDonald highlighted during question time—none of them will fit together in such a way as to improve our children's health. Other worthwhile initiatives include encouraging children to eat healthily right from the start and the provision of free fruit, which I would like to be extended to all primary school children. We also have to hold the corporate sector to account. Far too often, that sector promotes unhealthy foods, especially to children. We need to tackle the issue across the board and we must tackle the lack of self-esteem and lack of confidence that underlies so many of our health problems. People need to be motivated to eat more healthily, and that needs to start at a young age.

Will the minister say whether the legislation will lead the way to the establishment of licensing schemes for fireworks vendors? If so, how quickly could such  schemes be introduced to ensure that we can turn around the appalling rise in fireworks injuries this year?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

I say to Bill Aitken that perhaps if we had had more emotion and less detachment, we would have stopped locking up children in Scotland before now. Of course emotion should be brought into a debate such as this. What kind of people would we be if there was no emotion in a debate on the detention of children? I want to say something about the tone of the debate and the language that has been used. To imply that John Swinney or anyone else has any ulterior motive other than the best interests and welfare of children is nothing short of a disgrace. Many SNP members have been raising issues about asylum seekers and their children from the day we came into Parliament. We did that well before there was any nonsense about the other issues that have arisen; to say otherwise is, quite frankly, disgraceful. The oohing and aahing that took place during John Swinney's speech is the type of behaviour that brings the Parliament into disrepute. Today, we need to reflect on what this Parliament is about. The Parliament was set up to change Scotland and to reflect the type of Scotland that we wish to see. Surely to God this Parliament can agree on one thing—that we do not want to see children locked up on Scotland's soil. If we cannot agree on that, my goodness, what can we agree on? In April last year I, Dennis Canavan and others went to Dungavel to see for ourselves what was happening there. I will say a few words about it. I have no criticisms whatever of the staff in Dungavel. They do a job in difficult circumstances, but it is a job that they should not be asked to do. No one should be doing a job that involves locking up children.

No. Annabel Goldie would not let me intervene on her, so I return the favour. When we arrived at Dungavel, we were met with a fence that is at least 20ft or 30ft high. If it looks  like a prison and it acts like a prison, in my view it is a prison. We spoke to many of the detainees there. I was thankful for the open access that we were given to speak to them, because it was revealing. I was struck by how many of them had no idea why they were there, how long they were going to be there, and what was going to happen to them. Members should imagine families with children in that situation, having no idea what is going to happen to their children. It is deeply disturbing and difficult when one is grabbed by families, mothers and children who are begging one to get them out of there. That is a tough thing to face. Perhaps some of the members in here who have alternative views should experience it for themselves. We have had numerous reports. The issues that the cross-party group on refugees and asylum seekers raised in its report in April 2002 were almost identical to the ones that were raised by the chief inspector of prisons—children should not be locked up. Margaret Curran said a lot of warm words, and laboured the point that Scottish ministers have done a lot to improve the plight of children at Dungavel, yet children are still being locked up and reports are still being written condemning that practice. Whatever Scottish ministers claim they have been doing behind the scenes, it is not enough. I finish where I started. Surely this Parliament can come to an agreement on one thing—that it is wrong in Scotland, on our soil, to be locking up children. I hope that by the end of today we are able to agree on that.

rose—

I find the member's tone slightly out of sync with the rest of the debate. I draw her attention to some of my remarks about our proposals to tackle smoking. I urged the Executive to consider those proposals, so I do not know quite where she is coming from.

I do not think that I have ever lodged a seductive amendment before. It is unfortunate that this is such a short debate to try to address such a big subject. Cancer is Scotland's biggest killer and our cancer record is the worst in Europe. Although the focus of the debate is on cancer services, we need to do more to prevent cancer in the first place, by taking further action to reduce tobacco and alcohol consumption, tackle poverty and deprivation, and encourage more Scots to improve their diet. We have done a lot to reduce smoking levels, including the efforts of my predecessor towards banning tobacco advertising, but we need to do more. We must tackle childhood smoking, especially among young girls. It is still far too easy for children to purchase cigarettes, and we should consider using test purchasing to expose those who still sell cigarettes to children. I look forward to the forthcoming debate on smoking in public places, which I hope will take that issue forward. As the minister laid out, cancer screening is an important preventative measure. The breast and cervical screening programmes have been very successful. I, too, look forward to the roll-out of the colorectal screening programme, which I hope will be equally successful. However, we must ensure that the services are in place to back up the demand for services that will follow the screening, so that there is no delay in treatment. We welcome the investment in cancer services and the redesigning of services to improve the life of the patient. As highlighted by the minister, the development of managed clinical networks is an important way forward for services. The latest monitoring report on the cancer strategy reveals that the only real way to improve  cancer services is to invest in staff and equipment. I know that that is happening. Although progress has been made, there are still some key deficiencies and major challenges that the Executive must tackle. More has to be done to recruit staff and invest in equipment to ensure that cancer services change for the better. Technology is not always available, or there is not enough equipment or access to equipment to meet demand. There is a lack of out-of-hours services for cancer patients, particularly chemotherapy. Staffing is the key problem in oncology generally, with low numbers of specialists, consultants and nurses in the field. Given that we know that survival rates improve when patients are treated by those who specialise in oncology, and in the particular cancer that the patient has, it is necessary that such shortages are addressed. While the news about the vacancies at the Beatson is good, there are still too many vacancies for consultant clinical and medical oncologists. Many posts have remained unfilled for more than six months. In order to help to tackle those staffing problems, I lodged the seductive amendment. We must consider the enhancement of pay and conditions for oncology consultants and specialist nurses in order to get those scarce professionals to come and work in Scotland. Access to services is not consistent throughout Scotland, and the problem of postcode prescribing continues, with some people being denied access to cancer drugs depending on where they live. We must address that. Similarly, people from rural and remote areas must receive the services and support that they require. With that in mind, I support the call by the Scottish cancer coalition that, where there would otherwise be no access to treatment or palliative care services, patients and carers should be offered reimbursement of their travel costs. I hope that the minister will respond to that when he winds up. We should remember that it is not only the health service that provides cancer services; crucially, the voluntary sector provides much-needed support and care, education and research. Like the minister, I was pleased to attend the launch of the Scottish cancer coalition and its manifesto and calls for action last night. Between them, the bodies involved provide a staggering £40 million each year towards care, education and cancer research. Without those resources, our services and treatments would be a lot poorer. Cancer charities have been the key provider of resources for research for many years. I support their call for the Executive to provide more funding to institutions and trusts for specific cancer research projects. It is only through research that outcomes for patients with cancer will improve. We have an excellent reputation for research, with  more than 13 per cent of the UK's biomedical scientists being based in Scotland. I am lucky to have in my constituency the star of them, Professor Sir David Lane, of Cyclacel, which is based in Dundee. His excellent work is known throughout the world. A concern that was raised by the Scottish cancer coalition, on which I hope that the minister will respond, concerns the European Union directive on clinical trials, which is to be implemented by 2004. What representations were made to Europe? What representations will be made to Westminster about the directive's implementation? I look forward to supporting the important developments that will take place, in the hope that the next generation will not have the reputation of having the worst cancer rates in Europe. I move amendment S2M-292.2, to insert at end: "but recognises that further action is required to tackle staffing shortages in the oncology field in Scotland, including consideration of enhanced terms and conditions."

To ask the Scottish Executive how many nurse and consultant vacancies there are in the NHS. (S2O-357)

Is the minister aware that the figures show that since 1999 nurse vacancies have gone up by 52 per cent and consultant vacancies have gone up by 50 per cent? In the case of nurse vacancies will he now consider implementing a Scottish recruitment premium to attract staff to come and work in Scotland, as is allowed under the "Agenda for Change" deal?

Does the member therefore agree that it is wrong not to have a target for child poverty?

rose—

Of course I took the best care of my health. Does the member accept that the life expectancy figures that were published recently showed a clear link between people's life expectancy and where they live? That was evident for areas of the highest poverty and deprivation. Do those figures not prove that people with the poorest health are people with the lowest incomes?

I look forward to having many a debate with Margaret Curran on poverty and social justice issues. I warn her that my use of language will not be as colourful as Mr Gibson's was—

I know. As I said in my intervention, we support many of the initiatives that the Executive has introduced. Indeed, some of them were SNP manifesto commitments at previous elections. We support those initiatives and welcome them—few would argue against them. However, let us not be under any illusion that those initiatives alone will bring an end to the scourge of poverty in our society. That will be the tenor of my argument this morning. It would be unreasonable for me to stand here and say that the Labour Government at Westminster or the Labour-Liberal Government in Scotland should already have eradicated poverty. I will not argue that, as that could not realistically be achieved in the short term and it is right that it is a long-term aim. However, it is reasonable to expect that we should be going in the right direction, with poverty levels in Scotland diminishing. Unfortunately, that is not the case, for reasons that I will outline. Child poverty is one of our national scandals. Danny Phillips, who is the head of the Child Poverty Action Group, said: "It is simply unacceptable that in a rich nation such as Scotland so many children go without and enter the cycle of poverty into adulthood." There have been so many failed targets on child poverty—set by both Governments—that it is hard to keep count of them all. On 26 March 1999, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced a £0.5 billion strategy to reduce the number of children living in poverty by 60,000 in Scotland. In its programme for government in 2000, the Scottish Executive stated that it would reduce the number of children living in poverty by 100,000. Neither of those targets has been met, despite what the minister said. The scandal is that, since 1999, child poverty in Scotland has, in fact, increased. There are 10,000 more children living in poverty now than there were in 1999, when Gordon Brown announced the Westminster initiative.

I am thankful for the opportunity to clarify that I am of course talking about relative poverty. For me, that is the measure. The measure should show the disparity in levels of poverty now, rather than going back to 1996 figures. Relative poverty is the measure of  poverty that we should use and, on that basis, more children are living in poverty now. That is nothing short of a national scandal. Perhaps it is because the Scottish Executive accepts that it is failing to come anywhere close to meeting its targets that it seems not to have included any targets for ending child poverty in this year's partnership agreement—those targets are strangely missing. Perhaps the minister would like to comment on that when she sums up. The motion talks about "measures to increase financial inclusion to reduce debt". I take that to be political speak for tackling low income. Despite the rhetoric about reducing inequality, the truth is that all the currently available statistics show that, under the Blair Government, inequality has increased at a much faster rate than it did even under the last Tory Government.

I agree that it is appropriate to target money, but I was talking about children who are living in the poorest areas. The 10,000 children about whom I spoke are the poorest children in society who live in the most deprived areas. Despite what the minister said, the gap is widening. The gap in incomes is also widening. Let me give some figures. The incomes of the poorest in our society increased on average by only 1.4 per cent during the first three years of Blair's Government, from 1997 to 2000, whereas the large incomes of the richest fifth of the population grew by twice as much a year. That increase meant a rise of only £2.94 per week for those on low pay, whereas the increase for the top earners was £19 a week. Those figures hardly fit with the strategy that the minister outlined. They show that what Labour is trying to do here is being undermined by what is being done at Westminster. The motion refers to "measures to overcome barriers to training and employment". However, between 1999 and 2002, there was an increase in the number of 16 to 19-year-olds not in education, training or employment. That means  that nearly 11,000 school leavers did not enter education, training or employment.

The point of my speech is that, in order to tackle poverty, we need to have those powers. No matter how worthy the Executive's initiatives are—and I support many of them—they are not enough.

I need to move on. Research published by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development suggests that around 20 per cent of people in Scotland fall within the lowest literacy levels and that a further 30 per cent might find their skills inadequate to meet the demands of the so-called knowledge society. I support some of the initiatives that have been introduced to tackle those problems, but far more needs to be done on the education front. It is depressing to note that the opportunity gap in relation to health is as wide as ever. I was shocked to read that, according to recent figures, Scottish females have the lowest life expectancy at birth in the European Union and that Scottish males have the second lowest life expectancy. I was also shocked to read that people in Glasgow have the lowest life expectancy in the United Kingdom. Recent figures show that men in Glasgow are dying younger than used to be the case. Things are not getting better for men in the poorest areas in Glasgow; they are getting worse. Scottish local authorities account for more than half of the 10 United Kingdom local authorities whose residents had the lowest life expectancies. Seven of the 10 areas for men and six of the 10 for women were in Scotland—that is not a good picture. In addition to low life expectancy figures, Scotland has shocking suicide rates, which have continued to rise. For young people aged between 15 and 24, the rate is almost double the rate in England and Wales. Research indicates that suicides are twice as likely to occur in the most deprived areas of Scotland. The incidence of suicide in those areas has increased. For those young people, the opportunity gap is not being closed.

I have to move on. I have only two minutes left. Even on homelessness, which is a policy area that the Executive can influence, there are still problems. The Executive has failed to meet the targets that it set on rough sleeping. Mysteriously, that target has been dropped from the latest partnership agreement. Shelter Scotland estimates that more than 2,000 children became homeless during the month it took members of the Scottish Parliament to get elected or re-elected. That is a sobering thought. Around 11,500 young people aged between 16 and 24 apply to their local authority as homeless, yet a study has estimated that more than 85 per cent of councils do not believe that they have the resources to tackle homelessness in their area. The minister talked about community regeneration. There are major problems with the SIPs. A report commissioned by the Executive from Cambridge Economic Policy Associates contained a range of scathing criticisms, such as that the SIPs' boards were being filled by what are described as Labour placemen—I am sorry, I should say "place people". The report also criticised SIPs for failing to lift people out of the benefit trap, for wasting money in excessive bureaucracy and for a lack of monitoring. The SIPs were given £300 million to spend, but fraud investigations have had to be made into six SIP projects. Not all is well with the SIPs and that has to be looked at.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. Some of the criticisms that I have made might seem overly harsh. I sympathise with the Executive. It knows that, because it does not have the powers, it is unable to tackle poverty or close the opportunity gap. To pretend anything else is nothing short of a con. Dr Helen Fawcett of the University of Strathclyde said: "To protect people from poverty, one option would be to change the social security and unemployment policy, but Scotland has no control over this." Without control over social security or tax policy, it is impossible to tackle poverty. All that the Scottish Executive can do is tinker around the edges with policies, however worthy those policies are. Measures taken in Scotland can be directly undermined by policy decisions that are made at Westminster. I will cite two examples. I do not believe that the removal of additional benefit payments to single parents helped to tackle child poverty. I also do not believe that the removal of  benefits to 16 and 17-year-olds has been shown to tackle homelessness among young people. Control over tax and benefits, in addition to the powers under devolution, would at least give a Scottish Government a fighting chance—presuming that it had the political will—to launch a full-blown attack on poverty. To put things simply, the Parliament needs the power to be able to use our nation's wealth and resources to deliver people out of poverty. Without that power, we will continue to see too many of our people living in poverty without opportunity or hope. Poverty is something that all of us in the chamber want to change. I move amendment S2M.293.3, to insert at end: "but recognises that none of this action will be enough to reduce poverty levels in Scotland, which will only be achieved once the Executive has power and control over tax and social security policy."

I do not think that anyone is saying that many of those measures are not good and worthy; indeed, I acknowledge that they are. However, will the minister admit that it is the amount of money in people's pockets that determines how they can live their lives and the quality of their lives? Does she accept that the fundamental power to change people's lives is the power over tax and social security policy, which provides the only way of fundamentally lifting people out of poverty?

rose—

Is it not a bit disingenuous to claim that a measure of absolute poverty should be used when, clearly, the gap is growing in relation to the 1996-97 measure? Would it not be more accurate to consider relative poverty according to today's standards? On that basis, does the minister accept the fact that 10,000 more children are now living in poverty than when Labour and the Liberal Democrats came to power in 1999?

Surely the point is that a number of questions have been asked by all parties this afternoon and the minister has so far answered none of them. Is not the point that, by the time that the regulations are laid before the Parliament, those questions will not have been answered here? Surely it would be better to get the right regulations in the first place than to be in the position of having not to implement them because they are the wrong regulations, as the minister suggests. Is that not a strange way to legislate?

What will be the cost of administering the system?

Will the member take an intervention?

As with all Sewel motions, the onus is on the minister to tell us why we should be giving up legislative power in this case and why we are not able to legislate in this Parliament. I heard what the minister said about there not being an opportunity in our programme to do that, but surely the Scottish Executive could manage the considerable time that it has in Parliament a little bit better to ensure that we do have that legislative opportunity. A number of questions are raised by what is being proposed today. On the substance of the matter, we have no objection in principle to extending recovery of costs of NHS treatment for road traffic accidents alone to all personal injury compensation claims where someone who is not at fault requires NHS treatment. However, we have a number of concerns about the consequences of the extension, some of which the minister has touched on. First, what is proposed might increase insurance premiums, which would mean that some people were unable to pay. I presume that people who do not have insurance cover will have to cover the NHS treatment charges if they are found to be liable—that is something that the minister could clarify in summing up. I was glad that the minister said that the Executive is happy to delay the commencement of the changes in order to provide time for insurance companies to address inequalities in premiums. That is a sensible measure in this case. My second concern is that the cost of doctors insuring themselves against clinical negligence could be an issue. Will the costs of such insurance increase, what will the minister do about that, and has he spoken to professional bodies such as the British Medical Association about the possible consequences of clinical negligence cases?  Thirdly, what is proposed might increase the chances of the blame culture's becoming worse than it is at the moment, which could lead to more and more people attending NHS hospitals for examination of injuries that they have sustained in accidents for which they want personal injury compensation. If their claims are unsuccessful, the NHS will not be reimbursed for the charges for NHS treatment in those cases. We need to be reassured on those matters of concern. Those concerns add weight to our fundamental argument that legislation such as the bill should undergo full scrutiny in this Parliament in order to get answers to such questions. To be quite frank, I do not think that time is a good enough reason not to have done that in this case.

To ask the Scottish Executive what further progress has been made in negotiations with Her Majesty's Government about payments of financial assistance to those infected with hepatitis C through contaminated blood and blood products while undergoing national health service treatment. (S2O-229)

Is the minister aware of the growing frustration—in particular with answers such as the one that he has just given—that is felt by hepatitis C sufferers after waiting nearly five months with no progress having been made in his negotiations with Westminster? Can he tell us today what more he is going to do to resolve the issue? What is his alternative plan if Westminster says no?

Will the member give way?

Is not the member pleased that SNP members support his bill? It is important  that local people have the power to enforce consultation; the right of appeal is also important. I would have thought that the member would welcome SNP support for that.

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes it does.

I would have thought that every member of the public has experience of the health service, given that they and their families use the health service. What better than to ask the people who use the health service?

I do not know about other members, but I feel cheated by not hearing the other five minutes of the minister's speech. I hope that today's debate will amount to more than motherhood-and-apple-pie talk about the need to involve patients and the public in decisions about the running of our health service. Since the document "Designed to Care—Renewing the National Health Service in Scotland" was published in 1997, Labour has had six years to consult on improving public involvement. Only now has it finished its consultation on how the public should be consulted. It has taken rather too long for that to happen. Since the publication of "Designed to Care", there have been numerous glossy documents that have all said broadly the same thing. Although the document "Patient Focus and Public Involvement" was published in December 2001, it has taken until now for the consultation process to be completed. Furthermore, we have had consultation on reforming the NHS complaints procedure and patients' rights and responsibilities. Indeed, the only issue on which there seems to have been no consultation has been Labour's election manifesto commitment to consult on introducing a directly elected element to all NHS boards. I will return to that issue later.

I assure Bill Butler that his proposal has the full support of the SNP. He would find it difficult to argue that anyone should not support the amendment in my name, as it aims to create exactly what he aims to create. Spinning on the head of a pin is what comes to mind. I turn to the patient information initiative to which the minister referred. We would all agree that the current patients charter is outdated and needs to be improved, but I am a little concerned about whether what is being proposed goes far enough. As I understand it, the Scottish Consumer Council has been given a budget of £450,000 over two years to develop leaflets on issues that patients have a right to know about, including issues relating to confidentiality, consent and complaints. As the minister said, quality-assured information is important. Information is power, as they say, but I am not convinced that that initiative alone, however well intentioned, will be enough to empower patients by improving their access to information. Surely what we need is the establishment of a statutory independent patient body at national level with the power and resources to increase public awareness of patient rights and to enforce communication with the public at both national and local level. What we need is a body with teeth that can act as the patient's champion. That is what we would like, and what the minister is proposing falls way short of that. Health councils are, without a doubt, one of the main ways in which the patient and public voice has been heard. Our 15 local health councils have done a tremendous job, and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the work that they have undertaken over the past 25 years. They have helped many people to find a voice in dealing with what can be described only as the might of NHS bureaucracy. The Executive's proposal is to abolish the local health councils and instead have a Scottish health council as part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, with local offices in each health board area. We are told that those local offices will still provide the services of the local health council, but my question and that of many others is how independent that service will be. Genuine concerns are being raised about that, particularly by local health councils, which question the independence of the proposed regime. Age Concern Scotland has said that the proposed Scottish health council should be independent and, which is important, should be seen to be independent. There has been very  limited consultation with existing health councils about the proposals, and the feedback that I am getting is that people are not happy with the proposals at all. Many local health councils are concerned that it appears that NHS boards will organise the public involvement, whereas they wish to ensure that the opinions expressed will be independent. Health councils fulfil the role of seeing the broad vision of the patient's journey, and it is essential that that role continue to be fulfilled by independent sources that can act as a conduit between the Executive, health boards and the public. I remain to be convinced that the Executive's proposals will advance that in any way.

I thought that I had put it rather strongly. I cannot say anything other than that the local health councils' role has been a good one and that we should be taking the opportunity presented by structural changes to make local health councils more independent, not less independent. I hope that that is strong enough for Robin Harper. The current complaints procedure has three stages, which can be time consuming, stressful and lacking in impartiality. Importantly, the independent review stage lacks the power to make changes. All of us have constituents who have been very dissatisfied with the complaints procedure. Among those whose complaint was dealt with locally, only one in three believed that it was handled well. Only one in four felt the same when it was dealt with at an independent review. It is proposed that there should be a complaints officer in each NHS organisation and a member of senior management responsible for patient feedback. The SNP broadly supports the proposed changes, as long as they result in an accessible, transparent system of mediation, redress and compensation. We also support the introduction of a code of practice—which NHS boards would have to follow—governing how boards inform patients when mistakes occur in the NHS. That might help to address the problem of the blame culture that is making the NHS a difficult working environment for staff. I turn now to the substance of the debate, which is about the best way of engaging in public consultation. People are very sceptical when we talk about public consultation. That scepticism is born out of experience. The picture throughout Scotland of acute services reviews is not good. The public has the sense that local managers embark on the consultation process with a fixed  outcome in mind and—lo and behold—end up exactly where they started. I am afraid that my recollection of the acute services review in Tayside is somewhat different from the minister's. I could also cite the reviews in Glasgow, Argyll and Clyde and Fife as examples of how not to consult on major changes to NHS services. The fact that one member of Parliament was elected on the basis of public dissatisfaction with the way in which the NHS operates is clear evidence that all is not well. It is unfortunate that that member has not turned up for today's debate. The Health and Community Care Committee dealt with a number of public petitions concerning changes to local health services. The common factor in those cases was the failure of managers locally to consult in a way and at a stage that was meaningful and up front. For those reasons, I am sympathetic to Paul Martin's proposed member's bill. My views on medium-secure units differ from Mr Martin's, but the principle of making health boards consult when changes to services are being proposed and of giving the public the right of appeal has merit and is worth exploring further. One issue that we must address is the problem of consultant shortages, which are driving many of the decisions that are being made. If consultant shortages are the driving force, public consultation is a sham as, at the end of the day, the same decisions will be made. The minister must try harder to address that issue. The substance of my amendment relates to the issue of directly elected places on NHS boards. If we are serious about involving the public, surely members of the public should have a direct say on health boards. The proposal would send a clear, unambiguous message. I cannot understand the Executive's reluctance to take that step. Surely it is the logical conclusion of the wish to involve the public. The proposal would give the public a majority of places on NHS boards and, therefore, a key decision-making role.

No—I have already dealt with the member's point. The introduction of direct elections to NHS boards would bring rights and responsibilities but, crucially, it would stop the public believing that decisions about our health service are made behind closed doors by unelected bureaucrats. It does not matter whether that judgment is fair—it is the public's perception of the way in which decisions are made. I cannot understand why the proposal to consult on the issue of directly elected places does not appear in the partnership agreement, given that during the election campaign Labour thought that it was a good idea and included it in its manifesto.

No. I do not know whether the proposal was too much for the Lib Dems to handle or whether vested interests won the day and prevented its being advanced. We deserve to hear from the minister in his summing up why the idea was dropped. We are still committed to providing directly elected places on NHS boards. I hope that all those who have supported the bill proposed by Mr Butler will be consistent and support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-154.1, after "effectively" to insert: ", requiring direct elections for the public to the majority of places on NHS boards,".

Indeed.

The debate is not about cute kittens and fluffy bunnies, although I might have a soft spot for both. It is about the hard realities of animal welfare provision in Scotland and how seriously the Parliament and Executive take animal welfare. The Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals is facing a financial crisis that is not of its own making but is due to realities of the marketplace. The crisis arose because of a combination of rising costs, higher insurance costs after September 11, higher water and council tax charges, the loss of income from stock market investments and a deficit of £2 million in the society's pension fund that had to be made good to protect staff pensions. Those are the facts and their impact will be immense. The SSPCA has already cut some of its services, including its 24-hour service that allowed animal emergencies to be reported at night. Many members will have received the same letter from the society that I received in March, which highlighted the further financial cuts that are under consideration. The letter proposed closure of seven out of 13 animal welfare centres, a reduction in the society's education department and a cut in the number of ambulance drivers. It is likely that there will be up to 60 redundancies. It is fair to say that those proposals provoked a strong reaction from the public and from MSPs. That public pressure secured a stay of execution until October. We must use that time wisely in order to turn the situation around. Members are concerned about the loss of their local centres and will no doubt want to say something about that during tonight's debate. The  cross-party interest in doing something to save the animal welfare centres is a great strength of the campaign. I thank everyone across all the parties who signed my motion. I also pay tribute to the campaign that was launched by the Scottish Mirror newspaper to raise public awareness about the issue. However, let us be clear: if some form of assistance, even in the short term, is not forthcoming, there will be a serious reduction in animal welfare services in Scotland. The work of the animal welfare centres is crucial in a number of ways. My own centre, at Petterden, just outside Dundee, is a good example. In the year ending 2002, the centre cared for 63 dogs, 51 of which were rehomed, and 156 cats, 134 of which were rehomed. A further 279 other animals were cared for at the centre. I was struck by the dedication of the staff who work at Petterden, many of whom have worked there for a great number of years. Everyone locally knows where the centre is, and they go there if they are looking for a new pet, hence the good rehoming rates. People also know where to take injured animals, which they do frequently. The work that the centre does with local schools is important in teaching children how to be responsible and how to treat animals well. Last year across Scotland, nearly 28,000 pupils were taught about animal welfare by the SSPCA. Given the levels of animal cruelty in our society, we cannot underestimate the value of the work that is being done with children. Much of that local work is at risk if the animal welfare centres close. The total running costs for Petterden are less than £80,000 a year, which does not seem much in the bigger scheme of things when we consider the work that it does, yet, in the current financial crisis, it is beyond the means of the SSPCA to continue with the centre. So what can be done? First, the public have a key role. In addition to the obvious way of giving support through donations, we need to ensure that donations go to the right place. Too often, donations are lost to Scotland as a result of confusion with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which is a completely separate organisation. Recently, a legacy of £250,000 from a regular donor to the SSPCA was lost as a result of its being left, almost certainly in error, to the RSPCA. Members of the public need to know about that, and I support the awareness campaign that is being launched by the SSPCA. The public can do other things. For example, they can sponsor a space in an animal welfare centre, which I encourage them to do. MSPs can help too, by putting pressure on the local authorities in their areas to enter into discussions with the SSPCA about the local services that they provide. As is often the case, there are 101 varieties of contracts and  arrangements between the SSPCA and councils. Those discussions could centre on the varied and numerous statutory functions that the society performs, for which at present it gets little or no assistance from public funds. The society has 58 uniformed inspectors who investigate alleged cruelty cases and report offences to the procurator fiscal. They carry out routine monitoring of animal premises, such as farms and pet shops. They are involved in incidents of neglect or disease on farms, and are trained in humane destruction techniques. They investigate cases of badger baiting, dog fighting, illegal snaring and much more. They also have to respond to calls from local authority departments to care for animals that have been left due to elderly people being unable to remain at home and to care for animals that have been left abandoned in empty houses, and to many other requests. It is fair to say that every local authority makes use of the society's services, but financial assistance is inconsistent and patchy. I hope that MSPs will use their influence to improve that situation. All that will take time to take effect, though. The immediate crisis will require assistance from the Scottish Executive. This is not just a plea for funds—although it is a plea for funds—but a plea for recognition of the statutory functions that are performed by the SSPCA, and a test of how seriously the Executive takes animal welfare. There is some confusion over which department has responsibility for animal welfare. It seems that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development has responsibility, but so do the Minister for Justice and the Minister for Finance and Public Services. That makes it difficult for negotiations to take place. That the society has been calling for the creation of an integrated animal welfare portfolio since 1999 is worthy of further consideration. The Executive must also recognise that some financial burdens that have contributed to the society's financial difficulties have originated from the Executive itself—increased water charges since the removal of charitable relief is a good example. What I am asking for is simple: a commitment from the minister to meet the SSPCA to discuss ways in which assistance could be given to the society through a difficult period. There is light at the end of the tunnel. The society is working hard through fund-raising efforts to move forward, but a helping hand at this stage would allow it to get on to a more secure financial footing so that it can continue to provide Scotland with an animal welfare service of which we can be truly proud. I hope that the minister will listen to what is said in the debate and respond positively. I look forward to hearing what he has to say.

Does the minister accept that many trusts are continuing to fail to make junior doctors' posts compliant with the 56-hour rule? That failure puts patient care and safety at risk. Will he state today whether the 50 per cent of newly qualified junior doctors' posts  that are still non-compliant with the 56-hour rule will be compliant by the August deadline? How will he achieve that in 10 weeks?

Before I make an affirmation, I restate my belief that it is the people of Scotland who are sovereign. [ Interruption. ]  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Shona Robison (Dundee East) (SNP)

I will certainly do my best. I begin by thanking all the Health and Community Care Committee clerks, who have worked so hard on the bill. They were still working on the bill until well after midnight last Friday, which really is beyond the call of duty. I also thank everyone who gave evidence, particularly service users, many of whom shared personal experiences with us. We appreciated that very much. Suffice it to say that the bill has been a long haul for everyone involved. We have to learn lessons from the way in which the legislation has been handled. The initial delay in introducing the bill due to drafting problems was the start of the difficulties. Then there was the unprecedented number of amendments lodged at stage 2—more than 1,300—again due to drafting problems. Finally, more than 700 additional amendments were lodged at stage 3. I do not want to dwell on that too much but, as I said yesterday, I fear that there might be problems with the legislation that will come back to haunt us. There might be a need for an amending bill in the near future, although I hope not. We must ensure that our new Parliament reflects on what improvements can be made to our legislative process so that we can avoid such problems happening again. The amendment to the motion goes to the heart of the concerns that have been expressed at all stages of the bill. I believe that those concerns have to be expressed again. I am pleased that the Executive has, even if a little grudgingly, said that it will accept the amendment. The bill will work and deliver its aims and objectives only if the services and facilities exist to meet demand. I will come back to that issue in more detail. I broadly welcome the content of the bill, although I still have some reservations about elements of it. On the principles of the bill, it was important to try to keep service users on board with the legislation. It is fair to say that their biggest disappointment was with the failure to include the principle of reciprocity. That remains a  concern and it is unfortunate that our suggestions on that point were not accepted. Some unease remains about community-based CTOs, despite the safeguards that have now been included in the bill. I would have liked more safeguards but, now that we are where we are, it is important that there is effective monitoring of the numbers of community-based CTOs and swift action to investigate any unforeseen rise in the use of such orders. That would go some way towards reassuring the people who are concerned. There has been a lot of compromise with the bill, which is always a good thing. I was reassured by what was said about electroconvulsive therapy this morning, as I am sure many service users will have been. I was particularly pleased when the amendment on age-appropriate services was passed yesterday. With only 35 in-patient beds for adolescents throughout Scotland when there should be 80 to 100, that measure could not have come at a better time. For me, the most satisfying aspect of the bill is that is enshrines in statute the right to appeal against excessive security. The Crichton family's evidence about their experiences was powerful. For a young man to spend three years of his life in a maximum-security setting when he did not require to was a failure of the system. Rehabilitation should start at the earliest opportunity, not three years later than it has to. As a number of members said this morning, we now need to focus on appropriate alternative services, with local medium-secure units where rehabilitation and recovery can begin. We should talk about that more. At the moment, those facilities are inadequate—we need more of them. However, the public have to be given full information on what such units are about, otherwise opposition will develop based on myths and fear. It is imperative that community resources are developed for the next stage in people's rehabilitation into the community. If that does not happen, a bottleneck will develop in medium-secure units. That brings me back to resources and the reason for my amendment. It has been said throughout the process—by three committees of the Parliament and by nearly all the people who gave evidence—that there is concern in all quarters about resources. There are outstanding issues of resources for staffing and finding the staff to fill posts. I hope that those problems can be overcome. The proof of the pudding will be whether the services and facilities that are required by service users are sufficient. Only by ensuring that that is the case will the aims and aspirations of the bill be met. At the moment, I am afraid that the jury is out.  However, the Parliament has a huge role to play in monitoring the development of those services. I am sure that service users will work with us to ensure that that happens. I end by talking about the context of the bill. Although most of us will never need compulsory treatment or need to be detained, one in four of us will suffer from a mental health problem at some point in our lives. Therefore, it is in all our interests that appropriate services are available when and where people need them. Too often, that is not the case and by the time a person comes into the system their condition is much worse. Preventive work must be the key to ensuring that we have good mental health in Scotland. Mental health services must cease to be the cinderella services and must reflect the fact that mental health is supposed to be a key clinical priority. I urge the Parliament to support my amendment to the Executive motion on the bill. I am pleased that the Minister for Health and Community Care has accepted it, as that means that he will not experience the anxiety that he felt last week. I move amendment S1M-4024.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, supports the view expressed by many giving evidence on the Bill, and by three committees of the Parliament, that the aims of the Bill will not be met unless services and facilities are adequate to meet the demands placed on them."

In the interest of brevity, I will say only that I am pleased that the Executive will accept amendment 736, which I press.  Amendment 736 agreed to.  Amendments 103, 737 and 738 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Like many members, I have received several letters from clinical psychologists who are concerned that the bill omits psychological intervention and treatment. I have some sympathy with the view that the bill does not acknowledge the psychology input to the mental health care system as it should, but the amendments that the clinical psychologists suggested were not the way forward. To address some of their concerns, I lodged amendment 736, which would include psychological intervention in the definition of medical treatment. The Executive feels that the definition is in case law, but I see no reason not to provide clarity in the bill by specifying psychological intervention in the definition of medical treatment. I await with interest the minister's response. I move amendment 736.

It is worth putting on the record that the Health and Community Care Committee stuck doggedly to the principle behind what it wanted to achieve with these amendments. At one stage, the minister was sent away to think again and come back to us, which, to give her her due, she did. The amendments were only going to mean anything if they forced health boards to do what they were required to do. They will now do that. I am also pleased that, if a patient has ultimately to go to the Court of Session for assistance, they will be given help to do that by the Mental Welfare Commission as a matter of last resort. That is to be welcomed. Margaret Smith referred to the Crichton family, who will be pleased to know that in future there should be no one who ends up in the position in which their son found himself. He spent three years that he did not have to spend in Carstairs, waiting to leave. I hope that the bill will have the practical effect of ensuring that no one else is ever in that position again. That is why it is important that Mary Scanlon's amendments have been supported. That will ensure that there is no undue delay in getting to that position, so that the people who are currently in that situation in Carstairs will not have to be there for very much longer. My personal view is that that is one of the most welcome parts of the bill and many people throughout Scotland will welcome it.

In the light of what the minister said about the guidance and the consultation on it, and in the interests of compromise and agreement, I will not move amendments 216 and 217.  Amendments 216 and 217 not moved.  Amendments 656 to 658 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I appreciate what the minister has said about the complexity of this issue. By no means is it a simple matter to resolve. The purpose of my amendments 216 and 217 is to prevent ECT from being given to patients who are incapable of consenting to treatment, or who resist or object to its being administered. The only exception would arise in urgent situations, where the treatment could be given under the urgent treatment provisions in section 171. The reason why I lodged my two amendments and why I am persuaded that there is a debate to be had on the issues involved is based on the written and oral evidence that the Health and Community Care Committee received on ECT. One of my constituents had ECT when he was 16 years old. He underwent the treatment as a voluntary patient, although it might perhaps be difficult to make an important choice about that and to agree to the treatment at 16. He now regrets the treatment very much, because it completely wiped out all his primary school learning. He was unfortunate that that was the effect that the treatment had on him and, on reflection, he feels that he did not make an informed choice, as he was in no position to do so. The National Institute for Clinical Excellence—NICE—produced an appraisal consultation document on ECT, from which I quote: "The evidence submitted to the Committee, both written and verbal, demonstrated that, on balance, current opinion is that ECT is an effective treatment for certain subgroups of individuals with mental disorders. However opinion varies from those who consider that its adverse effects are tolerable to those who consider that it is associated with significant side effects including brain damage, severe confusion and considerable cognitive impairment in both the short and longer terms. Whilst some patients consider ECT to be a beneficial and lifesaving treatment, others report feelings of terror, shame and distress, and find it positively harmful and an abusive invasion of personal autonomy." There is clearly huge division over whether ECT is effective or ineffective and over the lasting effects of ECT on patients. Service users expressed mixed views about ECT to the Scottish Association for Mental Health. In its stage 1 report, the Health and Community Care Committee recommended that the Executive introduce "additional protections for patients for whom ECT is proposed, who are incapable of consenting and who are objecting to or resisting the treatment."  That is what my amendments seek to achieve. Preventing ECT from being given to patients who are incapable of consenting would make the safeguards for ECT for incapable patients closer to those that apply to neurosurgery for mental disorder and incapable patients, without going as far as those NMD safeguards. I accept that the Executive amendments represent a tightening up of safeguards for incapable patients who resist or object to ECT. As the minister outlined, a patient would not be given ECT under section 167 unless the circumstances that are stated in section 171 apply. I could be persuaded to compromise on the matter if certain safeguards are put in place. The primary concern about amendment 656 is the wording of the phrases used in section 171. The treatment can be given if its purpose is "(b) preventing serious deterioration in the patient's condition" and "(c) alleviating serious suffering on the part of the patient". Those terms already appear in the urgent treatment provisions in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 and in section 171 of the bill. However, those urgent treatment provisions include the phrases "immediately necessary" and "necessary as a matter of urgency". Amendment 656 would effectively incorporate the terms of the urgent treatment provisions, but without the use of the phrases "immediately necessary" or "urgent". I am concerned that that could mean there is a lack of clarity about how the terms could be interpreted in practice. There is a danger that they could be interpreted too widely when treatment is given under section 167. If the minister can give an assurance that the terms will be clarified outwith the bill so that they can be clearly interpreted in practice, that clear guidance will be given in a code of practice or good practice guidelines—whichever is most appropriate—and, importantly, that there would be wide consultation, involving user groups in particular, on the preparation of such guidance, we could reach a compromise this morning on ECT.

I will be brief. I suppose that to speak on others' behalf is always dangerous to do. However, it would be fair to say that the mental  health organisations, user groups and most of the individuals to whom I have spoken would prefer amendments 74 and 75 to be agreed to for the reasons that Adam Ingram outlined eloquently. For that reason, I will press those amendments. However, if amendments 74 and 75 are not successful, I would regard amendment 343 as a compromise amendment. I welcome the minister's movement, but if there are to be regulations, let us have them. If the minister is going to consult on regulations, let us have them to consult on. He should not say that he may have them, because to lead organisations up the path by talking about having regulations and then not to have them is not the best approach. That could lead to further feelings of alienation among some of the organisations that are concerned that their views have not been taken on board. I strongly urge the minister to compromise on amendment 343, which would mean that ministers would put further restrictions on the use of community-based CTOs. The minister would be able to go out and consult on the regulations. That would be better than leaving the situation so vague. There is no indication of whether there will be regulations. If there were no regulations, that would be too much of a compromise for most of the mental health user groups that I have spoken to. Therefore, I intend to press my amendments.

Amendments 74 and 75 are responses to the concerns that have been expressed by mental health organisations and  user groups in the light of the 284 per cent rise in the number of episodes of long-term orders between 1985 and 2001. The bill does not differentiate between the type of patient for whom a community-based CTO would be more appropriate and the type of patient for whom a hospital-based CTO would be more appropriate. My amendments in this group attempt to make such a definition. Research undertaken by the Scottish Executive's central research unit considered the international use of compulsory treatment orders. On the question of whom the orders suit, that research stated: "Guidance is generally unclear. With no clear guidelines as to who is suitable it is difficult to assess whether CTOs are under or over used." The Millan committee suggested that the new orders be used for patients in three categories in particular: patients "who have relapsed whilst off medication in the community in the past, presenting a risk to themselves or others ... who have a history of refusing to take their medication once there is no legal compulsion to do so; and ... for whom all other means of trying to negotiate with them and maintain them in the community without compulsion have been tried and failed." It is clear for whom the Millan committee thought community-based CTOs would be appropriate. I believe that those factors should be stated in the bill, as Millan recommended, so that it will be clear to all for whom community-based CTOs are appropriate. That will reduce the likelihood of an inappropriate rise in the use of the orders, which is the fear of many of the organisations that I mentioned earlier. I move amendment 74.

I do not agree with the minister's analysis. Amendment 69 would make health boards and local authorities do what all members want them to do and provide the services that are required. The minister knows that this debate goes to the core of the issues of concern in the bill. He and I have heard all the mental health user groups and individuals say that there are two sides to the bargain. The bill extends the use of compulsory measures, particularly with the extension of community-based compulsory treatment orders. Such extension is accepted by many organisations and individuals, but only if the other side of the bargain is fulfilled, which is that health boards and local authorities provide services on the ground to meet the service users' needs. They feel that, if the principle of reciprocity is not explicitly stated as a duty on health boards and local authorities, that side of the bargain will not be met. The minister knows as well as I do that that has been the key concern of all the groups and individuals who have given evidence. I press amendment 69.

I feel that the minister is hiding behind the legal issues that have been raised throughout the debate on the principle of reciprocity. It is a bit strange that he should focus on the definition of "appropriate services". Not only did Millan use that term, but the minister himself has used the term "appropriate services" in the much watered-down need to "have regard to the importance of the provision of appropriate services". Unless the minister is saying that the phrase "appropriate services" is nonsense and is so vague that it should never have been in the bill in the first place—which I am sure he is not—and given that the words are a term of reference that is used in the bill, I do not see a problem with imposing a duty on health boards and local  authorities. Doing so would go some way towards solving the problem. Obviously, the other end of the road is that health boards and local authorities must provide the services. I return to a point that was raised before. Unless a duty is imposed on health boards and local authorities, our fear—and the fear of many organisations out there that have expressed concerns about the matter—is that such services will not be provided.

The amendments relate to the principle of reciprocity. Their purpose is to give effect to the principle, which the Millan committee recommended. The Millan definition of reciprocity is: "Where society imposes an obligation on an individual to comply with a programme of treatment and care, it should impose a parallel obligation on the health and social care authorities to provide safe and appropriate services, including ongoing care following discharge from compulsion." As the bill stands, it requires only that those exercising functions under the bill "have regard to the importance of the provision of appropriate services".  Although that important principle should stay in the bill, it is not enough in itself to ensure that reciprocity is truly enshrined in the bill. My amendments would ensure that a duty to provide appropriate services falls on health boards and local authorities, as Millan intended. The Health and Community Care Committee supported the inclusion in the bill of all the Millan principles and felt that reciprocity was a key principle, as did all the mental health organisations that gave evidence. The Executive expressed concerns about the wording of an amendment that was lodged at stage 2. Those concerns have been taken on board in my amendment, because it would ensure that the duty falls on health boards and local authorities, rather than on individuals. On that basis, I hope that the Executive will support my amendment. I move amendment 69.

I wish to make a brief speech in support of Margaret Jamieson's amendment 34. She has pursued the provision of services for children and young people throughout our consideration of the bill. The placing of a SNAP report in the Scottish Parliament information centre the day before we debate the issue is not a substitute for amendment 34. It is not appropriate for young people to be put in the care of adult psychiatric services. As we heard time and time again, that can do more harm than good. The SNAP report will not provide the necessary impetus for health boards to provide the services for young people that are so badly required. I know that the minister will say that the problem with putting something in statute is that it gives priority to a group of health service users, but I cannot think of any group of health service users other than young people suffering mental health problems who should be given priority in statute. I urge the minister to set aside the concerns about precedence and legal issues, because we have already accepted the principle in the bill's provisions on appeals against excessive security for people in Carstairs. There is a case to be made for making a group of vulnerable young people an exception to the rule. We should support amendment 34.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have given you notice of my point of order, which is to ask you to reflect on the number of amendments that have been submitted to the bill. We have had over 2,000 amendments in total, with over 500 amendments being submitted on the very last day for amendments at stage 3. I ask you to reflect on whether that is the way for the Parliament to make good legislation. All the parties, especially those that are represented on the Health and Community Care Committee, have been hugely co-operative in  trying to get the bill through, but I feel that it is my responsibility to say that we may not be doing our best with the bill because of the volume of amendments and the lack of time. I ask the Presiding Officer to reflect on whether the Procedures Committee might not have a role in ensuring that we are never again placed in the position of having to deal with so many amendments in so little time.

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention?

rose—

I congratulate David Mundell on securing the debate and I also express my disappointment that not a single Labour member has stayed for the debate. Given the overwhelming concern about the issue among pensioners, that is somewhat surprising. I am sure that the pensioners will make their views known. The Westminster Government's changes to the way in which pensions will be paid are a threat to the existence of many of our local post offices. I would prefer pensioners to be able to collect their pensions in the traditional manner, through their pension books at their local post offices. All the pensioners to whom I have spoken agree. However, that is not going to be the case—Westminster is determined to push ahead with changes to the system that are driven by the administrative savings that will be made rather by than what is best for pensioners. As has been said, many pensioners do not have a bank account, nor do they want one. In many cases, they will not be entitled to one; many pensioners whom I know have been declined bank accounts. Pensioners prefer to manage their pension money as they have always done, but the changes will be disruptive to the budgets of many pensioner households. For many pensioners, the only remaining alternative to a bank account will be the Post Office card account. Although that option is not ideal, I think that it is the best that is available and—more important—it provides a lifeline for the post offices that are under threat of closure. It is fair to say that the card accounts have the potential to be a lifeline, which is why it is incredible that the Government is not providing a level playing field for Post Office card accounts. They are not being promoted as they should be. Instead, the Government clearly wants people to have bank accounts because the system will then cost less to administer. A constituent of a colleague of mine phoned the helpline that the Department for Work and Pensions provides to find out how to open a Post  Office card account. That constituent was told that it was not necessary for them to do that because they had an existing bank account. The evidence is that people are being put off having Post Office card accounts and that there is no level playing field. I join others in endorsing the call by the National Federation of SubPostmasters for there to be no administrative obstacles for customers who want to open Post Office card accounts. I look forward to hearing from the minister about what he intends to do to ensure that a level playing field is created.

I welcome tonight's important debate. I thank Helen McDade and John McKee from the save our supplements campaign for the very useful information that they provided and for making their campaign one that has made MSPs sit up and take note of the issue. As other members have said, the debate on the food supplements directive is not about consumer safety but about harmonisation. Scotland has strict food safety laws at the moment, under which any nutrients that are found to be unsafe can be banned. A range of consumer protection legislation applies in this area and current legislation should be adequate to guarantee consumer protection. I am concerned about the thinking behind the directive. I am concerned that there was no nutritionist on the expert group from which the directive emanated. That speaks volumes about the directive. There will be a danger to consumer safety if people who have traditionally bought these products at reputable high-street retailers or health food shops begin to purchase products of dubious quality from overseas. Forty per cent of adults use these types of food supplement: they take them because they believe that the products help to relieve the symptoms of their chronic conditions. There is no evidence to prove them wrong and I know that many of my constituents use them to good effect. The directive has worried people who think that they could be denied access to supplements because 300 nutrients that are currently in use are not on the positive list.  Margo MacDonald mentioned the mineral deficiencies of the soil in which our food is grown, which raises issues about Scotland's poor health record. It may be that this EU directive will exacerbate the situation. Selenium has been mentioned. It is interesting to note that, in the United States of America, the Food and Drug Administration has just approved selenium. The FDA has given it a qualified positive labelling, saying that it may reduce the likelihood of some types of cancer. Silica and boron, both of which help with osteoporosis, are not yet on the positive list, whereas caustic soda and sodium are on it. Hazel Blears, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health at Westminster, has applauded the fact that six forms of sodium are on the list, but that flies in the face of the health advice that the Scottish ministers give out in the guidance issued by the Scottish Executive health department. I want to end with some questions for the minister. The issue of derogation is important to the debate and I will be interested to hear what she has to say about it. The Channel Islands have a derogation, which means that people who live there will be able to continue to buy these products. Will the minister argue for a negative list? It makes sense that any list should contain only products that are deemed unsafe rather than those for which there is no evidence of any safety concerns. Will the minister also comment on whether she feels that the thinking behind the directive is rather old-fashioned—and indeed cuts across some of the very good health promotion policies that her department has introduced? If so, is she concerned about that?

Can the minister confirm whether Dundee City Council will be entitled to apply for prudential borrowing—an question that was also asked by Dundee Federation of Tenants Associations? Does she acknowledge that the level of investment that is needed in Dundee, and the high rents, might bar the council from being able to take that route?

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has about the key statistics contained in the 2001 Census. (S1O-6545)

I point the minister to a key statistic that will be of particular concern to him. Does he agree that it is concerning that more than 40 per cent of Dundee men of working age are regarded as long-term unemployed, which means that they have not worked since 1999 or earlier? That is the highest figure in Scotland. Does he agree that that is more evidence of the failure of the Labour-Liberal Government, and the failure of the Labour council in Dundee to tackle the core economic problems that face the city?

Does the minister appreciate how fed up the public are becoming with glossy documents being produced but no action being taken? Is not it time that there were fewer documents and more action to address the core problems in the NHS, which are lack of beds and a lack of staff? When will we see progress on those matters? Does not the minister think that it is a bit desperate on his part to describe progress on waiting times as being encapsulated by an increase in out-patient waiting times? Does he think that progress on in-patient waiting times is represented by—according to the figures that were produced today—a staggering 0.4 per cent increase? Does not his claim that those facts show progress in waiting times reflect desperation on his part?

Today we have had the usual story from the Tories. Everything was okay under them and market forces will deliver for the NHS. Of course, no one believes that, particularly not the public. I wonder whether some Tory members really believe it. Will they ever learn? The answer that we have had today is that it does not look like it. Alex Johnstone made a rather peculiar speech that highlighted the fact that he needs to take the wax out of his ears and do a little more homework before engaging in debates on health. Clearly, he did not hear what Nicola Sturgeon was saying so, for his benefit, I will say it a second time. The SNP is the only party that is committed to addressing the core problem in the NHS, which is the lack of capacity. That is why we are going to tackle bed and staff shortages by assessing the real level of acute beds that we require. At the moment, we do not know what that is. Clearly, we do not have enough or we would not have the thousands of cancelled operations that we do. We need to know the right level of acute beds for Scotland. We then need the staff to ensure that those beds can operate. The only way we can do that is by ensuring that nurses and doctors want to come and work in Scotland. The only way we can do that is by giving the Scottish health service a competitive edge. That is why we are committed to an 11 per cent pay rise for nurses. Only then will we be able to tackle the core problems in the NHS. If we need any evidence of those problems, we should note that we are falling further behind the English health service. Scotland has over 1,400 people waiting more than 15 months for in-patient treatment, whereas England has only 105. Given  the difference in population, that is quite a stark figure.

We look forward to hearing what the minister has to say tomorrow. The problem is that it is always jam tomorrow, but the facts speak for themselves. The Executive has failed to address the issue of waiting times over the past four years and it cannot get away from that.

It is all very well for the Executive to say that it is trying its best and admitting that there is a problem, but that is not good enough. The Executive has failed. Moving on to the other party of failure, I say that the Liberal Democrats cannot have their cake and eat it. That annoys their coalition partners greatly, as we saw at the weekend. It annoys me greatly as well because, if we were to listen to the Liberal Democrats, we would think that it has nothing to do with them. Mike Rumbles was complaining about the situation in Grampian. Yes, it is terrible that people have to wait for digital hearing aids and dental treatment, but the Liberal Democrats' Executive is running the health service and they are as guilty as their Labour coalition partners.

I am in my last minute. Colin Campbell gave an eloquent example of how the problems that we are talking about today impact on patient care, which is most important. He gave one example out of thousands of someone who has had their operation cancelled time and again. That is the reality of bed and staff shortages. I will conclude by being magnanimous enough to say that many of the Executive's health policies  are well intentioned. However, that is not good enough. Labour's stewardship of the NHS has been a failure and it has failed to use the resources available wisely and effectively. It is time for change. It is time for a new team to lead the NHS and we look forward to starting that on May 2.

Does the minister share my concern about the impact that the failure to have an agreement with the private care home sector will mean for patients who suffer delayed discharge? What more will he do to try to resolve that dispute? The dispute will harm patients and is not good for anybody.

I will make a brief speech. I was not very aware of the issue, so I tried to make myself a bit more aware of it before tonight. I found an article on the BBC news website about the situation back in 2000 when the "Frontline Scotland" programme investigated the problems of lead in new developments. I must admit that I was not highly aware of that aspect of the situation. I am shocked by the figures. Up to 30 per cent of new homes built in 2000 had drinking water contaminated by lead. That was caused, as Robert Brown said, by the illegal use of lead solders to join copper pipes.  It is a concerning situation, particularly given that even very low levels of contamination by lead can have an impact on young children. It is also very concerning for pregnant women. Some developers and builders must know what the plumbers on their sites are doing—I find it hard to believe that plumbers are doing such things off their own back. Such people have a blatant disregard for human health and the law. We must find out what more can be done. The BBC article contains a comment from Dr Pauline Upton, who is a consultant in public health. She said that although adults are unlikely to be affected by lead poisoning unless the levels are very high, "Children and babies are particularly vulnerable to the effects of lead poisoning, so it is important that parents follow ... advice." What advice are parents and pregnant women getting about lead in water? It is important that such people get advice, as that could reduce the risk of their being affected by lead. We need answers to our questions. Robert Brown mentioned what Scottish Water is doing to discover problems in its supply—that issue must be addressed. I appreciate that the Scottish Executive tried to tackle the problem after the Scottish new homes lead survey in 2000. We are awaiting another report and it will be interesting to see the figures, but we must know now what further measures will be taken to address the problem. In East Ayrshire, 46 per cent of the houses that were sampled failed: in Moray, 66 per cent failed. The levels in other areas varied and some were fairly low. People who live in those areas and who have young children or who are pregnant will be concerned about the issue of lead in water. We must reassure the public and I hope that the minister's answer will do that.

After Brian Fitzpatrick's comments, I wondered whether I should remove my earrings before speaking. However, I will not do so, as I quite like them. I do not often agree with Brian Fitzpatrick, but I agreed with him when he said that it does not matter where good ideas come from—what matters is that they are developed. That is absolutely correct. The problem is that good ideas that relate to dealing with symptoms will do nothing to address the core problem of the Scottish economy, which is low growth. As Andrew Wilson said, we have a shrinking economy—even according to the Executive's figures, the economy grew by only a miserable 0.1 per cent in the past year. Of course, that has a direct impact on our ability to invest in our services and in the communities where we live and work. I will relate that to the city of Dundee. Every £1 billion that we could raise in the economy would give us another £400 million in revenues to invest. A sluggish economy means higher unemployment—in parts of Dundee, more than 7 per cent of males are unemployed. It also means low wages—the Dundee weekly average wage is even lower than the Scottish average. A debate on the economy is not an abstract or arid constitutional debate. The issue impacts directly on the fortunes of cities such as Dundee. Dundee's traditionally large manufacturing base has been hit hard by inappropriate monetary policy. Dundee has huge potential in new industries such as the digital media and biosciences. It has a higher output per capita than Scotland and the UK. However, it also has a declining population, numerous factory closures and large areas of deprivation with poor health records and a life expectancy that is lower than the Scottish average. I believe that only by tackling the underlying cause of our economic malaise—low growth—will we be able to tackle the problems that the Dundee  economy and the Scottish economy face. Low growth is bad for Scottish living standards. Of course, in order to tackle that problem, we need the powers to do so, which we do not have. This Parliament has only 8 per cent control over the economic levers. Compare that with other devolved institutions: the Parliament in Catalonia has 33 per cent control and the one in Quebec has 80 per cent control. We need to be able to tackle the problems in the Scottish economy with home-grown solutions, not solutions designed for someone else's problems. Higher growth delivers a higher tax take and less dependency, which is the SNP's objective. We know that that will be good for the people of Dundee and for the people of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Trish Godman for lodging the motion, which tackles an important issue. It has been said on a number of occasions that the Parliament has not given the issue of alcohol the attention that it should have. The minister will correct me if I am wrong, but I think that we are still waiting for an Executive debate on the subject. My colleague Keith Raffan mentioned that today and it struck a chord with me, because, if the Executive led a debate on the subject, that would show that we take the issue seriously and want to tackle it. As Trish Godman said, under-age drinking could be seen as a rite of passage. I know that we all did it—well, I certainly did—so it could be seen as part of growing up. However, I believe that under-age drinking is now out of hand. The type of drinking and what it leads to is different from what used to happen. Trish Godman outlined some of the dreadful effects of heavy drinking in teenage years, which can have lifelong consequences. We all have examples to give. We have all received complaints from constituents about gangs of young people hanging about and drinking in play parks, smashing bottles and causing a disturbance. To deal with the problem, we have to examine some of our attitudes to alcohol. Scotland has a culture of drinking, which is not the same as that on the continent. Europeans enjoy drinking, but they have a different way of drinking—they drink more often with a meal and unusually to excess. The Scottish drinking culture is one of getting drunk—that is the purpose of alcohol in the minds of many. The culture of binge drinking is at the root of the problem. Unless we address our behaviour as adults, young people will not take us seriously when we address their drinking. We have to set a clear example. I will focus the rest of my remarks on those who  sell alcohol to under-age children. An answer to a parliamentary question that Roseanna Cunningham lodged showed the extent of prosecutions in Scotland of those who had been found selling drink to under-age children. I accept—and I was approached about this—that it is sometimes difficult to spot whether someone is 16, because they might look older. If people sell under-age children alcohol inadvertently, of course there is a defence. However, some people consistently sell alcohol to under-age drinkers and are well known for doing so. Across Scotland, there is huge variation in the numbers of people who are prosecuted. I do not think that that is just because some areas are worse than others—the issue relates to the prosecution service. I know that that is not the minister's responsibility, but I would appreciate it if she would take on board the need for an investigation into why some procurators fiscal are prosecuting and others are not. The selling of alcohol to under-age drinkers should be taken seriously and the full force of the law should be used against those who consistently break it.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Dundee City Council and what issues were discussed. (S1O-6260)

During the minister's meetings with the council, councillors might have reminded him of the comments that his colleague the Minister for Education and Young People made in Parliament and in the press, which led everyone to believe that the funding to include Dundee's Catholic schools in the current public-private partnership bid had been secured. However, at this week's meeting of Dundee City Council's education committee, the chief executive reported that he had held discussions with Scottish Executive officials and that no decision had been reached on whether Dundee will get that money. Does the minister agree that the reality seems to fall far short of the assurances that the Minister for Education and Young People gave before  Christmas? Can he give us a definite answer today? Is Dundee getting the money?

Is the minister aware—I am sure that he is—of his recent figures that show a dramatic decline in the number of D-grade nurses who work in the national health service? Does he agree that that helps to prove the case for an 11 per cent increase in nurses' pay—as pledged by the SNP—over and above the agenda for change deal? That would not only reward nurses, but it would give Scotland a competitive edge in attracting nurses to work in the Scottish health service.

If a Scottish deal can be struck for consultants, why cannot one be struck for nurses?

I, too, congratulate Johann Lamont on securing this very important debate. I want to concentrate on Dundee. In common with many other Scottish cities, Dundee has thousands of tenement properties, many of which are in mixed ownership. Achieving agreement between owners to carry out repairs, let alone maintenance, is a time-consuming and often fruitless process. In many cases, councils are forced to serve notices on owners to ensure that they comply with basic safety requirements. The majority of the properties in Dundee are in the private rented sector and anecdotal evidence shows that the vast majority of tenants receive some level of housing benefit. As a result, landlords are making thousands of pounds in income, often from some of the most vulnerable tenants, and many are giving little or nothing in return. As a consequence, properties gradually fall into disrepair and become a blight on surrounding areas and other properties. In turn, property prices are lowered, which leads to negative equity with the frequent result that, when owners move, they are forced into renting and the cycle continues. The situation does not affect the traditional late-Victorian tenements alone; increasingly, it is  spreading into former council estates because of the right to buy, as Linda Fabiani pointed out. It used to be said that one could spot the bought houses because they had double glazing, but it is now more likely that the bought property is the one without the new windows. It is a matter of importance to many communities throughout Scotland and I welcome Johann Lamont's motion. I have lodged a motion on the related subject of accessing the registration of ownership in order to allow faster resolution of many problems. Part of the problem is trying to find out who owns the property, particularly when it has become vacant and fallen into disrepair. I ask the minister to consider how the Executive can assist local councils in their work by making records of property ownership readily available to them. That would make their job an awful lot easier. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say about that.

What was the member doing when his party's Government was selling arms to the Iraqi regime that was persecuting the Kurds? The SNP raised concerns about what Saddam Hussein was doing; what was the member's view at that time?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Keith Harding on securing this important debate and giving the Parliament an opportunity to recognise breast cancer awareness month and the efforts of the many staff and volunteers who are involved in supporting sufferers and their families. I would also like to echo Keith Harding's comment and say that Margaret and Fergus Ewing would have wanted to attend this debate, but were not able to for the reason Keith outlined. The Parliament has shown a great deal of concern about this issue, which is reflected in the number of parliamentary questions about issues relating to breast cancer. Few people have not been touched by breast cancer. All of us have friends or members of our family who have had breast cancer. The condition has increased in the years 1989 to 1998 and it is the leading cause of cancer-related death among women aged 15 to 54. Although Keith Harding is correct in saying that survival rates are getting better in Scotland, they are still not as good as they are in many countries in Europe. As Keith Harding also pointed out, the key to getting better survival rates is to have earlier diagnosis and earlier treatment. Although Scotland has the unenviable reputation of being the cancer capital of Europe, it is worth putting on record the fact that that is partly to do with the way in which our data are collected. We have a more robust way of collecting data than do  some other European countries, which means that we have an accurate record of the levels of cancer. Nevertheless, we are faced with a major problem and must find ways of solving it. Getting access to treatment is an important issue. There are far too many variations in access to cancer drugs across Scotland. The postcode lottery still exists, as is shown by the fact that drugs such as Herceptin are more readily available in some health board areas than in others. We cannot allow that to continue. No matter where they live in Scotland, women must have equal access to the drugs that are the best drugs for them. The importance of continuing research cannot be underestimated. Much of it is funded from public subscription. Without the many charities and the people who shake cans on the streets, we would not have made some of the breakthroughs that there have been in cancer treatment. Most of all, I want to praise the staff who are involved in supporting cancer patients: not only doctors and nurses, but the Macmillan nurses who do an important job. I echo the point that Rhona Brankin made about the work of the Maggie's Centres. I have spoken to people who have been in Maggie's Centres and know how lucky we are that one is opening in Dundee. Someone told me that the centres provide an oasis of calm in which patients and their families can relax and get advice and therapeutic treatments in an atmosphere in which they feel at home. That is important when one is undergoing cancer treatment, which can be quite frightening. I agree with what the motion says about funding. We still have too many vacancies for cancer consultants and specialist nurses. Funding is critical in that regard and I hope that the minister will be able to give us some reassurances on that this evening.

Is the minister concerned about moving children of asylum seekers from the state education sector into detention centres? Is she aware of the plight of the children of the Kurdish Ay family, who were described as exceptional and model pupils by teachers at their schools in Kent? Does she agree that it is unacceptable to remove children from the state education sector to put them into detention centres for up to six months—sometimes more—where education provision is severely limited?

Will Peter Peacock give way?

I commend Nicola Sturgeon for her well-thought-out proposal for a solution to one of the greatest injustices that the Parliament will ever be faced with—people infected, through no fault of their own, with hepatitis C contracted from contaminated blood and blood products received through the health service. Nicola Sturgeon has had a long-term interest in that issue and feels strongly about it. I say to Mary Scanlon and Margaret Smith that it does not matter who brings forward a good idea or how an idea is brought about; whether an idea is good or not is more important. The proposal is good for hepatitis C sufferers. Yesterday, I spoke on the phone to a hepatitis C sufferer who thought that a debate would be good, as it would provide another opportunity to raise the issue and possibly find a solution.

What is best for hepatitis C sufferers is more important and must come first and foremost, before any perception of what parliamentary protocol is. A result for hepatitis C sufferers is far more important than the member's or anyone else's perception of what parliamentary protocol is.

If the member went out and spoke to hepatitis C sufferers, which I assume that he has not done—[ Interruption .]

I hear the member interrupting—there should be one singer, one song. If the member spoke to hepatitis C sufferers, they would tell him that it is good that today's debate is happening, as it gives another opportunity to raise the issue and find a possible solution. If hepatitis C sufferers think that that is the case, that it is more important than what the member or anybody else thinks about parliamentary protocol or procedure. We should all bear that in mind. I pay tribute to the expert group under Lord Ross. Its sterling work has provided the Health and Community Care Committee with a huge opportunity to reach a solution in respect of hepatitis C sufferers. It has provided a cast-iron case. Despite the fact that the group was appointed and given its remit by the Minister for Health and Community Care, its recommendation is clear. It is a little disappointing and somewhat disturbing that its judgment has been ignored by the minister. Experts who know about the subject have been asked for advice. Given that the Health and Community Care Committee has given a clear view on financial assistance and that the expert group has said that such assistance should be given, can the committee and the expert group be wrong and the minister right? I do not think so.

In the main, I would support such recommendations and, in the main, the SNP has done so. I wonder whether the member has an example of our not doing so.

For example, unlike the Liberal Democrats, we supported the Cubie recommendations. The Liberal Democrats should have supported that expert group's recommendations. I want to move on, as I am already over my time. Nicola Sturgeon's amendment is a practical and workable solution. It has been pointed out that, last year, the capital budget underspend was £111 million and it is possible to release those resources without any adverse effect on capital or revenue spend. Some problems that have been identified are problems only if they are made into problems. The benefit clawback, for example, is a problem only if Westminster ministers decide to make it a problem. Of course, the precedent exists in the Macfarlane Trust for benefits to be disregarded. It would be a travesty of justice if Westminster ministers stood in the way of hepatitis C sufferers in Scotland getting financial assistance should the Scottish Parliament support such assistance. Similarly, the issue of no-fault compensation does not arise. Lord Ross clearly said that giving financial assistance to hepatitis C sufferers sets no more of a dangerous precedent than that established under the Macfarlane Trust. There are no insurmountable problems. Where there is a will, there is a way. Today, I hope that the Parliament will have the political will to find a way of giving the vital assistance that is required by hepatitis C sufferers. That can be done if members support Nicola Sturgeon's amendment.

Will the member give way?

I thank all the Health and Community Care Committee clerks, who have worked hard on the bill. I pay special thanks to our committee adviser, Dr Jacqueline Atkinson, without whose help we would not have got this far. I also want to record my thanks to all those who gave evidence, particularly service users, who shared an awful lot of their personal experience with us. Their evidence was invaluable. We all accept that there is a need to update and renew mental health law, and the bill is, without doubt, one of the most important pieces of legislation that the Parliament has dealt with. However, it is important to set the bill in some context. Although the bill's focus is on people with severe and enduring mental illness, considering the bill has given us an opportunity to explore our attitudes towards mental health more generally and to consider the lack of resources dedicated to mental health services. We should welcome the fact that an assessment is to be made of the current provision of mental health services throughout Scotland. We need to ensure that our mental health services are appropriate, particularly for young people. Throughout Scotland, there are currently only 35 in-patient beds for adolescents, when there should be 80 to 100 such beds. It is totally unacceptable that young people should find themselves in adult psychiatric wards because no age-appropriate services exist. That can be a deeply frightening and damaging experience for young people. One of my colleagues will cover that issue in more detail later. The bill will have a major impact on the lives of many people, which is why it is absolutely essential that we get it right. Getting it right takes time—something that the Health and Community Care Committee has been left with little of. That need not have been the case. It is important to remember that the bill was more than six months late in being introduced by the Executive. We were told at the time that the delay was due to drafting problems, but now we find ourselves being told to expect upwards of 800 amendments from the  Executive alone. Those vital months, which would have helped the committee to deal with the bill, were lost needlessly. Between Executive and non-Executive amendments, we are facing around 1,400 amendments at stage 2. There is something fundamentally flawed with the drafting of any bill that requires so many amendments. As members of the Health and Community Care Committee, we will do our best to get the bill through and to make it as good as it can be. However, let us be absolutely clear that that task will be difficult. The Executive must take responsibility for those problems and ensure that the bill is given adequate time for the important scrutiny that is required. I reiterate the fact that we are dealing with people's lives and fundamental issues of liberty, so we must get it right. As the Scottish Association for Mental Health put it, "mental health service users must not be left with inadequate legislation." It is crucial that we keep service users on board with the legislation. There has to be compromise, but it must work in both directions; reciprocity is crucial. In order for service users to accept any extension of compulsory treatment in the community, there must be the guarantee of resources and services. Unless we get that commitment on resources, the Executive is in danger of not fulfilling its side of the bargain. The Executive can show that it has done that by including in the bill the guiding principles that were set out by Millan, in particular the principle of reciprocity. I heard what the Minister for Health and Community Care said, and I shall take it at face value that he is confirming that the Executive will do that, but the wording in the bill is crucial. We should have no equivocation, no funny wording and no hiding behind civil servants who are concerned about the legal interpretation of reciprocity. Rather, we should have a clear statement of accepting what was said by every witness who gave evidence to the committee: that the principles must be included in the bill. Nothing less will do. If that does not happen, we are in danger of a breach of trust, and service users are likely to walk away from the table. It is important that they do not do that. Community-based compulsory treatment is undoubtedly one of the most controversial elements of the bill, and the committee heard a variety of views on that from service users. I have no principled opposition to community-based compulsory treatment orders, which for some would be the preferred and least restrictive alternative. However, I have concerns about how they will operate in practice. I will be honest. I have travelled around my constituency and further afield and the majority of  service users are anxious about the introduction of community-based CTOs. I understand their fears. They fear that someone's home will become their prison and that privacy will be invaded; that they might be left for long periods on CTOs without any assistance or treatment other than medication; that CTOs are nothing more than a method of control; that a larger and currently unaffected group of people will become subject to compulsory treatment; and that the number of hospital beds will be reduced, which will reduce their availability as an option for people who need hospital care. The Executive has a job to do in persuading people that such things will not happen, but it can do so in a number of ways. First, there can be a clear and unequivocal statement on reciprocity in the bill, which the minister has said that he will make. Secondly, a clear message can be given that resources will be forthcoming—I will return to that issue shortly. Thirdly, the Executive can accept its own argument that the number of CTOs that are issued will not increase. The introduction of community CTOs should not increase the number of people who are subject to compulsory treatment; instead, it should simply increase the options for treatment. Apart from anything else, resources are earmarked for only 200 people, so any breach of that limit will have resource implications. No resources have been allocated for more people than that. Given that that is the case and is clearly stated in the financial memorandum, there should be no problem in including in the bill safeguards that would trigger a formal review of the operation of the legislation if that level were breached. I hope that we can agree an amendment on that at stage 2. We keep returning to the issue of resources because the financial memorandum, as it stands, is inadequate. That is not just my view or the view of the Health and Community Care Committee, but the view of the Local Government Committee, the Justice 1 Committee and the Finance Committee. The Finance Committee is concerned that the costs of implementing the bill have been underestimated and recommends that the Executive produce revised figures. All committees have given the same message about resources: the Executive should go back and think again. The total additional on-going costs to local authorities associated with the bill are estimated at £13 million per annum. If that amount is spread across 32 local authorities, it does not instil confidence that resources will be adequate. Of course, the context of the debate on resources is long-term underfunding of mental health services, which has led to their being known as a cinderella service. There must be a huge catch-up before we start to consider the proposed legislation. The  review of service provision will confirm that that is true and I hope that it will give weight to the argument for the financial memorandum to be reviewed. The same remarks on under-resourcing apply to the health service, for which an additional £6 million per annum has been allocated. That amount is supposed to cover, across 15 health boards, care plans, more mental health assessments, new duties to support advocacy and an additional psychiatrist work load. I cannot see how that amount can be anywhere near adequate, given the current under-resourcing of mental health services in the health service. It is unclear how the Executive came up with the estimated—or guesstimated—costs in the financial memorandum. There does not seem to be a clear rationale for some of its figures and I am pleased that the minister will come back to the committee with more details on that. Resources for staffing are of particular concern. The new legislation will, without doubt, increase the work load for doctors and mental health officers through the addition of extra duties and responsibilities. There must be adequate resources for mental health officers and a strategy for recruiting adequate numbers—that point was well made by the British Association of Social Workers. Likewise, psychiatrists who gave evidence were concerned about the impact of the new tribunal system on their work load. The Health and Community Care Committee is convinced that the tribunal system is a good thing and that the end of the adversarial court system is welcome, but the system needs to be properly resourced and psychiatrists need to be reassured that they will not be buried under mountains of tribunal paperwork to the detriment of their work with patients. The Executive needs to tell us its proposals to address that problem. Jim Kiddie, who was the user group representative on the Millan committee, said: "Various projects that are run by voluntary organisations and others are dependent on making what I call Mickey Mouse money, such as from short-term initiatives from the National Lottery and European social funds. If we are really taking community care seriously, the Parliament needs to take the lead and ensure that the package includes properly funded community care services".—[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 25 September 2002; c 3082-3.] That sums up our feelings on the issue. The provision of accessible quality advocacy is key to ensuring that service users' interests are protected. Many of the witnesses said how important access to an advocate was for them; others said how having an advocate could have  made a difference to their experience of the mental health system. Everyone must have access to a person who is there exclusively for them. At a time of crisis and when a person is ill, it can be difficult for people to make decisions that are in their best interests. People can feel taken over by the system, pressurised into decisions or simply beyond caring what happens. Advocates ensure, as far as possible, that people understand what is happening to them and help them to give their opinion. Given the extension of compulsory treatment so that it can happen in the community, people's right to advocacy must be enshrined in the bill. There is a difference between a duty to provide advocacy and a right to have it. A right is stronger and would ensure that, no matter where people lived and how remote they were, they would have access to assistance from an advocacy service. We will support an amendment at stage 2 to achieve that. The Executive must reassure us that, to meet the increased demand, adequate independent advocacy services will be established and supported. There are concerns among the user movement about how that will be achieved. Advance statements provide a means for service users to express a clear view when they are well about what should happen to them when they are ill. A statement could take the form of specifying treatments and drugs that the person does not wish to receive. Such statements will empower patients and allow them to have more control over what happens to them. The Health and Community Care Committee struggled with some of the ethical issues that arise from advance statements. What will happen if a person's advance statement says that they do not wish to receive a specific treatment, but, in the doctor's opinion, the patient will die without that treatment? That is an extreme but possible scenario. The committee considered that a balance must be struck between patients' rights and ensuring that doctors are not prohibited from protecting patients' welfare. Despite the dilemmas, I believe that the presumption should always be in favour of upholding a patient's expressed wishes, which should be overturned only when a number of safeguards to protect the patient's wishes have been met. We would welcome additional protection for patients for whom electroconvulsive therapy is proposed but who are incapable of consenting and who do not wish to have such treatment. I am pleased that the committee recommended that patients who are subject to compulsory treatment should be given a right of appeal against excessive security. We will support an amendment to that effect at stage 2. It is totally unacceptable  and a breach of human rights to hold someone in a place that they do not have to be in. Carstairs state hospital provides a high-quality service for those who need it, but it is no place for someone who does not. The Crichton family's evidence about their son's experience there was powerful. For a young man to spend three years of his life in a maximum security setting when that was not required was a failure of the system. The system failed that young man. Rehabilitation should start at the earliest opportunity, not three years late. For that to happen we need appropriate local medium-secure units where rehabilitation and—dare I say it—recovery can begin. At present, such facilities are totally inadequate, which leads to dozens of people being trapped in Carstairs. We need far more facilities like the Orchard clinic in Edinburgh, which we visited. It is imperative that community resources are developed for the next stage in people's rehabilitation back into the community, otherwise a bottleneck will develop and people will be trapped in medium-secure units. Unless a right of appeal is inserted at stage 2, there will be no change. Health boards must know that there is no choice other than to develop such services and to do so soon. If they do not, mental health services will continue to be a low priority. The minister said that the tribunals would have the power to hold managers to account, but that is not the same as a right of appeal against excessive security. The location of medium-secure units has been a contentious issue, over which much misunderstanding has arisen. The public should be involved at an early stage and consultation must be adequate. It is not sufficient to go through the motions when deciding where to site such units. The public must be given full information, or opposition based on myths and fears will develop. I end as I began, by talking about the context of the bill. One in four of us will suffer from a mental health problem at some point in our lives, although most of us will recover without needing compulsory treatment or being detained. However, it is in all our interests that appropriate services are available when and where people need them. Too often, that is not the case and by the time that a person enters the mental health system, their condition has got much worse. Preventive work must be the key to ensuring that we have good mental health in Scotland. The Scottish National Party is happy to support the general principles of the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill. However, I give notice to the minister that we will pursue rigorously the concerns that have arisen over the bill, which my colleagues and I will raise this afternoon.

Will the minister give way?

Returning to the subject of compulsory treatment orders, I was pleased to hear what the minister said about the research project that he is establishing. However, we need to know whether there will be a formal mechanism to review the operation of the bill if the number of compulsory treatment orders that he suggests will be made—around 200 were suggested in the financial memorandum—is breached.

Does the minister agree that the joint-future approach between local authorities and health boards is completely missing from the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, which is being considered by the Health and Community Care Committee? Will the Executive address that omission?

Yes.

First of all, I thank all members who have supported my proposals for a licensing scheme and those who managed to stay on tonight for the debate. I also want to thank the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Most important, I must thank the hundreds of people who responded to my consultation paper on introducing a licensing scheme for firework retailers. I have received more than 200 responses, the majority of which have been submitted by community councils and groups the length and breadth of urban and rural Scotland. It is a tribute to the public that the issue of fireworks has registered so high on the political Richter scale. I also want to pay tribute to the media's role in achieving that, because they have been campaigning for stricter controls. Although the Daily Record campaign seeks to go further than the measures proposed in my bill, it has been important in raising public awareness of the issue and putting politicians under the spotlight. Now that another Guy Fawkes night has passed, it is hoped that the misuse and abuse of fireworks will abate, although it is apparent that, with every passing year, the fireworks season gets longer and longer. In Dundee this weekend, much to the annoyance of residents in that area, fireworks were still being thrown about in the streets where I was working. Nevertheless, it is now even more important that we keep up the pressure on Government at all levels to ensure that action is taken to tackle the misuse of fireworks and that we do not have to  face yet another Guy Fawkes night that causes distress and misery to so many in our communities. This debate is part of my long campaign to raise the issue in the Parliament. It started last year when members of all parties signed my first members' business motion, which was followed by a members' business debate earlier this year in which Lewis Macdonald promised that my proposal would be considered. I then lodged my proposal for a member's bill. Today's debate presents another opportunity to keep the issue on the agenda and to try to secure some Government action. The same idea lies behind my bill, public concerns and the media campaigns. We do not want to ban the responsible use of fireworks, but we want to address the misuse and abuse of fireworks and the distress and misery that they can bring to many people, including the old, the young, the vulnerable and the animals that are targeted and affected. Last year, there was a 35 per cent increase in fireworks injuries. This year has been no better; indeed, it has been even worse in some areas. This year, eight police forces have dealt with 820 firework incidents and more than 6,000 nuisance calls, which appears to be an all-time high. Indeed, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has said that more than 3,000 man-hours have been wasted following up calls about fireworks and bonfires. Clearly, that is a drain on scarce resources. The horrific injuries suffered by Alex Carroll from Motherwell, which were featured in the Daily Record , are a stark reminder of the dangers of fireworks. It is sad that so many injuries are caused by fireworks. Some injuries are the result of accidents, but many are the result of the deliberate misuse and abuse of fireworks. Fireworks are thrown through windows, put under cars, thrown at people in the street, set off beside animals or—unimaginably—tied to animals. The misuse of fireworks causes most of the problems that we are concerned about tonight. Some disgraceful incidents happened in Dundee over the fireworks season. For example, on bonfire night, fireworks were thrown at firefighters while they were attending bonfires that were out of control. That is disgraceful. The existing legislation is totally inadequate to deal with the problem. The voluntary code of the British Fireworks Association says that shops should sell fireworks only in the three weeks leading up to 5 November, yet we all know that that is completely ignored by many retailers. It is clear that we need further legislation. While it is to be welcomed that Westminster is to  ban certain grades of fireworks from being sold to the public, as announced in the Queen's speech, the measures do not go far enough. It is important that we tackle the misuse of fireworks in Scotland, which I believe we have the power to do. A licensing scheme, used imaginatively, would go a long way towards addressing many of our concerns. Not only would it prevent people who are deemed unfit to sell fireworks from doing so, but it would restrict the number of outlets, with applicants for licences having to show a need in their area. A local authority could also introduce a strict code of practice in its area, restricting when fireworks could be sold and making it clear that anyone applying for a licence would be expected to abide by that code. Retailers who chose to advertise half-price fireworks six weeks before bonfire night would be unlikely to be granted a licence. I am pleased that the Executive has said that it is considering my proposal for a licensing scheme, but it is time to hear when and how it intends to take that forward. It is time for action. In reply to a letter to the First Minister, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, Andy Kerr, said that the Executive is considering my proposed bill and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities report, which also supports a licensing scheme. I am glad that that is happening, but time is of the essence. I know that it would be difficult for me to get primary legislation through in the four months that remain before Parliament dissolves for the election. That is why I have consistently asked for ministers in the Executive to act to amend the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 by regulation, as it should be far quicker to get a statutory instrument through the Parliament before March. However, that will happen only if the Executive acts soon. We need to move quickly to ensure that a licensing scheme is in operation well in advance of Guy Fawkes night next year. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services can tell us when and how he intends to take that forward.

Fireworks are a major quality-of-life issue and I was pleased that the minister addressed that issue in his speech. I could not agree more with his comments, particularly about the disgraceful attacks on firefighters by youths throwing fireworks. That is a particular problem in Dundee and Tayside and it is something that everyone in the chamber should condemn. Although the minister said that more would be done, he did not tell us much more than we know already. I thought that he was about to say what would be done and when it would be done. A bit of detail would be nice. We have just been through another Guy Fawkes season. For many people, it was a fun night with a safe firework display for all to enjoy. For others, however, it was a nightmare because of the misuse of fireworks in the run-up to 5 November. It will also be a nightmare in the weeks to come, because the misuse does not stop on 5 November. This year, police throughout Scotland have so far been called to 4,000 firework incidents, more than 2,000 of which have involved Strathclyde police. Firework-related injuries and disturbances are on the increase, according to the DTI report. Last year, there was a 35 per cent increase in the number of injuries in Scotland. This year is unlikely to be any different. Many of the problems are caused by young people who manage to obtain and misuse fireworks. A recent survey in Edinburgh found that more than half the stores that were visited in the days before bonfire night—eight out of 15—were breaking the existing law. A licensing scheme is important, because not only will it prevent such retailers selling fireworks, it will provide a mechanism to ensure that retailers adhere to codes of practice that local authorities develop to lay down, for example, when and where fireworks are sold. A scheme could also restrict the number of outlets by restricting the number of licences that are issued. We agree on all those points. My proposal for a licensing scheme has been warmly received by members from all parties in this Parliament. It has also been hugely welcomed by the community groups and organisations that have responded to me. I have received more than 150 responses so far, in which people have cited dreadful experiences for themselves, for people they know, such as families and relatives, and for household pets.  We know what the problem is and we know that there is a solution through a licensing scheme. The Minister for Finance and Public Services talked about the need to crack down on the misuse of fireworks, but the detail of how and when that will be done was missing. I am pleased that the Executive has stopped talking about the issue being reserved and that it is moving in the right direction, but we now need a clear commitment to amend section 44 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. That is the only way that I can see of taking the issue forward. A clear commitment to that today would send out a good message to all the community groups and organisations that have written to me, and to the Scottish public, that we are serious about this matter and that by this time next year we will have a licensing scheme in place. However, we have not heard that today, which is a matter of regret. The measures could be implemented quickly and easily, as the minister said, through regulations, and that could be done well in advance of the election. We seek a commitment today. When will the minister implement the proposals?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to respond to the report produced by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' fireworks task group. (S1O-5787)

It is good news that COSLA has come out in support of a licensing scheme. There has been an overwhelming public response to my consultation on my proposed bill on a licensing scheme for fireworks retailers. I am happy to share the results of that response with the minister. The First Minister has also signalled his support for such a scheme. Will the minister outline when he will introduce clear proposals and when a licensing scheme is likely to be operational?

Is the minister aware of the all-party support for my proposed bill, which I lodged today, to introduce a licensing scheme for retailers of fireworks? Will he listen to the concerns of members of all parties in the Parliament, to COSLA, to the police and to the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, as well as to the public? Will he agree to use the powers that he has under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to amend the current law by regulation, so that we can bring a speedy solution to the gap in the legislation on fireworks? I also ask him to contact Melanie Johnson MP, the minister with responsibility for consumer affairs, who has clearly said that she is happy for Scotland to move ahead on the issue.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. [Interruption.] When Mr Raffan is finished, I will begin. Malcolm Chisholm and others have rightly focused on managed clinical networks as an important tool in getting the best out of the resources that we have. However, for me, the theme that has come out the debate is the fact that prevention is the key to turning round our fortunes and our unenviable position of having the second-highest mortality rate for coronary heart disease in Europe. I agree with Des McNulty that the fact that the section on prevention is the shortest in the strategy—only two pages out of 50—does not send out the right message. It is important that we send out the message that prevention is the key and that without it—without a change in lifestyle—our nation's health fortunes will not change. I also agree with Keith Raffan that the omission of alcohol from the strategy is short-sighted, given that we know that alcohol—especially a combination of alcohol and smoking—is a key factor in the incidence of strokes and coronary heart disease. Perhaps the Executive should respond by making alcohol far more prominent. As Nicola Sturgeon outlined, smoking cessation is key. Smoking is one of the key causes of so many of the diseases that plague Scotland. I, too, would like the Parliament to take as many measures as possible to tackle it. We need to know what will happen to the ring fencing of funding for smoking cessation. When a person wants to give up smoking, it is vital that the support is there when they require it and that the moment is seized. As many members have said, poverty and deprivation are key aspects of our poor health record. The higher levels of coronary heart disease and strokes in deprived areas are well documented. We need to raise the ambitions and aspirations of our people. If people do not see something to change their lifestyle for—an aspiration or a goal to aim for—why would they fundamentally change their lifestyle? Colin Campbell's speech was well thought out and was one of the best in the debate, focusing on giving people hope. The main issue is about changing attitudes, particularly those of men, who still tend not to seek health-related assistance, which they do not see as being of any relevance to their lives. We must reverse such an attitude,  which begins at an early age, so that we do not all end up with the "we've all got to die of something" attitude. We do not need to "die of something" 10, 20 or 30 years younger than when we do have to leave this earth. People are dying far too young from preventable diseases, and they have a key role in preventing them themselves. As Murdo Fraser said, the message has to be given to people from a young age. It is crucial that we set out the diets that people should follow at a young age. If we do not, people will end up following the same poor diet over a lifetime. If we do not reverse that at an early age, it is more difficult to do so later. At lunch time today I heard a good example of a health education project in the Whitfield area of Dundee. It was a healthy eating initiative, involving whole families, who would come together and take part in the project, enjoying simple, healthy foods. The initiative has proved so popular that there is a waiting list. That is the kind of project that we need to roll out. Such initiatives are not expensive; they are cost-effective, and display good results. Where they work, let us see more of them. Stewart Stevenson highlighted vacancies among doctors and nurses. Filling those vacancies is critical to ensure that we have the resources that are required to provide the necessary treatment. Sometimes we politicians can focus too much on the short-term solutions—we all have the date of the next election in mind. We must focus on the long term when it comes to changing our nation's health. That is not without risk, because it can be 10, 20 or, to take the case of Finland, even 30 years before we see results. We have to be brave enough to invest resources for the long term if our nation's health is ever to change.

Will the national review take account of the declining number of in-patient beds and the increase in the incidence of mental health problems in the under-16 age group, which means that more children and young people are treated in inappropriate adult psychiatric settings? Is there not a compelling argument for putting a duty on health boards to provide appropriate treatment facilities for children and young people? Otherwise, that practice will continue.

Will the minister give way?

That is all right then.

I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing the debate and I commend her for it—there would otherwise have been no opportunity to discuss the important issues that we are discussing. Over the past few months, a flood of ministers has visited Dundee for one reason or another. That will not have escaped the attention of many members. It is lovely to see all those ministers, but we would like them to put their efforts to more practical use. Something practical that ministers who come to Dundee could do is save two of Dundee's important tourist attractions. It is all very well to talk about wanting to turn the city around, about the future or about how Dundee has changed—that is great—but the city will not be turned around if tourist attractions such as the RRS Discovery and Verdant Works go. They are important for the tourism industry in Dundee, but they are also important for the perception of Dundee. Too many people from elsewhere—not only in Scotland, but in the United Kingdom and Europe—do not know that Dundee exists or, if they do, do not have the best image of the city. That is why Dundee's heritage is so important. It is important that we protect that heritage and turn the situation around. Irene McGugan outlined the financial problems that face Dundee Heritage Trust. Although Dundee City Council—praise where it is due—has managed to increase its grant to Dundee Heritage  Trust by £1,000, it is not able to bail the trust out. The financial problem is far too big for the council to cope with. The question comes down to what the minister will do to save two of Dundee's important tourist attractions. What will she do to ensure that Dundee's tourism industry goes uphill instead of downhill? What will she do to ensure that Dundee's reputation as a centre for tourism is maintained? A recent report to Dundee City Council noted that a positive effort had been made on the promotion of the RRS Discovery and Verdant Works and that that had resulted in an 8.5 per cent increase in total visitor numbers over the past year to nearly 92,000. That is a success to be celebrated, but what is the point of celebrating if the attractions are under threat? To lose the key staff who have been lost makes closure more likely because they are not there to promote the attractions. Although cost-cutting measures had to be implemented because of the dire financial situation, they will make the situation worse. As Irene McGugan rightly says, we are at crisis point. If the minister does not intervene now, it will be her responsibility if Dundee's tourism industry takes a turn for the worse.

Will the member give way?

We would use the £150 million that has been identified in the budget. There is plenty money to pay for our proposals. The  problem is that the Liberal Democrats' priorities are all wrong.

I put on record how discourteous I find it that the Minister for Finance and Public Services is not present for what is essentially a debate about finance. I am also concerned that the Minister for Health and Community Care has chosen to leave  the chamber, given the importance of health matters to the debate. I hope that Ross Finnie's knowledge of health is better than his knowledge of sheep. The SNP always welcomes investment in the health service, but the question is what has happened to that investment. What has been done with the £1.5 billion of taxpayers' money? The debate is not only about the size of the investment, but about what has been done with it.

Let me get going. The Minister for Health and Community Care and the coalition are culpable over that issue. It is incredible how little has been achieved with the £1.5 billion. I will outline the situation after Des McNulty's scintillating intervention.

My leader asked what has been done with the £1.5 billion, which is exactly what I am asking. If Des McNulty can tell me, I would be extremely grateful. On what we have got for that £1.5 billion, the facts speak for themselves. Since 1997, waiting times for out-patients have gone up by 14 days; waiting times for in-patients have gone up by three days; and the NHS has seen 46,000 fewer out-patients and 46,000 fewer elective in-patients, which means that around 100,000 fewer people have been treated, as John Swinney mentioned during question time. Even if we accept that more people are treated in clinics—although the figure is certainly not 100,000 more people—we must ask why waiting times are up. If people were being treated elsewhere, surely waiting times would come down, but they are not coming down. It is nonsense to say that people are being treated elsewhere in the health service. There has been a loss of more than 60 residential care homes and there are more than 1,500 fewer residential care beds. The coalition tells us that community care is at the heart of its policy, but 18,000 fewer home care clients are being looked after in their home. The coalition's assertion is obviously the case in theory, but not in practice. There has been a 13 per cent rise in the number of nursing vacancies since last year and the figure has risen by 46 per cent since 1999. The number of blocked beds has risen to nearly 3,000, which is almost double the 1999 figure. That hardly amounts to success on a plate for £1.5 billion worth of investment. The results are poor. We know that health service staff are working harder than ever, so the only conclusion that I can come  to is that the problem is the Executive. The Executive's government and stewardship of the NHS have been a dismal failure. The facts speak for themselves. The shortage of nurses in Scotland is a crucial issue that must be tackled. It underpins many of the problems in the health service. The coalition has failed to tackle the shortage—it has let graduates slip through the net to go and work in other health services. The resultant increase in reliance on agency staff is costing the NHS £24 million a year. The SNP will not fudge the issue in the way that the coalition has done. It will go to the heart of the matter—pay and conditions for nurses. As a first step, an SNP Government would increase the pay of all nurses and midwives by 11 per cent, which would give them equity of pay with teachers. Nurses have already embraced change in the way in which they work and so far they have received little recognition or reward. An SNP Government would give them that reward. The sooner it comes, the better.

Given the huge importance that Des McNulty has just ascribed to this debate, can he tell us where the Minister for Finance and Public Services is?

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing tonight's debate on her important motion. As Karen Gillon stated, we have an opportunity to send out the clear message that we will not tolerate attacks on our emergency service workers. Those workers go out at all times of the night to save people's lives, so it is intolerable that they should come under mindless violent attack during the course of carrying out their job. Such attacks are becoming all too common. Figures released last year showed that there had been a dramatic rise in the number of assaults on ambulance personnel in Tayside. Throughout 1999, assaults on paramedic staff in Tayside totalled 16. However, in the first six months of 2000, the figure had risen to 22 and continued to rise. That led to a debate on whether the Scottish Ambulance Service should copy the London Ambulance Service by providing crews with stab-proof and bullet-proof vests. Surely, things have not come to the stage where our emergency  service staff must go out equipped with bullet-proof vests. I hope that we do not have to see that day; sadly, it is having to be discussed. Doctors in Dundee have to have a police escort to make out-of-hours calls because of fears for their safety. Last month, firefighters in Dundee faced a sustained attack by mindless young thugs—some as young as eight years old. That happened when the firefighters were attending a blaze in a scrap yard in the Hilltown area of the city. The blaze had been started deliberately to lure the fire service. If such attacks continue, it is only a matter of time before someone is seriously injured—as Karen Gillon says, that has already happened—or indeed killed. We must prevent that. Our emergency services staff have a hazardous enough job without mindless thugs pelting them with stones and bottles. The lives of emergency service workers and members of the public are being put at risk. We need to hear today how the Scottish Executive will ensure the safety of those workers as they go about their crucial jobs. Yes, education and resources are important, but we must also ensure that the law backs up emergency staff. Mindless thugs must be dealt with. They must face the full weight of the law. Indeed, their parents should perhaps face the full weight of the law. The current situation cannot continue.

This afternoon, we will debate the document "Better Communities in Scotland: closing the gap". Given the important role that community councils have in community planning and other matters, will the minister explain why there is no mention of community councils in that document?

The debate on waiting—

The debate on waiting times is well timed indeed, in the light of the shenanigans that were revealed by the Audit Scotland report, to which many members have referred. That report  was produced only after the SNP—in particular, John Swinney—pursued the matter at First Minister's questions. The report was not produced, as Margaret Smith would like to think, out of the goodness of Jack McConnell's heart. We pursued it and dragged it kicking and screaming out of the Executive, as all members know. The SNP welcomes the new waiting time targets that the minister announced today. However, the reality is that waiting times are going up. There has been an increase of 20 days in median waiting times. The minister has a long way to go—if he can be bothered to listen. Audit Scotland has revealed that many patients are waiting more than 12 months for treatment. That is a clear breach of the 12-month guarantee. Why should the public trust the Government when it announces a new six-month target wait if it cannot even meet the 12-month target? That will hardly instil public confidence. The Audit Scotland report revealed a large number of inconsistencies and irregularities, to which many members have referred. The management of waiting lists has been found to be very inconsistent throughout Scotland. Frankly, for the Executive to claim no responsibility is unbelievable, because a culture has been created that encourages hospitals to find ways of keeping down their waiting lists no matter what. That culture has led directly to the deferred waiting list, which has been used to siphon off 25,000 patients from the true waiting lists so that they can disappear from the headline waiting list figures. To say anything other than that is unbelievable and no one believes it. Audit Scotland could find no rationale for deferred waiting lists. What more evidence is required in order for deferred waiting lists to be abolished? We do not need another inquiry; we need deferred waiting lists to be abolished.

The difference is that the SNP believes in action rather than words—and action today. That is the difference between this party and Malcolm Chisholm's party. It is not just the SNP, but the BMA that has said that 25,000 hidden patients are included on the deferred waiting list. If those patients were included on the true waiting lists, the Government's targets would not be being met, despite the Executive's claims to the contrary. It is time for action on a number of fronts. It is time for the deferred waiting lists to be abolished,  and that should be done today, not next week or next month. It is time for patients at all stages to receive a waiting time guarantee. What is the problem with that? Why does that pose the Executive so much difficulty? It is also time for an independent health inspectorate to be established to protect patients' interests from Government interference, which has been so clearly demonstrated by the Executive. Delayed discharge remains a huge, long-term problem, which must be addressed so that people receive the appropriate care in the appropriate setting and in order for the capacity of the NHS to be extended. I hope that the figures that are due out will show progress. However, one trust chief executive told me last week, "The system is silting up as bad as ever." I hope that it is not silting up, because that means that the 3,000 people who are trapped in inappropriate hospital wards continue to be trapped there. That is a tragedy. The Administration is on very shaky ground when it comes to waiting times and waiting lists. It has lost the public's trust on waiting times and waiting lists. The public do not believe a word that the Executive says on waiting times. We need a health system that is free from political interference, in which the public can have full confidence. We will wait forever for that under the present Administration, and it is time that it gave way to a Government that will put the public interest before Government interference.

Will the member give way?

For the record, the Health and Community Care Committee took evidence on 8 May and 15 May. Both Nicola Sturgeon and I were present for all the  oral evidence during those meetings. Perhaps the convener of the Health and Community Care Committee would like to take the opportunity to withdraw her remarks.

Well—

Perhaps Margaret Smith should check the Official Report before making such comments in the chamber. I have the Official Report here and it says that Nicola Sturgeon and I were present for all that evidence.

Unlike some, Nicola Sturgeon and I took on board the evidence that we heard. We did not make up our minds before hearing the evidence. Like many others, I was not totally convinced at first and needed to be persuaded. The weight of evidence that was presented to the Health and Community Care Committee has persuaded me to support the bill at stage 1, despite the reservations that I share with Michael Russell.

No. Nineteen organisations support the bill and the Health and Community Care Committee heard from several of them. For example, One Plus gave persuasive evidence about the stigma surrounding free school meals. Are we really to believe that all those organisations that gave evidence are wrong and that the Executive is right? That is not credible. Even those who gave evidence against  the bill agreed, when pressed, that free school meals would have a health benefit. The question was whether that health benefit was proportionate to the cost. That is important, because if we accept that there would be a health benefit, the debate is about not the benefit, but whether it would be proportionate to the cost. That is a different matter, because it means that we must estimate how to put a value on our children's health. Perhaps we should have heard more about that this afternoon. How do we put a value on our children's health? We all agree that Scotland's health record is appalling. We need look only at the rising levels of childhood obesity and diabetes—current estimates are that the rate of obesity could double by 2030. If we all accept that the diet of our children is appalling, we must prepare for the repercussions of heart disease and cancer in later life. How do we change our appalling health record? We need to change eating habits fundamentally. The report by David Player studies the experience of Sweden and Finland, which had the same dietary and health problems as Scotland. He says that the provision of free school meals "has provided an ideal vehicle for educating the Scandinavian palate in favour of healthy eating." That is important, because we need to educate our children's palates away from unhealthy foods. The resulting uptake of free schools meals in those countries is high and the nutritional content is controlled, which is an important factor. The benefits can be seen in children from all socioeconomic backgrounds. No one is arguing that, on their own, free school meals would transform Scotland's health record. However, there is strong evidence to suggest that it could contribute to doing just that. If we are serious about improving public health, we have to start somewhere, and I think that we should give the bill the benefit of our support at this stage so that we can improve on it.

The minister has mentioned a number of times that there is space for expansion. He has given us a little detail, but will he give us more? What does he envisage as the final bed capacity at HCI? When will that be achieved? How will the hospital be staffed?

The Atomic Warlord is "Like a nuclear holocaust as this 112 shot barrage vents its might and ferocity." The Midnight Thunder is a "25 shot, very very loud air bomb. Not for the weak hearted. Available for under £8." Those are examples of sales pitches that irresponsible retailers use to encourage people to buy fireworks. People market and sell fireworks by promoting their explosive capacity and there are increasingly frequent reports of fireworks being used as weapons. Some of those fireworks are bombs by another name. For example, the Black Cat firework, which weighs 21lb, has a greater velocity than many mortar bombs. The advice is that it should not be detonated within 80ft of a structure. In a recent survey carried out by the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, 70 per cent of community councils that had received complaints about fireworks reported complaints of fear and anxiety among humans. That is no wonder when, for example, Corkerhill community council in Glasgow cited problems of "fireworks in letter boxes, stuffed in milk bottles, thrown under police cars." Bus services in Glasgow were discontinued during the build-up to bonfire night because bus drivers were being threatened with, among other things, fireworks. However, those fireworks can be bought  easily at retail outlets. The ease with which such weapons are sold under the guise of fireworks and their availability to anyone, including children, must be reviewed at the earliest opportunity. I am raising the issue in our Parliament in response to many complaints and concerns from constituents and community groups in my area and throughout Scotland about the misuse of fireworks. I put on record my thanks to the SSPCA for its support and valuable research on the problems that are caused by the irresponsible use of fireworks. Clearly, the misuse of fireworks causes huge distress to thousands of people. Last year, 89 people were injured by fireworks and had to have hospital treatment for those injuries. Thousands more are inconvenienced and disturbed by fireworks being let off in their street. We also know of the effect of fireworks on domestic and wild animals. The SSPCA's research shows that, last year, 8,000 animals received veterinary treatment for firework-related injuries. The research also shows that 100 per cent of community councils that had received complaints about fireworks reported incidents of fear and anxiety in animals, that 28 per cent of them reported injury of pets and that 40 per cent of them reported attacks on animals. The firework problem is getting worse. Over recent years, the SSPCA has received an upsurge in letter and phone complaints. It seems that 2001 was a watershed, as there was a significant increase in the use and abuse of fireworks last year. The traditional firework season gets longer and longer and fireworks can now be bought all year round. The current legislation on fireworks is not working. Fireworks are regularly sold to people under 18, despite the fact that that is against the law. The voluntary code of practice for the sale of fireworks is frequently ignored. It is supposed to restrict the sale of fireworks to the three weeks before 5 November or to other festival times. However, the SSPCA today purchased three rockets called War of the Worlds—12 June does not strike me as a particularly well-known festival day, unless one is an English football fan. I heard of a firework outlet that had four times the permitted amount of fireworks in stock. The fireworks were removed but the shop was back in business the next day because the local authority lacked the appropriate powers. The public want something to be done about fireworks now, as the recent SSPCA survey confirms—98 per cent of those asked said that they supported tighter restrictions on the sale and use of fireworks. Scotland's councils also want something to be done and two thirds of the local  authorities expressed a willingness to review or support changes to fireworks regulations. What can be done? I know that some people support a complete ban on fireworks, but I think that that would be difficult to enforce and would lead to a black market in illegal fireworks. It would be more effective to encourage a more responsible use of legal fireworks with a more effective range of controls over use and supply. No one wants to be a party-pooper. Fireworks that are properly handled—preferably at an organised display—can be good fun. However, I believe that the Scottish Executive should, as a minimum, review the powers available to local authorities in respect of vendor licensing. That proposal is supported by a number of Scotland's councils and I am pleased that it has also drawn the support of the police organisations in their submission to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities fireworks task group. The submission calls for the tightening up of the legislation governing sales, retailers, possession and premises. Specifically, it states that there has to be stringent vetting of sellers to ensure that those applying for a certificate are of good character. It also states that more cognisance needs to be taken of previous convictions for related offences by persons applying for a certificate and that applicants for a certificate should be required to show need before being granted a certificate. At present, there are no controls over the number of retail outlets that sell fireworks in an area. In Paisley, for example, there are 62 certificates in force, which seems rather excessive to me. A vendor licensing scheme could do all that and could be introduced through an amendment to section 44 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. If we wait for Westminster to do something, we could wait for ever. Time and again, private members' bills to address the problem have been introduced at Westminster. Two more private members' bills are scheduled to have their second readings at the end of the month. However, because of their low place on the list, they are unlikely to be dealt with. I welcome the establishment of the COSLA fireworks task group and I hope that, when it reports in October, it will back the idea of a licensing scheme for vendors and put its weight behind persuading the Scottish Executive to press ahead in implementing such a scheme. My motion has been signed by members of all but one of the political parties in the chamber. It would have been nice if members of all parties had signed it. However, I know that people such as John Young have taken a keen interest in tightening up controls on fireworks. If there is the political will in the Parliament, something can be  done about the problem. I do not want to have a constitutional debate on the matter; I want action. I suspect that that is the view of the vast majority of the Scottish public. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say and trust that he will offer some hope to the thousands of people whose lives are made a misery by the misuse of fireworks.

I, too, welcome the tone of the debate, which has reflected the importance that our society gives to tackling cancer. There will be few of us whose lives have not been touched by cancer in one way or another, perhaps through friends or family. We  all have a vested interested in ensuring that cancer services in Scotland are the best that they can be. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the hard-working staff throughout Scotland who strive to provide services in the best way possible. I will focus on some of the key issues that remain outstanding in the problem areas that we must address if we are to achieve the best cancer services. Waiting times for diagnosis and treatment are still too long. One of the CSBS reports described waiting times for computerised tomography—CT—scans and investigative procedures as "unacceptably long". Such factors will sometimes make the difference between a patient getting treatment at a sufficiently early stage or not. At that point, patients will be very anxious indeed. What they want is prompt diagnosis and prompt treatment. That problem must be addressed. Equipment is also important in early detection. One of the CSBS reports said that there were not enough linear accelerators in Scotland to meet patient demand. Much of the equipment is old and subject to frequent breakdown. We must strive towards the aim recommended by the Royal College of Radiologists of having five linear accelerators per million people. Staff shortages have been mentioned by a number of members, including shortages of radiologists, pathologists, clinical oncologists and specialist nurses—we are all familiar with that. I agree with Margaret Smith's comments about aggressive work force planning. I welcome the investment for additional posts, but we need to do more, because, as Nicola Sturgeon said, we need to find the people to fill the posts. We need to look proactively outside Scotland for those people. The SNP has made a positive suggestion for a special envoy—someone to recruit skilled and specialised staff throughout Europe and beyond. I hope that the minister will respond positively to that suggestion. The issue of access to drugs has been raised. We spend much less per head of population on cancer drugs than do other countries. We spend an average of 90p per head, compared to £4 or £5 per head in other parts of Europe. We are all aware, through constituency cases, of post-code prescribing, including well-documented problems of access to taxane and herceptin or other drugs. The key is prevention. Many members have mentioned the need for education and public information and the need to tackle deprivation. Mary Scanlon and Ian Jenkins mentioned oral cancer—a much-neglected form of the disease. We can do more. We can encourage people to visit their dentists and I agree with the call for free dental check-ups, because we should remove barriers to the early detection of oral cancer.  Ken Macintosh mentioned David Lane's comment that a cure for cancer is called stopping smoking, which brings the message home. Levels of smoking in deprived areas are much higher than they are in other areas, which is why tobacco advertising targets such areas. I hope that we will see a ban on tobacco advertising sooner rather than later. I pay tribute to Nicola Sturgeon's work in pushing that agenda in this Parliament. Everyone in the chamber agrees on the need to tackle cancer as a key priority; nobody would disagree with that. Our party has made a positive contribution to the debate through the call for an envoy to work throughout Europe, recruiting specialist staff. I hope that the minister will respond positively to that suggestion.

Is the minister aware of the problem that was raised this morning at the north-east Scotland cancer co-ordinating and advisory group conference of the 30 per cent vacancy rate for therapy radiographers? Only 24 therapy radiographers are trained every year, most of whom are lured abroad, so what will the minister do to address that serious problem?

It is difficult to deal with all the public health aspects of GM crops in two minutes, but I will try to cover the main issues. The point of the debate is the possible public health impact of GM crop trials. I say possible, because the fact is that we just do not know what they will be. We must have the answer to the public health question before, not after, embarking on GM crop trials. There has to be an immediate end to the current trials until we get those answers. It is not only the SNP that is saying that. The BMA has raised concerns about the trials.

No thank you. I have only two minutes.  Scotland's leading public health doctors have voted to call on ministers to begin monitoring the health of people who live close to GM crops. That has not been happening. The public health consultant, Charles Saunders, who is chairman of the BMA's public health committee, has criticised the decision to press ahead with the crop trials in Scotland without first assessing the impact on human health. Such an assessment has not taken place. Mr Saunders said: "Releasing GMOs into the environment really needs to be regarded as an irreversible act. Because of that, the precautionary principle should be applied. Where there is any doubt about whether something is safe or not, you should not proceed until you have eradicated that doubt. There is not adequate information available at the moment to show the safety or otherwise of GMOs. The potential effect on human health is not known." Yesterday the First Minister talked about building trust with the people. How can he build trust with the people when such a public health issue exists? The only way to build trust with the people is to listen to the public concern. The minister mentioned everything except the public concern. Let us listen to the public's concerns and let us stop the trials until we have the answers to our questions.

Does the minister agree that his party is disingenuous when it expresses concerns about GM crops? Would he make the same accusation against the BMA?

I begin by congratulating Richard Lochhead on securing tonight's debate on what is a crucially important subject not just for the north-east but for the rest of Scotland. The scale of the problem in the north-east is truly frightening. It affects not only the urban areas of the north-east, but rural locations, and Fraserburgh has earned an unfortunate and undesirable reputation for the level of heroin use there. However, I want to focus my comments on the drug problem in the city of Dundee, in the southern part of the north-east, because it has the second highest level of drug misuse in Scotland—only Glasgow has a worse drug problem. An Executive report issued last September gave a more accurate picture of Scotland's hard drug culture and placed Dundee second in the country for heroin and tranquilliser abuse. The prevalence rate of drug misuse in Scotland  is around 2 per cent of the population aged from 15 to 54, yet the prevalence rate in Dundee, at 3.5 per cent, is almost twice that level. Tayside police's drugs co-ordinator, Chris White, said that those findings were in line with the experience on the streets of the city. Of course, the situation on the streets is what matters, because behind the statistics lie the real people whose lives have been blighted by drugs misuse. I cite the case of a young single mum who came, along with her mother, to see me at my surgery. Her life and the lives of her family effectively have been destroyed by drug misuse. She has lost her house and has huge debts, as does her mother, who has taken on debt to cover her daughter's debts. Of course, a child is in the middle of that, suffering alongside. The young mum has been clean for six months, I think because she realised the effect on her child. I hope that she will be one of the success stories of the intervention of the statutory and voluntary services, but there are countless others who are not so lucky and fall through the net, or for whom the drug rehab places that Richard Lochhead mentioned are unavailable. Given the scale of the drugs problem in Dundee, it is bizarre that the funding decisions do not reflect that situation. Apart from Glasgow, Tayside has the highest rate of hospital discharges recording drugs misuse; yet while funding to tackle drug misuse has increased over the years, the increases that have been allocated to Tayside have lagged behind the Scottish average. Since 1998, Tayside has received in real terms an ever decreasing per capita allocation of funds. Furthermore, Tayside's funding for the prevention of transmission of blood-borne viruses has declined since 1998, while the funding in Scotland has risen. That funding mismatch requires some explanation from the minister. I also seek an explanation on the key initiative of diversion from prosecution. Unfortunately, in Dundee there is a six-month waiting list for drug treatment. How can there be diversion from prosecution when the drug treatment is not available to provide that diversion? Clearly, poverty and deprivation are the key issues behind hardened drug misuse. Yes, we need to put money into services, treatments, drug rehab and so on—that is important—but we also need to give people aspirations and self-esteem, because lack of aspiration and lack of self-esteem provide the breeding ground for drug misuse. Unless we tackle that, we will not be able to tackle this deep-rooted problem in Scotland.

The Tayside area waste plan sets out plans for the next 20 years. The minister will be aware of the problems with the Baldovie energy-from-waste incinerator, over which a major financial question mark is hanging. Should the situation go badly and  the plant not survive into the near future, what is plan B for the Tayside area waste plan?

Will the member give way?

This has been an interesting debate, if for no other reason than the fact that we have witnessed the spectrum of views from Labour members. We had an off-the-shelf monologue from Karen Whitefield about how well the Executive has done.

No, thank you. After that, we heard a rather more interesting speech from John McAllion. I could not disagree with a word that he said, but I suspect that many on the Labour benches will disagree with him. The difference, of course, is that the SNP will include in its manifesto the proposal to empower the public through direct elections to health boards. That is unlike the Labour party, which wants continually to tell the public how things will be. The fact that Westminster decides how much money the Scottish Parliament receives affects all members of Parliament, across all parties. The fact that the future of our health service is not in our hands also affects all members. The sustainability of investment is outwith our control. That leaves us as mere administrators of someone else's decisions. The limitations of the Scottish Parliament hinder our ability in the long term to tackle Scotland's appalling health record. I note in passing that even the proposed English regional assemblies will have more financial powers than the Scottish Parliament has. The Parliament's limitations were  acknowledged by Bill Butler, who said that investment depends on Westminster's intervention. The problem is that that leaves us dependent on decisions that are made elsewhere.

In a moment. That dependency has affected Parliament's ability to tackle our problems. For years, health has been underfunded, as the SNP has pointed out. However, we have seen tax cuts at Westminster at a time when there should have been more investment in our health service. The Executive continually denied that there was a problem until Gordon Brown's sudden volte-face, when he decided that he had been wrong all along. Bill Butler can tell us why Gordon Brown changed his mind.

We would not wait for a crisis in the health service before we started to do something. We would have invested Scotland's huge potential resources in Scotland's health service years ago, rather than waiting until the health service was in the state in which it is. The fact that the destiny of Scotland's health service is in someone else's hands is a problem. As Karen Whitefield so simply put it: we get our money from Westminster. However, it is time to end the dependency culture to which Bill Butler referred. We have all agreed this morning on the need for reform in the health service, but we disagree on how that should be achieved. The SNP believes that the starting point for reform should be what is best for the patient. We believe that the public have a right to transparency and accountability. I do not think that there is anything to fear by giving patients the power to make decisions. The minister's proposals for public involvement sounded fair, but they are simply not enough. As was pointed out, the accountability of the bodies to which the minister referred remains with the minister. The only way of giving people real power is to have directly elected positions on our health boards. People have had enough of the sham consultations throughout the country. If they feel that they have no say in their local health service  and are involved in a consultation process that asks them questions to which the answers have already been decided, they are unlikely to take part in a similar process again. That leads to further disengagement from the political process. The SNP believes that the right way forward is to give people a place at the top table where the decisions are made—our health boards. We also believe that the public should have access to robust and accessible information about hospital performance and the performance of people who treat patients. I do not think that medical staff—doctors or consultants—have anything to fear from that, because, as we know, the quality of our doctors' performance is high, except in unusual cases. There is nothing to fear from giving the public access to the information about the people who have patients' lives in their hands. I cannot see why the Executive is so reluctant to do that.

When will the public get access to that information? I am sorry, but the comments of the minister and those of his predecessor led me to believe that that information will not be provided. We do not believe that the use of private finance does anything to build up capacity in the NHS. The use of private finance is further proof of the Executive's policy of saddling future generations with massive debt in order to finance its short-term political goals. The national waiting times unit's use of the private sector is only a short-term sticking plaster. Of course we all hope that the official figures, which we still await, will show that waiting times have gone down, but that cannot be a solution to the long-term problems of the health service. If waiting times are not to go up next year or the year after next, we need to ensure that the capacity of the NHS is built up sufficiently to treat patients quickly. I see that time has moved on. I conclude by saying to the minister that we have heard nothing new this morning. I listened to 20 minutes of the minister's speech of restated policies. We will debate health as often as the Executive wants to, but we expect the minister to tell us something new and to update us with information about what is happening and how he intends to tackle the many problems that patients in Scotland face. He has told us nothing about that this morning. Perhaps we will hear something on it from the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care in  his first main debate on health. However, I suspect that we might be treated to more of a stand-up comedy act, which will do nothing to further the debate on the way forward for our health service. I remain to be surprised.

I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing this important debate to mark world asthma day. Yesterday, to mark world asthma day, I visited a new project that is being established at Ninewells hospital. I want to say something about that project. It is called asthma in retreat—AIR—and is a collaboration between the Universityof Dundee's  asthma research unit, the Tayside Institute of Child Health, the University of Glasgow and the royal hospital for sick children in Glasgow. It aims to create an educational tool that will be used with children aged between two and 16 years old and their parents who present to emergency departments in Glasgow and Dundee. The education that is provided in the project will be guideline based, individualised and targeted at patients and their parents. The project is about attack management and prevention. I looked at the tool, which is multimedia based, and was extremely impressed. The children that I know are certainly more computer literate than I am. There is a touch-screen interface and children are shown using inhalers and other tools. It is important to overcome some of the fear that children might have, particularly of inhalers, which can seem very large and frightening devices to a small child. Those tools were shown in use and children spoke about their fears and how they overcame them. The project will give children the confidence to manage their asthma, and it is hoped that emergency admissions will be prevented. It will also give confidence to parents for whom the process can be huge and fearful, as Margaret Jamieson outlined well. Often they do not know what to do. I hope that the tool will be available not just in a hospital context, but at a local level. Given the prevalence of asthma—one in nine children is being treated for asthma symptoms—we must look at the whole range of tools to ensure that we can prevent emergency admissions and encourage self-help as much as possible. I will conclude by paying tribute to the staff involved in this innovative project, which I think is the first of its kind. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will listen to some of the very constructive suggestions that have been made this evening and will respond in a positive manner to the issues raised during the debate.

rose—

Mr Aitken talks about levels of support. In order to refresh our memories, will he kindly remind the chamber of the level of support for the Tories among the Scottish public?

Will Mike Rumbles reflect on his party's inability to balance the books, given the experience of the administration of Scottish Borders Council?

I join other members in thanking Cathy Peattie for securing this debate on her motion.  I want to say a few words about my father's experience as a pipe fitter, working in the 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s in sites across Scotland and England, offshore and in many plants, including Grangemouth. He witnessed a number of tragic deaths that were clearly down to major breaches of health and safety regulations. We may well reflect on whether things have dramatically improved. Certainly, the figures that Cathy Peattie gave in her speech indicated that there may be a long way to go to ensure that workers are working in safe conditions. I want to tell a story about someone I used to work beside when I was a community worker. He was a community activist, who had worked as a fitter at many sites in Scotland. One day, when he was working with a mate in a pipe in a nuclear power station, that pipe was—unbeknown to them—being flushed with radioactive water. The first they knew of it was when they came to the end of the pipe and found the back of a sign. They saw that the front of the sign said, "Keep Clear—Radioactive Water." They got soaked and had no protective clothing. He contracted leukaemia when he was in his 40s and had leukaemia when I knew him. He died a few years after he contracted the disease, having struggled with ill health for all those years. To his dying day, he blamed his contraction of leukaemia on that one-off event. Whether that is the case or not, the accident should clearly never have happened and was down to the sloppy health and safety practices in that plant. That is only one story and there are a great many others. Many of those stories have tragic consequences, not only for the people involved but for their families. For example, wives who were washing clothes that carried asbestos were also affected and the lives of their children were put at risk. It is important that we commemorate international workers memorial day. I would like health and safety matters to be the responsibility of this Parliament, as there is a lot that we could do. However, even within our powers, we could do a lot in relation to occupational health through the powers of local authorities and environmental health legislation. I look forward to hearing from the minister about some of the issues that he will take up in the interests of strengthening the health and safety of the Scottish work force.

I do not know about Walter Mitty, but Ben Wallace is doing a very good "Just William" impression. I will not tell Mike Rumbles what impression he is doing—perhaps I will tell him afterwards. There has been a large degree of consensus on primary care in the health service. All members agree that that is where the focus must be, although differences of opinion have appeared concerning how we get there.  The quote of the day is: "If it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care." All members can sign up to that. We have heard that 90 per cent of the public's contact with the NHS begins and ends with primary care, so it is imperative that the primary care sector is able to develop to meet the demands of 21 st century Scotland, as Bill Butler mentioned. As many members have said, a number of issues require resolution if that is to happen. To maximise what we can achieve, we must address capacity, which means addressing work force issues. Recruitment and retention remain a huge problem. Although the incentives for dental practitioners are to be welcomed, we must do much more if we are to compensate for the potential loss of 25 per cent of nurses, as was highlighted by Margaret Smith. The primary care sector has the highest vacancy rates among nurses, so we must do more. Roles and responsibilities are also key. The minister is right to say that people need to receive services at the right place at the right time and from the right professional. There are huge opportunities to enhance the delivery of services to those with chronic disease, as Janis Hughes said. There is agreement among members that GPs should not be the gatekeepers for services. We all agree that primary care is bigger than GPs. Nurse prescribing is important, as is the enhanced role for community pharmacists, direct access to physiotherapy, and so on. The expansion of the role of LHCCs has been a key issue in the debate. I agree with Mr Fitzpatrick—which might cause him some concern. We want to devolve powers that are held by the health boards to the LHCCs. We want to give the LHCCs the clout to which Mr Fitzpatrick referred by giving them commissioning powers. That should also please Margaret Jamieson, who gave the example of the one-stop-shop community ownership model. We would want to enhance that further by devolving powers to LHCCs so that they can deliver services in partnership with local people, as Margaret Jamieson outlined. The debate is not about GPs—it is about the whole primary care team. It is about empowering them to the maximum in partnership with local people. We need to get a dynamic system of LHCCs if we are to deliver the change that we have talked about. For LHCCs to be dynamic, they need to be empowered. John McAllion and other members have made the mistake of confusing LHCCs with GPs. They are not the same. LHCCs are the primary care teams. Either LHCCs are the right people to deliver local services or they are  not. If they are, they must be given powers to allow them to do so effectively; if they are not, we have to stop pretending that they are. Saying that they are is mere rhetoric, which is not good enough. The ministers cannot have their cake and eat it. If LHCCs are the way to do things in future, we must give them the necessary powers backed up by the necessary resources. Such a system should have accountability structures to ensure that standards and guidelines exist for the delivery of effective local services. Socialists should not be afraid of devolving power to local people; I had thought that that was what socialists believed in. In the Health and Community Care Committee and in this chamber we have discussed public health many a time. The primary care sector has a crucial role in delivering public health. In my view, public health is not the domain of any single medical professional but should be the responsibility of every single member of the health service. For example—and to consider a subject that Margaret Jamieson has spoken about on occasion—when a GP sees a pregnant woman, the GP should be considering the early years of the child and ensuring that the mother-to-be has all the information that she will require to ensure that her baby is as healthy as possible. The public health agenda starts early and has to be the responsibility of all. Primary care must be the most important element in tackling health inequalities in our society. That is a big aim, and one that can be achieved only if all sections of the health service work together. We are not talking about a service that deals only with people in ill health, but a service that deals with the whole population to prevent people becoming ill in the first place. Adam Ingram reminded us of the scale of the problems that we face in mental health. A total of 30 per cent of all GP consultations arise from stress and depression; and the frightening number of 100,000 out of 700,000 women aged between 25 and 45 seek treatment for depression each year. Those figures should make us pause and reflect. Adam is right is to highlight the need for other members of the primary care team to take responsibility for the delivery of mental health services in their broadest sense. His proposal for a mental health task force deserves consideration. The shift from the acute sector to the primary care sector has happened only in rhetoric. We have spoken about it in this chamber time and time again, but the problem is that resources have not always followed the rhetoric. If we are serious about radically changing the way that our health service is delivered, those resources must follow. The Executive will certainly have the support of the SNP in making that happen.

I join other members in commending Susan Deacon for securing an important debate. The attendance in the public gallery is one of the best that I can remember for a members' business debate. Our visitors are most welcome. I can think of no more deserving cause than Rachel House, although I admit that I have not as yet visited it. Having heard what Susan Deacon said in tonight's debate, I fully intend to do that. However, I have met families who have used the services at Rachel House and, for them, Rachel House was a real lifeline. Had it not been for Rachel House, their lives would have been a lot more difficult. It is fitting that we highlight the achievements of CHAS on its 10 th anniversary and in the fifth year of Rachel House opening its doors. As we have heard, Rachel House provides a much-needed specialist facility that provides support to hundreds of families. As Susan Deacon outlined, CHAS provides services to families within their own homes as well. That is important. CHAS also helps families who are bereaved. At a difficult time, when the last thing that families need is to be cut off from the support network that they have had, CHAS provides an important service. I pay tribute to the work of the staff and volunteers at Rachel House, many of whom come from the local community. It is worth noting the good relationship that Rachel House has with the people of Kinross and the support that it receives from that community. Apart from that, all that I will say is that we need to support the work of Rachel House. We do that by supporting it financially, as is happening. Susan Deacon made the important point that we can also support Rachel House by removing any unnecessary existing barriers, such as the need to negotiate with 47 different public bodies. We must sort that out so that Rachel House can be allowed  to get on with the important work of supporting terminally ill children and their families.

I should make it clear that I am speaking in a personal capacity this afternoon. I begin by paying tribute to the business managers of the Parliament, who have had the difficult, if not impossible, task of trying to bring the salaries issue to the chamber this afternoon. I am sure that that process has not been made any easier by my amendment. I am sorry for that, but one sometimes has to do what one believes to be right. I felt that it was important to give members a choice today. My amendment does that by proposing an inflation-only pay rise instead of a 13.5 per cent pay rise. That is the only credible option, given that Tommy Sheridan's amendment is, quite frankly, a distraction from the real debate.

No, I will not. My reasons for lodging the amendment are simple. First, I do not believe that we should be voting at all on our own salaries. That is a hideous position to be in—I share John Young's sentiment on that—and I hope that we will avoid it in future years. Secondly, I cannot vote for something that I am unable to defend in public and I cannot defend receiving a pay rise that is four times the pay rise of a nurse or equivalent to the annual income of many pensioners. Thirdly, and most important, I do not believe that voting for the proposed pay rise will do anything to help to build trust and respect between the Scottish public and their Parliament. We should pay attention to the public mood on the issue. A poll today said that 99 per cent of the public thought that we should not accept the pay rise. We should listen to the views of the public. Let Westminster MPs justify to the public why they should get paid more when they do less. That is an issue for them. I support parity, as long as it involves a pay cut for Westminster MPs. The issue is a question of political judgment about what is sensible and in the best interests of this Parliament at this time. I urge members to support my amendment. I move amendment S1M-2919.1, to insert after "the Scheme": "subject to the Scheme being amended as follows: in paragraph 2(1) leave out '£48,228' and insert '£42,918', and in paragraph 5 leave out from 'as specified' to end and insert 'in accordance with an index determined by the Parliamentary corporation.'"

I begin by congratulating Kenneth Macintosh on securing the debate. I agree with him that the debate will remind Scotland about this devastating disease and its continuing presence. The debate's timing is good. First, I want to comment on the setting-up of the national care co-ordinator and the CJD advice network. On the diagnosis of such a devastating illness, patients and carers require good information and advice and the necessary support. I understand that a part-time neurologist in the network team is available by telephone and provides a good level of medical advice to those who require it. A care package can be put in place for people with CJD. As Kenneth Macintosh outlined, the condition progresses, so the care that the person requires also progresses. It is important that the patient and carers get the required intensive care, particularly as the disease reaches its final stages. The CJD care team provides essential help to improve sufferers' quality of life. Nothing can take away the devastating effects of the illness, but we must be vigilant in ensuring that care is provided throughout Scotland, no matter where the sufferer lives. The impact of the disease is all the more devastating given that, as we have heard, the illness was avoidable and unnecessary. The unacceptable practices of the past have left their legacy for the many affected people, many of whom are young and have been cut down in the prime of their life by CJD. I hope that we have learned the lessons of the past. Public health should never again be treated so recklessly. The legacy of BSE and CJD has had a major impact on trust in government. Governments are often no longer believed when they give assurances about public health issues. It will take a long time to re-establish that trust.

We welcome any initiatives to tackle problems of recruitment and retention. However, does the minister agree that if we want a true picture of nurse numbers in the NHS, we should concentrate on the additional number of nurses practising in the NHS, rather than on the number of those who qualify as nurses? If so, will he accept that there are fewer whole-time-equivalent nurses working in the NHS now than there were when Labour and the Liberal Democrats came to power in 1999?

Facts are facts, or so we thought. However, it seems that the Labour-Liberal Executive wants to dispute the facts that are provided by its own departments. Perhaps the Executive should take a closer look at the facts, some of which I will remind members about in a minute. It was interesting that the Minister for Health and Community Care rejected the use of 1999 figures as a baseline—he said that to do so would be to make an unfair comparison. However, he then moved swiftly on to use figures that were the same but for the fact that they were taken from a 1997 baseline. That was a little disingenuous of him.

I am glad that the minister has confirmed that he uses figures selectively when he talks about the health service. Let me remind members of the facts. In particular, I want to ensure that Margaret Smith is aware of them. There are more than 100 fewer nurses in the health service than there were in 1999. There are nearly 700 fewer acute beds than there were in 1999—not more, but fewer. It is a fact that the NHS is treating fewer people than in 1999. There are 64,000 fewer out-patients, 5,000 fewer in-patients and nearly 9,000 fewer day-case patients. Members cannot get away from the facts, but we must analyse what the facts tell us. The SNP believes that they tell us that the NHS is shrinking. The consequence of that is that people are waiting longer for treatment than they waited in 1999. More than 16,000 more people are on waiting lists and median waiting times have increased by 10 days. I am not clear about which of those facts the Executive disputes. Margaret Smith mentioned that recording procedures are becoming more sophisticated and have expanded. That is true. However, the opposite is also true. Some recording procedures have contracted—people are being taken off waiting lists and put on to deferred waiting lists.

It is interesting that the Liberal Democrats are advocating the closure of more acute beds. That will not be very popular among patients.

Excuse me—one singer, one song. As the member will know from speaking to mental health patients and carers, there is a need to preserve a level of psychiatric acute beds. The member should bear that in mind. The overall picture is clear. The NHS has shrunk under the present Administration.

Not at the moment. Some members seemed to argue that the shrinking of the NHS was not a bad thing and that a reduction in acute beds was not a problem. I will return to that in a minute. There are growing demands on the health service, which Tavish Scott recognised. Although I would not argue with that, greater demand for the NHS surely means that we need greater provision for the NHS. That means building up NHS capacity. We advocate precisely that. I am glad that the member has come round to our way of thinking on that. Bill Butler's Shakespearean performances are quite enjoyable from a spectator's point of view, but no amount of such performances will change the facts of the matter.

I would be delighted to. First, we would get to grips with the way in which resources are being spent in the NHS. The Executive has not done that. We would use the resources more effectively; there would be better stewardship of the NHS under the SNP. We would not preside over a situation in which more money was put into a shrinking NHS. We would not inject resources at the same time as allowing the NHS to shrink, which the present Administration is doing. Quite frankly, that is incompetence and an SNP Administration would never allow it. The first step in the reversal of the decline in NHS capacity should be an independent review of acute bed numbers. We must examine the reduction in acute bed numbers. Brian Monteith—who has left the chamber, unfortunately—argued that more patients need to be treated and that that would solve the problems. However, it was silly of him to suggest that the loss of acute beds is somehow unrelated. It is obvious that if the number of acute beds is reduced, the number of people who can be treated is reduced. That concept is not difficult to understand. The Executive's response is the stock response of higher levels of investment. I have said to Bill Butler that we accept that there is more investment, but we do not accept what the Executive says that higher level of investment is delivering. People in Scotland are being told that more of their money is being invested in the NHS. They should expect something for that. With higher levels of investment, they should not have to wait longer for treatment.

I am sorry, I do not have time. Are some members seriously arguing that the capacity of the NHS is adequate to meet the health needs of our population? I detected that argument in the speeches of some members. I am extremely concerned that such things are being said.

No. Given the fact that activity levels are increasing because we have an aging population that is placing growing demands on the health service, I am extremely concerned that members who have stewardship of the health service say that there is no problem with the NHS's present capacity. The SNP totally rejects such complacency.

I agree that there are many innovative ways of treating patients in the NHS, and we all welcome that. However, if those innovations are delivering what the member claims, why are people waiting longer?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will Des McNulty give way?

I begin by referring to the poll produced yesterday by Help the Aged and Scottish Gas, which highlights the widespread age discrimination within society and within our public institutions—including the health service. At the beginning of a debate that is, in essence, about the care and treatment of our older people, it is important to say that, despite the existence of awful terms such as bedblocking, we must reassure older people that the core of our desire to resolve the problem is the need to provide the best and the most appropriate care for older people. This is not about portraying older people as a burden on society. I became a community care manager back in 1997. If at that time someone had asked me to write an analysis of the problem of blocked beds, it would not have been dissimilar to the analysis of the problem in the Executive's action plan. Five years ago, the problems were as clear as they are today: a lack of funding for local authorities to place people in residential and nursing homes; a contraction of the number of care home places available; a lack of staff to carry  out assessments; and well-established institutional barriers between the NHS and local authorities. All those problems have led to an increasing number of elderly people being inappropriately trapped in acute hospital beds. This is not rocket science. If the same, growing problem was so apparent to all and sundry five years ago, why has it taken five years to even begin to do something about it? The pace of getting to grips with the problem has been ridiculously slow. The problem has now reached crisis point, with one in 10 NHS beds blocked to those needing medical treatment. As I have said, the Executive's analysis of the problem, as contained in the action plan, is sound—albeit that it tends to underplay the role of the reduction of care home beds and the inadequacy of community care services in creating the crisis. However, the action plan is poor on solutions. Many of the action points are vague, with yet more references to better partnership, stronger liaison, more co-ordination, and a review of this and a review of that. All of that is worthy, but it is the same language that we have seen time and again. It is time to stop asking for change. It is time to break down the barriers between local authorities and the NHS and to tell them what must and will be delivered—because a laissez-faire attitude will not deliver the change that the Executive has rightly identified in its own action plan as being required. For example, we are told that "A review of the funding regime between Local Authorities and NHS Boards around the care of older people needs undertaken to consolidate and accelerate the Joint Future agenda." Excuse me for saying so, but I thought that that was already under way. It sometimes appears to me—and I am sure to others—that it is easier to analyse the problem than to take action.

I am not taking issue with that; I am taking issue with the pace of change, which is far too slow. The action plan reveals that joint agreed discharge policies and protocols are not in place, that there is no national model agreement or  framework, that only one local authority and NHS partnership will have pooled budgets and—to cap it all—that neither the NHS nor local authorities share the Executive's view of the importance of setting up a system to deal with bedblocking. That is an admission of lack of progress. After all the debates about bedblocking in this chamber and after all the reports written by numerous working groups, I would have thought that we would have made more progress than we have. The key service providers do not even agree the basics of establishing a system to deal with the problems. That has to be changed. Let me be clear: we welcome the additional £20 million that has been announced for delayed discharge, but it smacks of crisis management and short termism, with the stated ambition being to reduce the number of blocked beds to 2,000 by next April. That ambition is limited by any stretch of the imagination. We must raise our sights. A number of things must be done. We agree with the need for new models of care, which the SNP has been advocating for some time now. First, there is a need to expand rehabilitation services, giving people more support to leave hospital and better preparing them to return home. Secondly, we need more intermediate care beds—to stop elderly people being admitted to acute beds in the first place and to be able to move them out sooner. Thirdly, we need to resolve the issue of resource transfer. We must ensure that there are resources to establish adequate community care services. If we are honest, we will admit that those services are not there. I say to Mary Scanlon that the policy was established under a Conservative Government. It was established to fail, and we are suffering the repercussions now. I am not taking issue with the Executive's intentions as outlined in the action plan, which I think are broadly in line with our own thoughts. What I am taking issue with is the lack of progress and the slow pace of change. I want to see far more intervention on the part of the Executive to make things happen. At the next debate on community care in the chamber, I want to hear from the Executive what progress has been made on the issues discussed here today, and not what the problems are, which we all know very well already.

Will the minister give way?

The Executive's action plan suggests that only one local authority and NHS partnership will have pooled budgets. Does the minister agree that that is inadequate?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing this important debate. I am reliably informed that international women's day originated with textile workers in America. Perhaps that is why the jute workers of Dundee—who were nearly all women—have left that city a reputation for having strong  women, where men are known as kettle-boilers and appear to know their place. That has been my experience. Dundee women have been very effective in the development of local services for women. I had the opportunity to visit one such project—the Young Women's Project—on Monday, which provides an important service to young women who have been sexually abused. As well as paying tribute to that project, I will take the opportunity to plug it. The project's funding runs out in September, so the minister will receive a request for more funding. I hope that she will lend them a sympathetic ear. Today presents an opportunity to pause for reflection on what women in the Parliament have achieved and what the Parliament has achieved for women. I do not doubt that some decisions, some legislation and many initiatives would never have come to light if the Parliament did not have the level it has of women's representation. There are too many measures to list, but I draw attention to the resourcing of initiatives against domestic violence and legislation to ensure that cohabiting women have the same rights as married women. Many policies that have come to fruition through the Parliament have had a women's dimension. That is to be commended. No party in the Parliament has a monopoly in equality issues. That is a strength. A consensus for equality has been achieved in the Parliament and there is common understanding. Women constitute more than 50 per cent of Scotland's population and the Parliament has done much to reflect the priorities of women. I look forward to seeing more of that and to working with women of all parties to ensure that we achieve even more.

Will the minister confirm that most of the IT money to which he referred was for a rescue package for the instant appointments system? Will he confirm that, according to Labour's programme for government, the new appointments system was supposed to be in place by 2002? Will he acknowledge that the new system is likely to be at least one year late and will be significantly over budget?

On behalf of the SNP, I am pleased to support the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill at its third and final stage. I want to place on record my thanks to all the witnesses who gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. I also thank the committee clerks, who have worked very hard to ensure the smooth progress of the bill through the Parliament.  The bill will make some important and welcome changes to the way in which community care services are delivered. It promotes choice for users and carers in a number of ways. It extends access to direct payments for community care services. It will empower individuals who need care and enable them to access the services that they want and that are suited to their needs. The bill enables local authorities to make loans to people so that they can pay for their care. Those arrangements have the potential to remove the need for anyone to sell their home, even if only to fund the accommodation costs of their care. I hope that the bill will also improve joint working on the delivery of community care services, particularly between local authorities and the national health service. However, many witnesses cast doubt on whether cultural and institutional differences can be overcome—the jury is out on that point. The bill contains good news for carers. It will provide carers with the right to request an assessment of their needs, regardless of whether the cared-for person is being assessed. The Executive has accepted that local authorities should be under a duty to inform carers of their rights, which is welcome news. This afternoon, we agreed to amendments to place a similar duty on the NHS and I am pleased that, by requiring health boards to prepare carer information strategies, some progress has been made along that road. It remains to be seen whether those strategies are effective. If they are not, we will certainly be back to make further progress. Most important, the bill marks the end of the Parliament's hard-fought battle, which it won, to force the Executive to implement the Sutherland commission's key recommendation of making personal care free for all who need it. The bill paves the way for free personal care by providing ministers with the powers to introduce it. I am pleased that, despite the protestations of the Minister for Health and Community Care, the Executive accepted the need to include in the bill a definition of personal care, which will make it far harder for future ministers to attempt to dismantle that principle. The funding package for the introduction of free personal care is still £20 million short—it is unfortunate, to say the least, that that shortfall led to a delay in the implementation of the policy. I will end on a more positive note. Despite the existence of a dwindling band of detractors of the policy, I hope that, by passing the bill, the Parliament will ensure that the end of the battle for free personal care is beginning.

Will the minister respond to Margaret Smith's suggestion that monitoring implementation of the information strategy should become part of the performance assessment framework for the NHS?

Given that amendment 18 was not successful, I am happy to support amendment 19 in the name of Janis Hughes, although I would rather that it was not watered down by Executive amendments. However, what is important this afternoon is that we include something in the bill that will be of benefit to carers. I was minded to support the Executive's amendments 19A to 19G, but as Janis Hughes said, the minister's contribution was not as persuasive as it could have been and left a lot of unanswered questions. We need a number of assurances. In particular, health boards have to be  monitored in their implementation of any information strategies for carers. An assurance should be given that if those strategies are not seen to deliver what is required for carers, and change does not happen, further steps will be taken to address the matter with health boards. I hope that we will be given that assurance this afternoon.

Some pertinent points have been made. The minister will have to go some way towards reassuring members that the Executive's amendments to Janis Hughes's amendment 19 are not a watering down of that amendment to make it meaningless. I feel that the identification of carers is a critical element of the process and that a situation in which carers have to request information is less than satisfactory, so I will press amendment 18.

Amendment 18 is intended to put the same onus on national health service bodies as on local authorities; first, to identify carers in their area and secondly, to provide information to carers; in particular, information about their right to an assessment of needs. The Health and Community Care Committee heard many carer organisations outline that the NHS has a long way to go before it supports carers effectively. That is what carers have said. A recent survey of carer organisations across Scotland, which was carried out by Carers Scotland and the Coalition of Carers in Scotland, found that carers regard the NHS as remote, inaccessible and sometimes intimidating. The survey found that the NHS can resist carer involvement, that carer consultation is done badly and that carers feel undervalued. A study of hospital discharge found that 72 per cent of carers had poor experiences of hospital discharge and that only 61 per cent of carers were consulted when hospital discharge of the person being cared for was planned. Hospital discharge practice is not referred to in legislation, but only in guidance. Quite frankly, that is not sufficient. The strong message coming from carers is that guidance has had its day and that they now want statutory duties to ensure action. The Scottish Executive's carers legislation working group strongly recommended the introduction of such duties. The evidence shows that unless statutory bodies proactively inform carers of their rights, carers do not take up assessments. One year after the passing of the Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995, 82 per cent of carers had not asked for an assessment. NHS services are integral to providing support to Scotland's 620,000 carers, but so far they have largely failed to do that. The NHS is often the main point of contact for carers. It makes sense to use that point of contact to support and inform carers of their rights. That will happen only if NHS bodies have a duty to do it. I move amendment 18.

Will the member give way?

The Labour administration on Dundee City Council has publicly announced that its council tax may rise by 25 per cent over two years. The Labour Minister for Finance and Public Services has said to the press that the council should not need to do that as it has been given more than enough money. The Dundee public are entitled to know who is telling the truth. Is it the Labour minister or the Labour administration in Dundee?

Does the First Minister agree that actions speak louder than words and that we need some real action by the Executive to resolve the care home dispute before the fast-approaching 11 February deadline? Will he accept that such action would be a far more effective way of promoting the interests of Scotland's older people than launching yet another glossy report such as the one issued today on health and the older citizen, which, although very worthy, tells us nothing new and is not what the older people of this country actually require from the Executive?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether mental health is still a key clinical priority. (S1O-4508)

I thank the minister for that answer. However, does he accept that that will be  cold comfort to the 47 people who have been trapped in the state hospital at Carstairs—some for as long as three years—despite their having been assessed as able to leave? They have been unable to return to their communities because of a lack of appropriate beds and staffing locally. Will he agree to visit Carstairs and to meet the patients concerned? Will he agree to intervene personally to stop that infringement of human rights?

Will the member give way?

Does the minister accept that the creation of the waiting times unit will not address the fundamental problems of undercapacity and lack of staff in the NHS? Would not it be better if the Minister for Health and Community Care were to put his efforts into tackling such issues, rather than into sidestepping them by the establishment of hit squads? We need more beds, doctors and nurses, not more bureaucracy.

The most important phrase that has been used during the debate is: "justice delayed is justice denied." After 18 months of taking detailed evidence, the Health and Community Care Committee saw no need for further investigation. As was said, more people will die as the result of yet further delay. We must be clear about what the expert working group will do, because the minister made some alarming comments during his speech. How can we reconcile the minister's statement that no policy will be driven by precedents and that hepatitis C sufferers will not be considered in isolation with the idea that the door is being kept open? I am not sure, but I detect the use of smoke and mirrors in that statement. It may be a delaying tactic, but delay is something that hepatitis C sufferers cannot afford. What is required is the implementation of the committee's recommendation that financial assistance should be issued within 12 months.

When I come to the criteria for the expert working group, I will give the minister a suggestion that might resolve that difficulty. First, I want to touch on the issue of precedent. As has been said, there have been a number of departures from the principle of no-fault compensation, whether that is the Consumer Protection Act 1987 or the cases of CJD or HIV infection from contaminated blood. The Macfarlane Trust is a clear model that could be followed for hepatitis C sufferers. As has been said, we have yet to hear an answer to the question why those infected with HIV from blood or blood products should be compensated while people contaminated with hepatitis C should not. The Minister for Health and Community Care has failed to answer that question.  As the Health and Community Care Committee reports, hepatitis C sufferers are a special case. There is a clear, moral case for financial assistance. As has been said, that is because we are talking about a relatively small group of around 300 people whose lives have been devastated by what is an incurable virus. It is not the case that legal recourse or a public inquiry is an option for them. Some people who were infected after 1988 can use the Consumer Protection Act 1987, but only if they had instructed a lawyer. As that applies to only 20 people in Scotland, that means that we have a small group of people who have no recourse left open to them. Bill Butler said that it should be possible for the expert group to come up with a system that does not create an unhappy precedent. I am sure that that is possible. The problem is that we are in danger of putting new hurdles in the way of that outcome. The main hurdle is what the expert group will come up with. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton outlined eloquently, given the complexities of the situation and the Executive's expressed view of a consistent model across the UK, that will take time. As we have heard, we do not have time. In the light of that, we need to give the expert group a clear remit to come up with a compensation package for hepatitis C sufferers. That may be ex gratia payments made without prejudice to liability or some other form of compensation. Once that is done, we should look at the group's remit so that a compensation model can be found that does not create an unhappy precedent. We must separate those two issues, as the second one will take time. As I have said, we do not have time. In the first instance, the expert group must look at a compensation package. If the minister gives that commitment today, that will go some way to dispelling the suspicion that ministers are attempting to kick the issue into the long grass. That would be unacceptable and unforgivable. I urge Malcolm Chisholm to look back to what he said in 1995 when he supported the call for compensation. If he believed his words then, surely he must believe them now. Actions speak louder than words. In this case, the Minister for Health and Community Care will be judged on his actions. I urge him to do the right thing. He should clarify the remit of the expert working group and give it, as its first task, the task of coming up with a compensation package for hepatitis C sufferers.

Does the member agree that it might be more beneficial for the expert working group to be given a clear remit to consider a compensation model that does not, as Bill Butler said, create an unhappy precedent?

Will the minister explain the intimation given this morning and yesterday that the door has been left open for hepatitis C sufferers, the implication being that that would include compensation? Given what the minister has just said, will he clarify whether that is the case?

I wonder whether—when Sarah Boyack gets her large mailbag with the large number of complaints about the health service—in explaining why people must wait so long for operations, she points her finger where the blames lies, which is with her party's Government. I hope that she will be honest about that with her constituents.

I begin with a word of advice for members on the Labour benches. It does not matter how often they say that Labour is managing the health service well; nor does it matter how loudly Duncan McNeil says that Labour is doing a good job for the health service—because the people out there do not believe that. I say to Labour members that I understand perfectly their frustration at their Government's inability to tackle the problems. I suggest that Labour members should direct their frustration towards their front-bench spokespeople and their ministers, who should be getting to grips with the health service, rather than trying to blame the Scottish National Party for the ills of the health service. Those ills can be laid directly at the door of the Minister for Health and Community Care and the health department.

No. The member did not do so. He should sit down.  How did we arrive at a situation in Scotland in which cancer patients who are referred for potentially curative therapy have to wait up to six months after diagnosis before treatment starts? That is the situation for many cancer patients. Members from all parts of the chamber should be concerned that, in Scotland in 2001, that is the case. The situation is not good enough. I do not doubt that all of us, across all the parties, want that situation to change. However, it is not acceptable for Jack McConnell to have said in The Herald today that people should accept delays in their treatment and that we should learn to accept that that is the way in which the health service operates. We should not accept that; we should aspire to something much better than that. Nearly everyone in the chamber will have been touched by cancer in some way or another—through family or friends. We know the anxiety and fear that a cancer diagnosis brings. Cancer patients need to know that their chances of survival will not be hampered by a lack of cancer specialists, outdated equipment or poor facilities. It is unfortunate that that is the picture of many cancer services in parts of Scotland. Cancer patients need to know that they will have the best chance of survival. The situation in the west of Scotland is, unfortunately, in a league of its own. We have heard the history of how the crisis at the Beatson centre arose from many members this morning. I do not intend to go into that again, apart from to say that there was clearly a catalogue of mismanagement and Government inaction. I reiterate the point that John Swinney made. The minister has talked about listening to clinicians. We should listen to clinicians, but for two years clinicians have drawn attention to the looming crisis at the Beatson centre and ministers have appeared not to listen to them. Their calls have fallen on deaf ears. That is what we take issue with. It is not all about money or investment, although that is important; it is also about the lack of Government action and the arrogance of Government in not listening to clinicians when they told of the developing situation at the Beatson centre— [Interruption.] That arrogance is being ably demonstrated by back-bench members of the Labour party today. Such arrogance led directly to the current situation at the Beatson. Although the Minister for Health and Community Care's swift action to deal with the management issues at the Beatson centre is welcome, his saying that he will accept a possible permanent reduction in cancer clinics in the west of Scotland is not welcome.

We have already made a positive suggestion about an enhanced pay and conditions package to attract consultants to the Beatson, which has, as ever, been dismissed. Jack McConnell gave a line about listening to good ideas from other parts of the chamber, but unfortunately they have fallen on deaf ears once again. In reply to Robert Brown, we would not ignore the pleas of clinicians. We would have listened and responded to their pleas; we would not have exhibited the arrogance that has, unfortunately, been exhibited by the coalition parties. As many people have done, I commended the Minister for Health and Community Care for his swift action in response to the management issues at the Beatson, but it is not acceptable for us now to be told about a reconfiguration of services. We all know what that means—a reduction in the number of cancer clinics in the west of Scotland, which is not an acceptable state of affairs. I would have hoped to hear something a little more positive from the Minister for Health and Community Care this morning.

I will accept an intervention from the minister.

Clinicians are saying that they want services in Glasgow back and that they do not want them to be withdrawn. I am suspicious about what is driving the decisions that are being taken.

My concern is that the decisions are being driven by a cost-cutting agenda. That should be prevented. I hope that the minister will reconsider the situation. I also hope that the minister, unlike his back benchers, will take a more responsible attitude to the constructive suggestion that was offered by my colleague Nicola Sturgeon: to consider an enhanced pay and conditions package to attract consultants to the Beatson centre. We need to take radical action. Otherwise, we will be discussing the situation again in a year's time and nothing will have changed. That would not be acceptable.

I congratulate Brian Monteith on securing this debate. I will restrict my speech to a few remarks about the Scottish Executive's regrettable decision to close SEERAD offices. I will concentrate on the closure of the office in Dundee, about which representations have been made to me. I am concerned about the lack of consultation, which  Sylvia Jackson has highlighted. Perhaps the minister could outline what level of consultation there was on the closure of each local office. The loss of those civil service jobs is a big loss to Dundee—the city with the lowest number of civil service jobs per head of the population. The decision has made that bad situation worse. Many of us have been involved in trying to attract civil service jobs to Dundee and have met with limited success—with, for example, the decision to locate the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care in the city. The arguments for dispersing civil service jobs as far as possible are valid. It seems strange, as Brian Monteith said, that that policy is almost being reversed. I will plug Dundee somewhat. Its good transport and communication links and the fact that it provides good cost savings as a location for civil service jobs are arguments to increase civil service jobs in the city, rather than to decrease them. I say to the minister that we need more of the policy of dispersal in action. That action must be speeded up. I hope that he will keep Dundee in mind as he speeds it up. I also hope that he will answer some of the valid questions, which many members have highlighted, about the decision, the process by which it was made and the lack of consultation of relevant groups and organisations.

Will the member take an intervention.

The feature of the debate has been Labour and  the Tories competing with each other for first and second place in the failure to provide stewardship for the NHS. I had hoped that under Malcolm Chisholm's tenure of office we would no longer witness the self-congratulatory motions that have come to symbolise important health debates in the Parliament. However, once again we are faced with an everything-in-the-garden-is-rosy motion highlighting the so-called great progress that is being made by the Executive in its stewardship of the health service. The problem is that no one believes it: the patients do not, the staff do not and, if we are honest, not many people in the chamber do either. The experience of people when they access the health service is quite different, as has been highlighted by numerous examples in the debate. Janis Hughes must not confuse talking about Labour's failure to run the NHS with talking down the NHS—they are distinct. Members have given examples that highlight the key problems and issues for the NHS. For example, outpatient waiting times are two weeks longer than they were when Labour took office in 1997, and are at their highest level since records began. There are 1,000 fewer nurses in Scotland since Labour came to power and the number of nurse vacancies is increasing. There are 500 fewer acute beds than when Labour came to power. I tell Susan Deacon that that is the case, as Nicola Sturgeon has outlined. The answer to the crisis in the NHS is not simple—no one in the SNP argues that it is—but honesty about the true state of our health service is a prerequisite to doing something about it. Unfortunately, this afternoon that honesty has been sadly lacking.

The Minister for Health and Community Care has recognised the need to reduce bureaucracy by his swift action in relation to the Beatson. Let us be clear: if required, we will put more resources into the NHS, but we must ensure that the money that is being put into the NHS at the moment is being spent where it is required on front-line services. The answer to the crisis in the NHS is not simple, but it is clear that the privatisation of the  health service is not the answer. That is not an acceptable solution to the SNP, because the Scottish Parliament's role should be that of protector of the public health service and it should aim to make the health service a truly national health service. As has been said, we have no problem with using private health care for short-term crisis management, because no one wants patients to wait for treatment when it can be provided. However, the use of private health care is not a solution to the crisis in the NHS if our aim is to rebuild a public health service. There should be a clear departure from the policy that is being pursued by the English Department of Health, because every pound spent on private treatment is a pound that will not be spent on building the capacity of the NHS to address the problems of waiting times, bed shortages and staff shortages. Worse still, if we went down the privatisation route in Scotland, it would require a massive expansion of the private sector, given that the sector is so small at present. If the capacity of the private sector expands in the hope of getting new NHS business, where will the staff come from? We have heard Tory speaker after Tory speaker this afternoon outline the need to use the private sector, yet not one of them has outlined where the staff will come from to staff those beds.

The reality, as the Tories know all too well, is that those staff are the same staff who are keeping the NHS going. The building up of the private sector will be at the expense of the NHS. Mary Scanlon knows it and we know it, which is why we are not going to do it. I will provide a practical example of that point. On Monday, John Swinney and I visited Ninewells hospital in Dundee, where we saw magnetic resonance imaging scanners operating—they ran at full capacity all day. We were told about the unacceptably long waiting times for MRI scans. Many patients must wait too long for urgent scans, many of which are urgent cancer scans. Ninewells has money to buy a third scanner, but no money to pay for staff to run it. To reduce waiting times for an MRI scan, some Tayside patients might have to travel to HCI in Glasgow for an MRI scan, and all because the cost of running a third scanner at Ninewells cannot be found. That cannot be a sensible use of public money in the NHS. The NHS is at a crossroads and we must decide in which direction we are going. From the Minister for Health and Community Care's comments, it appears that he does want to follow the privatisation route. That is to be welcomed, but we  must know the alternative. If the Executive will not follow the privatisation route that is being taken in England, if it has ruled out raising taxes and if it will not consider fiscal autonomy, what alternative does it propose? The public have a right to know. I am afraid that the waffle that we heard from the minister provided no answers. We need to make the NHS in Scotland an organisation for which consultants, nurses and others want to work. Nicola Sturgeon described how that could be achieved. It is unfortunate that that scenario is a long way off. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will make clear how that aim will be achieved.

Will Janis Hughes give way?

Will the minister give a quick explanation of how much out of the figures that he has just given will be taken up with external pressures?

Does the minister agree that it is of great concern that recent research has shown that our nurses are among the unhappiest in the world—because of long hours, low morale and poor wages? Does he further agree that the rise in waiting times across Scotland, announced today, will do little to boost nurses' morale? Will he tell us when he and his Government will stop failing nurses, patients and the rest of the health service?

I will not go through all the congratulations that are due—members can take them as read. Suffice it to say that I am excited about the prospect of not knowing which Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care I will be up against in each debate. I look forward to debating with them. The stage 1 debate has produced much agreement. The bill provides us with an opportunity to make a major impact on the way in which community care services are delivered. Key to the enhancement of the rights of users and carers are free personal care, direct payments, carers' assessments and joint working. The bill is based on the principle of equity and fairness. As many members have highlighted, all bar one of the organisations that gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee said that they would like the general principles to be  included in the bill. As was said, that has been done in other bills, most notably the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill and the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill. The minister cited difficulties in interpretation, but I am not convinced about such legal barriers, which have not been a problem with other bills. I ask him to look at the issue again at stage 2. The general principles should promote the role of carers in the delivery of care. The bill presents us with an opportunity to enhance the role and rights of carers. Janis Hughes proved that that needed to happen when she described the evidence given by the carer Isobel Allan. There should be a duty on local authorities and the NHS to take steps to identify carers and to ensure that they are informed of their right to an assessment. I am not convinced about the legal difficulties of doing that, which the minister outlined. I would welcome his saying that he intends to consider building on the new right for assessment for carers, which I hope will meet carers' demands—we will hear from them whether it does. I welcome the extension of the right to assessment to young carers. That is an important provision. On direct payments, I welcome the fact that the minister recognises that the needs of service users are paramount, despite the difficulties that, as he highlighted, that might bring to local authorities. Local authorities have to be confident that their services will be of such quality that users will choose to use them. That is about empowerment and choice. I hope that the bill will impose a duty on local authorities to inform users about direct payments. On joint working, the bill removes the legal barriers between agencies, as many have said. However, the question remains whether that goes far enough, as was said in evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. There are compelling arguments for a single budget. I was pleased to hear a number of people say that that will not necessarily be ruled out for the long term. Perhaps when the minister sums up he will confirm whether that is indeed the case. I support Margaret Jamieson's comments and her call for a national pay scheme for all those involved in joint working. That is also important. Free personal care is, as many have said, the settled will of the Parliament. I welcome the minister's commitment to lodge an amendment to include a definition of personal care in the bill. That is an important concession. However, it was right for Nicola Sturgeon to comment on the recent utterances made by a couple of members who do not seem to have signed up to that settled will of the Parliament and still peddle the myth of rich pensioners. I am sure that Kate MacLean's comments will not go down well with the hundreds  of pensioners in her constituency who have struggled all their lives to save, and perhaps to buy their council house, and who will be the beneficiaries of the bill. I am sure that they will have noted her comments about how rich and undeserving they are. I hope that the minister will take this opportunity to distance himself from Labour back benchers' comments on the issue. As Margaret Smith said, the bill will benefit not only those who go into residential and nursing home care but the tens of thousands of people who receive personal care in their own homes. Nicola Sturgeon and I raised that issue many times in the early stages of the debate and are happy that it has been recognised as an important effect of the bill. As Colin Campbell and others have highlighted, the arguments in favour of Westminster continuing to pay attendance allowance to those in Scotland who qualify for it are indisputable. The argument has been strengthened by the decision that attendance allowance will continue to be paid to residents of nursing homes in England and Wales who will receive free nursing care, the definition of which is likely to include elements of personal care. The Department for Work and Pensions is not being asked to increase its expenditure, as the money is already coming to Scotland. Ben Wallace should know that, but he seemed ignorant about the issue. I would be happy to bring him up to speed with that after the debate. As Nicola Sturgeon said, the concern is that Henry McLeish was personally involved in the negotiations with Westminster over the matter, as Malcolm Chisholm confirmed in his evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. We now need assurances that the new First Minister will be as involved and as committed to pursuing Westminster for Scotland's attendance allowance moneys. Mary Scanlon should not cut off her nose to spite her face. If she agrees with the SNP amendment in principle, she should not get hung up on silly arguments about who lodged it. If it is right, it is right, and she and everyone else in the chamber should support it. As Keith Raffan said, the Parliament should speak with one voice. Tonight, members have an opportunity to do that. I urge them to do the right thing and support the amendment.

It just shows lack of respect for the Parliament.

This Parliament should scrutinise all Sewel motions. I put on record my concern at the number of Sewel motions that the Executive is bringing to the Parliament. We all recognise the need for effective regulation and promotion of the public interest. There is a strong argument that that could best be achieved at a Scottish level, but I will leave that argument to one side for now. My concern is accountability. The council for the regulation of health care professionals will be accountable to the UK Parliament. The CRHP will also have the power to regulate any future regulatory bodies that are established by the Scottish Parliament, even if such new bodies regulate activity in a devolved area. The motion says that the council will "be made accountable to the Scottish Parliament in respect of such of its functions as fall within devolved competence" but it does not say how that will be achieved. We accept that provision is made for reports from the CRHP to be laid before this Parliament, but there appear to be no powers to compel the chair of the CRHP to appear before the Parliament. In essence, we will see the reports but we will have no power to hold the council to account. That is a major weakness. I highlight an issue of general concern, which is that we expect one representative from Scotland to represent the interests of eight professional bodies. Given that there will be specific Scottish interests, I am not sure how that will work in practice. Perhaps the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will address that in summing up. To conclude, the Executive has not thought through this legislation properly and has not answered the key question that was posed by Nicola Sturgeon: why does the Executive think it is important to allow Westminster to legislate on a devolved matter for a set of circumstances that the Executive does not think will arise? Perhaps the minister will have another go at answering that question in his summing up.

Is the Deputy First Minister aware of the research report published today showing the prevalence of drug misuse in Scotland? Does he agree that it is extremely concerning that Dundee has the second highest level of problematic drug misuse in Scotland, followed by Aberdeen, which has the third highest? Is he aware that, since 1997, when Labour came to power, the level of problematic drug misuse has been on the increase in Dundee and Aberdeen? Does he accept that those increases are a clear indication of his Government's failure to tackle drug misuse in Scotland?

I start by congratulating Johann Lamont on securing the debate. I am pleased that she said that she was not totally aware of the condition before it was brought to her attention by her constituents as a result of the sad loss of their son. I can make a similar confession—until the debate, I was not very aware of the condition, but I have done some research and I am surprised by the extent to which the condition affects people. It affects about one in 500 people. Given the difficulty in pronouncing the name of the condition, I will talk about HCM. HCM is an incurable but manageable condition, although it can lead to sudden, premature death. Systematic evaluation can identify the majority of patients at particular risk. That provides the opportunity for targeted therapy. Treatment can include drug therapy and, in severe cases, cardiac surgery to remove some of the muscle or to insert a pacemaker or converter defibrillator. Because of the risk of premature death, the Cardiomyopathy Association is campaigning for the mandatory offering of screening to children and young people up to the age of 21 in cases where a first-degree relative has the condition. Diagnosis would require a physical examination and both an electrocardiogram and an echocardiogram. An argument against screening for the disorder is that it is not foolproof, but I do not think that any screening process is totally foolproof. The CMA is not advocating the screening of all children, or even of all young athletes, who are a key group affected by the condition. The  association would like screening to be offered to all first-degree relatives up to the age of 21 of people in whom the condition has been found. That will often follow the tragic loss of a loved one, and there will obviously be concern for the rest of the family. I do not think that a request to consider the offering of screening is beyond the capability of the Executive; I think that it is very reasonable. Screening should not depend on who someone's doctor is or where someone lives, which unfortunately is, I think, the case. Screening should be open to everybody in Scotland who falls into the category that I have described. I hope that the minister will respond positively to Johann Lamont's call.

The debate has been productive and worth while. There has been much agreement and we are extremely pleased that the SNP's amendment has been accepted. Long may the trend continue. The debate is important in many ways, not least because although mental health is one of the Government's key clinical priorities it is still the poor relation in respect of attention and resources. There is a real stigma associated with mental health—Margaret Jamieson articulated that point extremely well. I support her call for a public education process to tackle that stigma. Renewing mental health law builds on many of the Millan committee recommendations and will—as has been said often this afternoon—lead to a major improvement in the legislation that underpins how mental health services are delivered in Scotland. We must ensure that adequate resources are provided to back up the principles and intention behind legislation. The tribunal system has been widely and rightly welcomed as an important change. It will take people away from the sheriff court system, which has stigmatised service users as criminals. The new right that gives service users and carers a right to request an assessment is an important development. Janis Hughes spoke well of the need for support for carers. I was struck by her comment that the working time directive does not apply to those who care 24 hours a day, 365 days a year—that will stay with me. Community-based compulsion is a contentious issue. There is continuing concern about the extension of compulsion into the community. Richard Simpson spoke about the reasons for concern. The Millan committee received a range of views on the matter and acknowledged that it would be one of the most controversial elements of the proposals. SAMH is concerned about the  new community orders which, if not used appropriately, could reduce the rights of service users. The key is appropriate use. We must explore that issue during the Health and Community Care Committee's evidence-taking sessions. I am concerned about the impression that has been given of the right to advocacy being watered down to a duty. I hope that the minister will give reassurances that there will be no watering down. Brian Adam outlined the importance of collective advocacy. Patients' councils are important. The Executive should consider the Dutch model, in which there is a statutory duty to provide patients' councils in every psychiatric hospital. We can learn from that. Resources are the key to the success or otherwise of the legislative changes. The Millan committee could not consider funding issues, but it highlighted the need for good services. It has already been said that in Scotland, unlike in England, mental health services lost the capital receipts from the sale of psychiatric hospitals. Members know of the difficulties of resource transfer moneys disappearing into the mist and never reappearing to develop the community-based services that are required. We must consider how that happens and try to stop it happening in the future. SAMH has said that the principle of the least restrictive alternative will not be meaningful in practice unless a full range of services is available, including crisis services and other services based in the community. Many examples have been given of the need for properly resourced services. Kenny Gibson highlighted the need for specialist services for survivors of childhood sexual abuse and expressed concern about the lack of such services. Des McNulty gave the example of a constituent who had experienced a lack of care. I associate myself with the views of John McAllion on the problem in Tayside, where there were cuts in mental health services to the tune of £500,000. Those cuts included the loss of community psychiatric nurses. One of the few eating disorders services, which is based at the Murray royal hospital, is under threat. It is one of the few day and in-patient services that are operated by the NHS for people with anorexia. We do not need to listen to my views on that issue—David Davidson gave a personal account of how important specialist services are for people with anorexia. I hope that the minister will consider the future of the service at Murray royal hospital because it is valued by the people who use it and their families. I look forward to the production of a mental health bill, which will come to the Health and Community Care Committee. A range of evidence  will be given. Given that one in four of us is likely to suffer mental health problems at some stage in our lives, the investment of time by the Parliament is absolutely crucial to ensure that mental health receives the recognition and resources it deserves.

I pay tribute to the Chhokar family. We should all remember that it is due to their tenacity that we are having this debate today. The family have been through so much. Last Sunday was the third anniversary of Surjit Singh's death. I attended a moving memorial service at the spot where Surjit died. Even in the face of intimidation by what can only be described as a low-life associate of the Coulter family, the Chhokar family retained their dignity and proceeded with a fitting tribute to their son. That has been the hallmark of the family, despite the many setbacks and disappointments that they have had to endure. From the debacle of the trials to the refusal to hold a public inquiry, it has been one long nightmare for the family. The Lord Advocate talked about the internal reports receiving a high level of scrutiny in the press. However, that applies only to the content of the reports; the actual evidence has not been subject to such public scrutiny. That is not good enough. The arguments for a public inquiry now are the same as the arguments at the start of the process. Only a public inquiry would provide the public scrutiny and accountability that is required. I want to focus on institutional racism. I say to  Bill Aitken that I thought that we had gone beyond debates on whether institutional racism existed. It is unfortunate that Bill Aitken questioned its existence. He should remember that the Campbell inquiry's terms of reference should have included examination of whether racism played a part in the legal decision-making process. Unfortunately, they did not. If institutional racism was part of the reason for the mishandling of the Chhokar family—as the Jandoo report concluded—it could also have played a part in the prosecution of the case. Many people and organisations have expressed concerns about the internal reports.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time.

I do not want to imagine—I want to hear. We need a public inquiry so that we can hear the evidence and get to the bottom of the matter. At the moment, we simply do not know whether to rule it in or out. That is part of the problem. The CRE highlighted the Campbell report's failure to show how racism was eliminated as a factor in the legal decision-making process. How was racism eliminated as a factor? The report does not tell us Campbell's method of identifying and eliminating racism as a factor. It is therefore difficult to have confidence in the conclusions. There is a discrepancy between the two reports in respect of institutional racism. The Jandoo report finds evidence of institutional racism. I ask Bill Aitken: if institutional racism was a factor in the handling of the family, is not it a possibility that it was a factor in the prosecution of the case? Does not that lend weight to the discussion being part of a public inquiry? Jandoo fails to define or demonstrate an understanding of institutional racism.

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time. Jandoo's definition is a weakening of the respected definition that was provided by Macpherson. That is unfortunate.  I listened carefully to what the Lord Advocate said about the rather personal attacks in the Jandoo report. The Lord Advocate should explain the possible relevance of the comments about the family to an inquiry into how the family was treated by the justice system. I cannot understand the relevance and I hope that he will explain it to us. Given that the process involved in the reports was flawed, the fundamental question is, how can the reports result in adequate reform? The only way forward is an independent public inquiry. Such an inquiry should have been held. It would be good if the Scottish Executive were to sponsor the inquiry, but if it does not, I pay tribute to the STUC's willingness to sponsor it. The bottom line is that the Chhokar family must have a chance to tell their story and finally get the justice that they deserve.

I have been contacted by a 93-year-old man who has not been able to access a digital hearing aid on the NHS despite an assessment that it would benefit him. Does the minister agree that Scots requiring digital hearing aids on the NHS should have the same access to them as their counterparts in England? Does he accept that that is clearly not the case at present, as only 1 per cent of Scots who require a digital hearing aid have access to one? Instead of talking about reviews, will he give a commitment to roll out a programme of digital hearing aids across the NHS in Scotland?

I welcome the debate, but I want to ask why it has taken two and a half years to get round to it and to begin talking about a strategy for integration. I would put Labour's question back to the Labour party, and ask why it is so obsessed with the constitution and what constitutes a reserved matter. It has delayed this debate for two and a half years for precisely that reason. Members of all parties have asked important questions about asylum issues, only to receive the stock reply, "That is a reserved matter." I am happy that we have moved beyond that; I am just sorry that it has taken so long. When Fiona Hyslop made a practical proposal to improve the dispersal system by giving local authorities more powers in that respect, it was dismissed out of hand as a constitutional ploy. That says more about the mindset of the Labour party than it does about the SNP. Let us be clear. Our complaints about the lack of action over the past few years are not directed at those who have worked extremely hard in communities throughout Scotland to welcome and support asylum seekers—many of those people provide crucial support. What I am talking about is the lack of action from Government, which has refused to take responsibility for asylum seekers and which allowed tensions to grow in Scottish communities. I find it slightly worrying that the Executive has not accepted those facts. I thought that lessons had been learned, but the complacent tone that some people have taken in the debate is a cause for concern, because complacency is something that we cannot afford. The recent Evening Times poll, which was depressing, showed that 93 per cent of the people who were asked do not want asylum seekers living in their communities. Clearly, we have a long way to go. I welcome the anti-racism campaign announced by Jackie Baillie, because it is important to send a clear message that racism will not be tolerated in our society. I take this opportunity to back the call from Mrs Ravinder Kaur Nijjar for an interfaith centre, which is a good proposal. It could provide a place for people to overcome any prejudices and differences that they have. I hope that the Minister for Social Justice will respond positively to that suggestion.  I will deal with some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. Jackie Baillie made much of David Blunkett's announcement of his intention to increase the value of vouchers to the level of income support. While that is welcome, she made no mention of the fact that her Government has left people to survive on 70 per cent of what is regarded as the minimum amount that it is possible to survive on for 18 months. It would have been good to receive an acknowledgement of the failure of the system. Labour members talked about vouchers being scrapped, but they are being superseded by a smart-card system. The question remains: why is one system that stigmatises asylum seekers being replaced with one that, if it does not stigmatise them, at least does not normalise the lives of asylum seekers? As Robert Brown said, one cannot buy bread and milk with a smart card. Why has there been such reluctance to return to a more cost-effective cash-based approach? I can only assume that the message is that asylum seekers cannot be trusted with money. Why else would the Government implement a system that costs more than a more efficient cash-based system? That is the only conclusion that I can draw. I hope that the Minister for Social Justice will give an alternative reason. While she is doing that, perhaps she can tell us what proposals she provided in her consultation with Westminster. I presume that she called for the voucher scheme to be scrapped. Did she advocate as a replacement a cash-based scheme, which has been advocated by every refugee organisation in Scotland? I hope that the minister represented their views when she proposed a system to replace vouchers.

I first heard that analogy from an Afghan asylum seeker. I agree that we should all be careful with the use of language. That applies also to Government ministers, who year after year talked about bogus asylum seekers, which did little to help the integration of asylum seekers. I say to the minister that the smart card that will be given to asylum seekers, which will not normalise their lives, can in no way be compared to the card that MSPs carry and are well rewarded for carrying. I will address dispersal, because it seems that there is some confusion. I hope that Jackie Baillie  will clear up that confusion this afternoon. The minister stated that dispersal stays. A few minutes later, one of her colleagues said that he is pleased that the dispersal system has gone. The minister must clear up what is happening to dispersal under David Blunkett's proposals. If the Edinburgh Evening News report on Edinburgh City Council's response is to be believed, local authorities are also under the impression that the dispersal system has gone. Urgent clarification is required. I welcome the Scottish Executive's belated response to the issue of asylum, but I have severe reservations about the different tone and content of David Blunkett's proposals, and those reservations are shared by Labour members. I am happy to support the amendment in Linda Fabiani's name.

Will the member give way?

Linda Fabiani was making the point that we must be aware that many problems that have been faced by people in communities have been largely ignored. That is where the problem has lain for the past 18 months.

Will the member take an intervention?

If Mr Gallie had been listening more thoroughly he would have noted that I said that each application should be decided on merit and not on which country a person comes from. I welcome moves towards a green card system that would separate the issues of asylum and immigration, which are too often mixed up during the debate. I hope that Mr Gallie does not go down that path.

Will Mr Gallie give way?

More thorough consideration of the facts might have told Mr Gallie that there is an 80 per cent success rate in Scotland in approvals of asylum applications. That figure might put the issue in a different context for him.

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to ensure that the chief scientist office actively seeks applications for research into multiple sclerosis. (S1O-3938)

The minister will be aware that, since 1990, the Multiple Sclerosis Society has spent more than £3 million on research. Does she agree that the society has a reputation in the scientific community for funding research of a high quality? Given that reputation for quality, does the minister agree that it is no longer appropriate for the Scottish Executive to say that it will not fund research projects on MS on the ground of their lack of quality? Will the minister instruct the CSO to enter into discussions with the Multiple  Sclerosis Society, with a view to funding future research projects on MS, to give some hope to MS sufferers in Scotland?

I will be brief, to allow other members an opportunity to speak. I thank Margaret Smith for securing this important debate. As part of the RCN's value nurses campaign, I recently spent some time at Ninewells hospital in Dundee shadowing a charge nurse in the acute surgical admissions ward. That was certainly an eye-opener for me. The charge nurse was a wonder woman. She spent most of the day managing beds, people and everything else. I tried to keep up with her, but at the end of the day I was absolutely exhausted. Yet she does that work day in, day out. On top of her other work, she also had to manage a budget, of which 80 per cent was devoted to staffing. Managing that budget was no mean feat, given the round of cuts in Tayside, which, I hope, will be alleviated following the deficit write-off. However, when a member of staff went  off sick or went on maternity leave, no cover was provided. The staff were working shifts that I did not think were possible. In fact, I wondered whether those shifts breached the new working time directive. I was shocked to learn that staff were working long shifts day after day without a break in shift patterns that were nine or 10 days long. The figures show that the number of nurses employed in Tayside has fallen by 6 per cent since 1996. Fewer people are doing more work, and that position cannot be sustained. Although we welcome the nursing summit as a step forward, much more has to be done to address the problems of recruitment and retention in nursing. A few months ago, I had the pleasure of addressing the RCN conference in Harrogate, at which delegates made clear what they wanted and gave the Minister for State at the UK Department of Health a hard time. I hope that the minister will endear himself to the nurses who are in the public gallery by responding positively to the demands of the value nurses campaign.

I thank all, or certainly most, of the members who contributed to the debate. At the end of the day, the debate took place only because the SNP afforded Parliament the opportunity. In fact, yesterday's ministerial statement was also due to my party's determination to secure a statement sooner rather than later. Although Susan Deacon's statement yesterday was welcome, today's debate has been an opportunity to try to get answers to some serious outstanding questions. Perhaps it is unfortunate that some members have not taken that opportunity and that some questions remain unanswered. When Mike Rumbles made his comments, he did not look over to the benches of his Executive partners. If looks could kill, Mike would look rather unwell. "How to Win Friends and Influence People" was perhaps lost on Mike Rumbles. The point about the whole resources issue is that it would be quite wrong if this Parliament had to find the shortfall from existing resources and raid other budgets simply because—I quote Mike Rumbles's colleague Margaret Smith—Westminster was being "perverse, narrow-minded and mean". Why on earth should that be?

That is nonsense. The principle at stake is that when this Parliament  decides a course of action, as it is quite entitled to do and as it has done with free personal care, it should not be thwarted by another body that does not agree with its policy. That is the problem with what Westminster is doing. Mike Rumbles knows that very well. Resourcing has featured heavily in the debate. It is crucial that the community care sector expands to meet the inevitable increase in demand. The sector cannot even meet current demand, before the care development group's recommendations are implemented next April. We have heard examples of the reduction in the number of local authority homes, in care home beds and in community care services on the ground. We need to move swiftly to build capacity. I am pleased that the minister has clarified that £50 million has been set aside to do that and I welcome that. Any shortfall in the funding package will be a serious problem. The resources that are required from Westminster will be an essential component of making the package work. It is all very well for Henry McLeish to say that if Westminster does not agree to the transfer, the £21.7 million will be found, but we have a right to know about the contingency plans. Would the money come from the £50 million that has been set aside to build capacity? If it would, that is a serious concern. For the policy to work, every penny of that £50 million will be required to build capacity. It is right that the Parliament has the opportunity to ask such questions.

At the end of the day, Margaret Smith must recognise that we want to go forward together on the issue. That comment was not worthy of her. The point is that a threat is undermining the very principle on which the package is based, which is that we must build up capacity. Otherwise, the whole package could be undermined. Among the many people I have spoken to outside the chamber, there has been agreement on that point, which is why it is frustrating that members, for whatever reason, feel that that they cannot support a very reasonable SNP motion. Perhaps people should reflect on why that is. The way in which we do business and the way in which negotiations are conducted are also issues. I would rather the Parliament gave its view on Westminster's actions than that it went on with what are in essence back-door negotiations. I do not know what stage things are at, or whether  Westminster is giving a nod in the right direction. We are not told. The fundamental point of principle is that the Parliament should be the place in which debates are held on what we think should happen on this or any other issue, rather than that being done behind closed doors. Let me turn to points that were raised during the debate. The Tory amendment, although—as others have pointed out—perhaps based on some spurious figures, makes an important point. The GAE spend by local authorities has been of concern for some time. Budgets for the care of the elderly are often the first to be plundered, so I am pleased that we are to have a far more rigorous assessment of how such budgets are spent. The way in which that has been done has been fundamentally wrong for quite some time. In an intervention, Richard Simpson spoke about how the Executive's package would improve care for the elderly. What he said suggested that his conversion has been something less than that on the road to Damascus. I am not convinced that he has fully converted to the principles underlying free personal care.

I do not have much time, but if Richard Simpson wants an answer to the question of how free personal care will fundamentally improve the care of elderly people, it is this: it will remove the fear that thousands of elderly people have had about what will happen to them in their golden years. That principle is very important. Christine Grahame raised important points about what is happening on the ground to community care services. Those points have to be addressed. I should also deal with another point that Richard Simpson raised. I want to correct his point about Falkirk Council. It was the previous Labour administration that embarked on the policy that was referred to—although to be fair, that administration was in a difficult position because of the discharges from the Royal Scottish national hospital, which the SNP administration has inherited. Richard Simpson was perhaps a little economical with the truth. Free personal care is an issue that unites the Parliament. I do not think that anyone was singly responsible for making it happen; I would like to think that it was a collective effort from all sides of the chamber. We want to see joined-up government. In future, when we want to make radical changes that affect the lives of our people, would it not be much easier if we had control over social security benefits? I support the motion in the name of Nicola Sturgeon.

I pay tribute to the work of the care development group, and to the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, who seems to be ever the bridesmaid and never the bride at such big events. The group's report sets the cost of free personal care at £145 per person per week. We know that the Executive has set aside £90 of that, and that there is continuing debate with Westminster about the remaining £55. Does Susan Deacon accept that not all people on attendance allowance receive the top rate of £55, and that some of them get the lower rate of £37? Even if Westminster agrees to allow people to retain attendance allowance, the Executive will still have an extra £18 to find for everyone on the lower rate. Has the minister calculated how many people are in that category, what the total additional bill will be and  where the extra money will come from?

I feel compelled to ask Mr Fitzpatrick to acknowledge that this is not a debate for party-political point scoring. I hope that he acknowledges that all members, from all parties, should come together to do the best that we can for asylum seekers in Scotland.

I thank Paul Martin for lodging the motion, which is perhaps overdue, but is welcome. I know Sighthill well, as I worked there for several years. I also know the people of Sighthill well and I agree with Paul Martin that they are good people who have been given a difficult time in the press. By the people of Sighthill, I mean both the host community and the asylum seekers who live there. In the past few months, I have made several visits to the area and I spoke to asylum seekers, local people and officials long before the issue hit the headlines. I was concerned about the lack of action and recognition of the situation. I am heartened to hear Paul Martin talk about learning from mistakes, because unless we are honest about the fact that actions were not taken as they should have been, we will not move on. Community consultation is at the heart of the matter, as many of the problems could have been avoided. It took the tragic death of Firsat Dag to make many in authority sit up and take notice, but we are now turning the corner. I welcome the long- overdue investment in Sighthill and other areas in Glasgow that have refugees and asylum seekers. However, money is not all that is needed. Money itself does not change attitudes or tackle the hostile media that have, unfortunately, fuelled many negative views about asylum seekers, which we must acknowledge are more widely held than we would like them to be. In the light of the tragic events in the USA last week, it is more important than ever that we send out a clear message that we will not tolerate any bigotry or racism, including that which uses last week's horrific events as an excuse to attack anyone from our ethnic minority communities. I am sorry to say that there have been reports of increased hostility towards our indigenous Scots Muslim community as well as asylum seekers. Investment is welcome, but what we politicians say and the language that we use about asylum seekers is important. If we get the language wrong or say what we should not, we will fuel the ideas of those who want to be less than welcoming towards our guests. I will conclude now, as I know that many other members want to speak and I do not want to take up too much time. I hope that we have turned a corner. We have the opportunity to restore the reputation that we would like Scotland to have as a welcoming, tolerant country. In the past few months, I have sometimes felt that that reputation has been in question. An opportunity exists to prove that we can be that country. I hope that all members agree that that is the way to proceed.

To ask the First Minister what discussions have been undertaken with Her Majesty's  Government regarding the recommendations of the care development group. (S1F-1249)

The initial cost of the care development recommendations is £125 million per year, which assumes that the Westminster Government will amend existing social security regulations. If Westminster refuses to amend those regulations, can the First Minister tell us—if he can get his sums right today—which part of the care development plan would have to be cut to fund the £20 million hole that would open up in the free care proposals?

Will Ben Wallace give way?

Is Ben Wallace really trying to tell me that a fivefold decrease in the number of domestic staff working in hospitals could in some way have helped maintain clean hospitals?

Is the minister equally happy that 500 staff have had to be lost from the Edinburgh royal infirmary due to the costs of PPP or PFI?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

I agreed with one thing in David McLetchie's speech, which was that not everything started to go wrong in the health service from 1997 onward, which is why the Tories have no credibility when it comes to the health service. When they open their mouths, it reminds everyone of 18 years of butchery of the health service, from which it has not recovered.

No thank you. It reminds people of the madness of the internal market, which David McLetchie seems to want to  re-establish, unless I misunderstood, and the privatisation of public assets. The really irritating thing about all this is that it gives new Labour the excuse time after time to say, "What do you expect after 18 years of Tory rule?" That is beginning to wear a bit thin. Everyone accepts that there are major problems to be resolved in the NHS, except perhaps the Minister for Health and Community Care, who tells us that everything is rosy and condemns staff for daring to complain, which reminds me of a rather famous Tory lady and her "moaning minnies" speech some years ago. Successive Tory and new Labour Governments have failed the NHS in Scotland. Under the Tories, waiting lists stood at around 80,000. Between 1992 and 1996, the number of nurses in the NHS fell every year, while the number of health service managers quadrupled. New Labour has admitted defeat on waiting lists and scrapped the pledge to bring them down, yet at the same time the median waiting time for out-patients has risen to 51 days. There are 1,000 fewer nurses under Labour than there were under the Tories and nearly 2,000 fewer ancillary staff. In addition, there are almost 3,000 patients awaiting discharge from hospital, and they are occupying more than one in 10 NHS beds. The NHS has its problems, but privatisation is not the answer. The Tories are in danger of never learning the lesson that ideological dogma is not the solution for public services. However, with the election of Iain Duncan Smith I suspect that we have not seen anything yet. Today's debate shows the direction that the Tories are heading in—the mass privatisation of the NHS, as I am sure that Ben Wallace is about to confirm.

Ben Wallace has misunderstood the concept of the privatisation of the health service, which his party wants to happen. I find myself in the somewhat strange position of facing a pro-privatisation alliance among the unionist parties in the chamber. The question is just how far each of them will go. The Tories are right about one point in their motion—PFI was their idea, but the Labour party has well and truly stolen the Tories' clothes, making Scotland the PFI capital of Europe. The question is how much further Labour will go.  Tony Blair wants to go all the way. He still has the scars on his back from the previous big ideological fight, but he won that one and I think that he will win this one too. Henry McLeish was not keen at first but, in true Henry style, he changed his tune and started to talk about how traditional public services had lost sight of their main goal—to serve the public. Does that mean that he believes that the private sector could do better? Does the Minister for Health and Community Care agree with him? The assumption of private sector good, public sector bad has no foundation other than the fact that Tory politicians, and an increasing number of Labour politicians, tell us that that is the case. Let us consider the reality of Scotland's experience of privatisation. The Tory motion extols the virtues of using PFI to build Hairmyres hospital, yet it fails to mention the problems that have been experienced there. The records of 200,000 patients have gone missing; raw sewage has been seeping through the floor; staff have been receiving electric shocks—I am sure that the people sitting in the gallery will find it strange that some members find that so funny—because of faulty work; meals are being prepared by contractors 200 miles away and the air conditioning is faulty and is causing the building to overheat. Is that success on a plate, minister?

I will do better than that; I will quote one hospital worker who said: "Morale couldn't be any lower. We are no longer working as a team because half the staff is employed by a private firm, while the rest are NHS. One team has patient welfare as a priority, the other has profit as a priority." That came from a hospital worker. The true cost of the Edinburgh royal infirmary—with the loss of 500 staff, including consultants—has emerged. That is another example of how the price of PFI has to be paid. The great privatisation itself—of the hospital cleaning services—started under the Tories and continued under new Labour. It is no coincidence that in recent years the incidence of hospital-acquired infections has risen dramatically. That is no surprise, given the fivefold decrease in the  number of domestics in the NHS since services were contracted out. While the Government estimates that hospital-acquired infections cost the NHS £21 million a year, a recent report suggests that they could cost it as much as £186 million. We are supposed to believe that privatisation is cost-effective and efficient. I do not think that it is. I turn to HCI in Clydebank. The Tories are trying to turn logic on its head with that. Instead of highlighting the solution for the NHS, the Tories are highlighting the problem—there is a lack of capacity in the NHS. That shows the absolute absurdity of the NHS being reliant in any way on the private sector. Instead of pouring more and more money into the private sector we should be building up the capacity of the NHS. The Tories appear to be happy to play the tune of the private sector. However, spending extra money on the private sector would not provide one extra nurse or doctor for the NHS.

No. I am just winding up. The Scottish National Party would spend Scotland's money more wisely. An SNP administration would never allow £718 million—money that could have been used for public services—to be underspent. We would make Scotland's wealth work for Scotland's health. Seven hundred million pounds a year could be freed up through spending resources that are raised in Scotland. That £700 million could be spent on Scotland's public services and health service. We would use Scotland's wealth to build up the family silver, not sell it off to the private sector to be lost for ever to future generations. I am happy to move the amendment in my name. I move amendment S1M-2207.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that, as a result of successive government policies, Scotland has become the PFI capital of Europe and that PFI is the most expensive method of financing hospital building; further notes that the privatisation of domestic services in hospitals presided over by the last Conservative government has resulted in a deterioration of standards of cleanliness in hospitals and record levels of hospital-acquired infections; believes that further private involvement in the delivery of health services is not in the interests of patients, and is committed to rebuilding a public health service in Scotland that is capable of delivering the highest quality of care for all our citizens."

There is little that I disagree with in the minister's speech so far, but will she clarify how far she is prepared to see private finance being used in the national health service?

I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing an important motion for debate. The motion mentions future plans for incineration in Scotland. I will cast my eye over recent events at the Baldovie  incinerator in Dundee and offer some thoughts on how we can proceed. Dundee has a long and troubled history of municipal waste incineration. The city had an incinerator to handle municipal solid waste in 1979, but that plant at Baldovie closed at the end of 1996 when stricter European Union emissions limits came into effect. Four years before the December 1996 deadline, Dundee City Council had to choose between upgrading the old plant to meet the new standards, building a new facility or revising its waste management strategy to increase its reliance on landfill. The council opted to construct a new energy-from-waste facility and entered into a joint venture arrangement with the private sector using the private finance initiative. Despite the closure of the old plant five years ago, the fallout from the emissions continues. A heated debate has continued in the city over how to investigate the health impact of the emissions. Residents in the areas beside the site of the incinerator have genuine concerns. Theories abound about clusters of cancer and other impacts on health. Finally, after much debate and pressure from local residents, the administration in Dundee agreed to carry out a health study. I hope that, whatever the findings of the study, concerns can be abated and fears can be laid to rest. The establishment of the new incinerator could have marked a fresh start for Dundee. Unfortunately, the promises of openness and transparency seem to disappear whenever a problem occurs. The recent batch of problems, which Irene McGugan highlighted, include 18 separate breaches of safety limits. When breaches occur they should at least be publicised immediately, with an appropriate explanation as soon as that is technically feasible. Unless that happens there is a culture of secrecy, which does nothing to allay fears because people think that there is a cover-up. That is what happened in relation to the breaches of safety that Irene McGugan mentioned. On a more positive note, I have been told that the operational problems with the new incinerator have—in the main—been resolved and that electricity production is on-going. That is welcome, but it is up to all of us to keep an eye on the Baldovie incinerator. We will certainly do so.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in raising awareness of men's health problems. I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the members' business debate today. David Davidson pipped me to the post in applauding the work of the Men's Health Forum Scotland. The forum seeks to work in partnership with others to improve the health of men in Scotland. That work is important. As members have said, men have a disturbingly low uptake of primary health care services—the annual number of general practitioner consultations by men is less than half that by women. We have heard some of the reasons for men's reluctance to seek help when they are not coping or when they feel unwell. We should remember that men's health is not always about physical health; it can sometimes be about depression—men are reluctant to seek help with that. Further research would be in order, to find out more of the reasons for that reluctance. Men's health problems start at an early age. A recent report indicated that there is a huge increase in the number of young men who are excluded from school, a steady increase in drug-related deaths among young men and a 75 per cent increase in the involvement of young men in crime. In addition, the report indicated where some  of the solutions lie: young men could be educated in school about the need to look after themselves, and they should seek the advice and help that they require when things go wrong for them. Our young men do not do very well in comparison with the young men in other European countries. They have lower learning achievements at age eight; they are less skilled and qualified when they leave school; and more of them grow up in poverty. We should look to our European neighbours for the reasons for that and act accordingly. Accidents account for 42 per cent of all deaths of 15 to 24-year-old males, road traffic accidents being the largest single cause. The majority of fatal accidents at work or leisure also involve males. Research may indicate that that is linked to the likelihood of males indulging in risky behaviours, of which alcohol abuse is the main one. Kenny Gibson has done a lot of work around the suicide rates among young men. I congratulate him on that work, which he has highlighted well. It is of concern that suicides are more than four times more likely to occur in men than in women. Clearly, work should be done in that area. It is of particular concern that, while the suicide rate appears to be flattening out in England and Wales, in Scotland it continues to increase. What makes Scotland different? We do not have enough information about why that is the case. Coronary heart disease is a major cause of death among young men, accounting for 29 per cent of all male deaths. Cancer deaths among males are significantly higher than in females. We have a lot of information, but we must start considering what lies behind it. What do we do? For too long, men's health work has been neglected. We cannot afford to ignore it any longer. We require urgent action. There are some good examples throughout the country; however, I am wary of what I would describe as pilotitis. We embark on pilot initiatives and schemes, but what happens to them afterwards? Where such initiatives work, do we extend them across the country? I would like to know why, where something is working, we are not rolling it out. Perhaps we could have a little less pilotitis. I end on a note about smoking. I do not want to make a party-political point, but there is something that the Parliament can do to address the issue of smoking: ban tobacco advertising. I make a plea for people to sign up to that.

Is the minister aware of the recent damning report on the standard of the reinstatement work that is done in Dundee by the utility companies after they have dug up the roads and pavements in the city? The report showed that fewer than one in 10 reinstatements met the required standard. Those that did not meet the standard had to be done again, which resulted in double the inconvenience  to the public—in addition to the threat to the condition of our roads and the extra burdens on local authorities, which have to issue improvement notices. Will the minister reassure us that he will consider that report and comment on it?

I wish to say a few words in support of amendment 21. I am disappointed at and surprised by the tone of some of the comments on amendment 21. Members of other parties should consider whether they are hiding behind the constitutional argument, rather than addressing a practical problem. I advise Cathie Craigie, or anyone else who is sceptical, to speak to refugee organisations and to refugees and asylum seekers who face difficulties because of the housing policy that is dictated by the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. We have a commitment to review this year the impact of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The review will examine housing policy and I hope that members will keep open minds. There is no point in having a review unless people are prepared to consider the problems that that legislation has caused. I will highlight one problem with the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, which is the removal of the right of local authorities to rehouse asylum  seekers. I am aware of an asylum seeker who suffered extreme racial harassment, including threats of petrol being put through the letterbox and bricks being put through the windows; nevertheless, NASS decided that it was safe for that asylum seeker to remain in that house. Any rational person would have deemed it not to be safe, but NASS deemed it to be safe and the racial harassment of that asylum seeker continued. Local authorities would not have responded in that manner, because they are better placed to decide whether it is safe or otherwise for an asylum seeker to remain where they are. There are problems with the housing policy for asylum seekers. I am not hiding behind a constitutional argument and I appeal to everyone in the chamber. The issue is not the constitution; it is the practical difficulties that have been caused by the implementation of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. I hope that members will keep an open mind when the review of that legislation is carried out.

I feel a little sorry for the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, who has done all the hard work through the bill process, only to have to stand aside at the last minute so that the Minister for Health and Community Care can take all the glory. That is a shame. However, I pay tribute to Malcolm Chisholm for the work that he has put into this bill. I also pay tribute to the clerks of the Health and Community Care Committee, to my fellow members of the committee and to all those who gave evidence during the bill process. On behalf of the SNP, I welcome the imminent passing of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. The bill will result in major improvements in our care system, through the constant and effective regulation of care and the people providing it. For too long we have read and heard about appalling cases in which the care system has failed to provide a proper standard of care—a standard that we would expect for our relatives and for ourselves. The vast majority of people working in the care system do a marvellous job. Through an effective system of regulating the work force, which this bill will provide, we can ensure that the 500,000 service users in Scotland receive a high-quality service. The public needs to have confidence in the care system. When standards are not met,  people need to feel able to bring that to the attention of the Scottish social services council or the Scottish commission for the regulation of care, so that action can be taken to rectify the situation. The bill has been strengthened by the many amendments that have been passed at stages 2 and 3, in particular the recognition of the requirement for two inspections of care homes and the inclusion of fostering and adoption services in the bill. The focus on extending consultation and information provision for users and carers is also to be welcomed. My main regret is that the Executive did not listen to the care providers and interest groups when they raised concerns about fees and the impact that they will have on service provision. At this point, all we can say is that time will tell who was right on that issue. I was also concerned by the removal from the bill earlier today of the important safeguard for voluntary organisations. I believe that that will cause the voluntary sector immense problems. Again, time will tell. On a happier note, the bill provides us with an opportunity to improve the delivery and monitoring of care for some of the most vulnerable people in our society. We all support that aim. The Health and Community Care Committee invested much time and energy in hearing a great deal of evidence, so that the bill could be improved. There has been much agreement across the parties on the content of the bill, and it is all the better for that. I am proud to have been associated with helping to improve the care system in Scotland through the passing of this bill. I look forward to the real changes and benefits that it will bring to the people of Scotland.

I would like a little clarification. We welcome the fact that the minister has responded to the concerns raised about the need for a general statement of principles, but I cannot understand why that is to be located after part 2 rather than at the beginning of the bill, which would be the most logical location. I wonder whether I am missing something.

The minister's opening remarks were quite heartening, as he said that the Executive recognises the funding problem, but he proceeded to say that the funding that is given to local authorities through grant-aided expenditure is adequate. What solutions does he propose?

I begin by paying tribute to Richard Simpson for getting his amendment into the bill at stage 2. In his speech, he laid out why it was necessary. He clearly knows his subject well and delivered a persuasive speech. It is therefore nothing short of tragic that in the face of pressure—probably considerable pressure—he has been forced not to see it through. Although we all welcome meetings—meetings are always a good thing—it is fair to say that the meeting that the minister had last week with Scottish Care was a fruitless exercise. How are we to be assured that another meeting will produce anything more than that? How do we know that the Executive will not seek to pass the buck back to local authorities, as it did at the meeting last week? The timing of the announcement of a meeting is, to say the least, extremely suspect. It is an attempt to get out of a situation that the Executive has got into because of the lack of assurances that it has given on funding streams.  Community Care Providers Scotland has made its position clear. It is an association of voluntary sector organisations that provide care in Scottish communities. Those organisations are at the  coalface, so they know best—even better than the minister. The key issue is the link between quality and cost. The voluntary sector welcomes the establishment of the commission and the setting of standards, but it realises that the new standards will be a challenge for the voluntary sector, in the context of many receiving zero inflation budgets and some having their budgets cut by their local authority. As we all know, voluntary organisations do not have the profit margins to absorb additional costs and, as Richard Simpson highlighted, staff pay and conditions are the first casualty. Section 24A introduced the ability for the commission to examine and comment on any contract or other funding arrangement between a local authority and a voluntary body, when it has failed to meet standards purely as a result of inadequate resources. Voluntary organisations are concerned that, without section 24A, services will have to close because standards are not met due to budget constraints. That would be a tragedy and a practical difficulty, given the number of services that are provided by the voluntary sector in Scotland. Checks and balances are required in the system. The commission's ability to comment on, not compel, the adequacy of funding arrangements would be a good check on the funding arrangements for voluntary organisations, which are often at the mercy of the local authority, which is, in turn, at the mercy of Government ministers. That check would create some welcome transparency in the funding process.

As the minister said, fees have been one of the most contentious issues since the start of the bill process. The Health and Community Care Committee heard one witness after another say that the Executive's stated objective that the Scottish commission for the regulation of care should be self-financing would mean a huge increase in fees and therefore a huge burden on care providers, particularly those in the voluntary sector. At present, fees cover only 17 per cent of the cost of registration, yet the minister wishes to adopt a system that will be 100 per cent funded by fees. The system will not provide one extra pound for care services. Instead, the minister will set up a little-needed paper-chase around a fees system. The minister told us that funding to local authorities will be increased to cover the cost of the increased charges that providers will levy to  cover their increased registration fees. All members of the Health and Community Care Committee were rather sceptical about that statement. I am sure that we will discuss the issue at some length when we debate amendment 34, which seeks to remove the safeguards that section 24A provides. The fundamental point is that the same pot of public money that goes to local authorities will be used to fund the commission, so why not fund the commission directly and prevent the recycling of public money, which loses value each time that it is recycled? We have yet to hear an adequate explanation of the policy. I recognise that amendment 24 will allow ministers to consider the potential effect of fees, but that does not go far enough. Amendment 24 is not strong enough to reflect the overwhelming views of the witnesses who gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee—in a democracy, after all, we are supposed to listen to such people. Amendment 76 would strengthen section 20 by stating that, when the commission sets fees, it should have regard to the "anticipated impact of fees on ... service providers". Given that the commission will have day-to-day contact with service providers, it will be in a better position to know the impact of fees than ministers might be.

I moved similar amendments at stage 2. I was unhappy with the minister's response to them, so I have lodged amendments 72 and 73. It appears that the purpose of section 2(17) is to ensure that schools and related activities, such as homework clubs, are excluded from the bill's provisions, which is quite right. Section 2(17) purports to ensure that out-of-school care activities that are provided on school premises fall within the scope of the bill and so will be subject to registration and inspection. However, certain out-of-school care activities are provided in a school as part of the school's activities and the person who provides those activities is employed or commissioned by the local authority to manage the service. That happens in a number of community schools. Section 2(17) appears to suggest that such activities should not fall within the remit of the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. Subsection (17) states that "a person does not provide day care of children where" the service is provided "as part of the school's activities" and the person is "employed to work at the school and authorised to provide the service as part of the school's activities." Such services—for example, those provided in community schools—may be aimed at the most vulnerable children, but they will not benefit from falling under the remit of the Scottish commission for the regulation of care or the Scottish social services council. The national care standards should apply to such services. Amendments 72 and 73 seek to ensure that all care services that are provided on school premises for children and young people are brought within the scope of the bill. The amendments also seek to distinguish between school education activities and child care activities. I move amendment 72.

I seek clarification from the minister that common sense would prevail if the person who runs an after-school care service in a community school is employed by the school. Will the minister give me an assurance that, in such a case—I know that there are only a small number of such cases, but they exist—common sense would prevail, with the service being treated as falling under the bill?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much money has been spent to date on work by private consultants on NHS 24. (S1O-3285)

Does the minister believe that that is the best use of NHS money that could instead have paid for many urgently required operations or for magnetic resonance imaging scanners that would treat thousands of cancer patients every year? Members of the medical profession throughout Scotland have criticised the spending. Does she agree with the Scottish Executive insider who said that they thought that people would be sickened when they saw where their taxes were going?

I am pleased that so many members have welcomed the opportunity to debate this issue. Mary Scanlon was correct to say that the Haemophilia Society did not initiate this debate; however, I assure members that the society welcomes it. In an e-mail, the society urged members to attend the debate on behalf of the 400 Scottish people with haemophilia who were infected with hepatitis C as part of their NHS treatment and expressed the hope that members would show their support. I am happy that so many members have done that. The Executive amendment signifies some movement on the issue, although members must have had difficulty picking that up from Malcolm Chisholm's opening speech, which was disappointing in its tone. I shall return to that in a couple of minutes. The debate has provided an important opportunity for the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to do the right thing and provide some hope for the 300 or so Scottish people with haemophilia who suffer from hepatitis C. All that we ask today is that the Executive review its decision. It is important for the morale of those who are affected that the debate is kept open and the door is not closed on the possibility of no-fault compensation, as appeared to be the case in the Minister for Health and Community Care's written answer on 5 April to Brian Adam's parliamentary question.

I will, although Mary Scanlon did not give way to me.

The terms of the SNP motion are limited to the people who have haemophilia. However, there is a case to be made for considering compensation for other people who are affected. That is one of the complexities of the issue and something that the Health and Community Care Committee will have to consider.

I shall move on and develop my argument. Although the recent ruling in England has no direct bearing on what happens in Scotland, it places a moral obligation on us to consider no-fault compensation. The precedent has been set by the MacFarlane Trust, which was established under the Tory Government in 1988 to provide financial assistance of some £10 million to those who were infected with HIV through contaminated blood products. When that trust was established, the NHS did not disintegrate in the way that the minister implied would happen if the same support was given to people who have contracted hepatitis C. The world did not stop with the establishment of the MacFarlane Trust. The Haemophilia Society has recommended a similar model for those with hepatitis C. We have heard no logical argument to support a situation in which someone who contracted HIV through contaminated blood products receives financial assistance, while someone who contracted hepatitis C through possibly the same contaminated blood products receives no financial assistance. That situation is patently inconsistent and unfair and the minister has provided no logical argument to support its continuation. A precedent has been set for departing from the principle of no non-fault compensation in well-defined circumstances. I hope that the minister will not continue to indulge in scaremongering about the impact of such a limited departure from the principle. Is he suggesting that providing financial assistance to a small group of people would somehow lead to the collapse of the NHS as we know it? His words are a smokescreen and do little to develop the argument. Talking about the floodgates opening to thousands of people is scaremongering and detracts from the central issue, which concerns consistency, fairness and equity. Financial assistance is important for people with hepatitis C, which is an infection that causes great anguish, ill health and hardship. Financial assistance would not remove hepatitis C or its devastating effects but it would improve dramatically the quality of life of those affected. This debate is about the human cost of hepatitis  C. There are many valid but unanswered questions beyond what we are discussing today, which the Health and Community Care Committee will consider. The petitioners raised issues about whether Scottish patients were exposed to risks for longer than they should have been, given the extent of knowledge at the time, and about why Scottish blood products were not made safe from hepatitis C until two years after their English equivalents. All those questions must be answered. I do not know whether those answers should be supplied by a public inquiry, but I do know that the limited internal inquiry did not answer the questions to the satisfaction of those people who have given evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. As many members have said, that issue will continue to be raised and answers to those important questions will continue to be sought. However, those matters are not for this morning's debate. I give a cautious welcome to the Executive's amendment. I hope that the intention behind the amendment is to give a clear signal that the Executive is prepared to reconsider the issue and to provide some hope to the more than 300 people in Scotland who suffer from haemophilia and have contracted hepatitis C. This is not a party-political issue; MSPs throughout the chamber have expressed support for giving financial assistance to people who contracted hepatitis C through being treated with contaminated blood or blood products by the NHS. This is about justice and fairness. Today, by supporting the motion, we can put right the wrong that has been done.

Richard Simpson started by alluding to the fact that the SNP was circumventing the Health and Community Care Committee's inquiry, but he has gone on to rule out the committee deciding in favour of a public inquiry. Is not that a contradiction in terms and a bit hypocritical?

On NHS performance, we all know that waiting lists are higher now than when Labour came to power. Will the Deputy First Minister explain why, in the past year, waiting times have also risen sharply? In-patients who waited an average of 30 days for treatment last year now wait 35 days. For outpatients, the median wait has risen from 42 to 45 days. Will he say why that has happened, and whether it is a matter of concern to somebody whose party promised in 1999 to reduce patient waiting times?

I will ask a question about urban regeneration in Dundee. An integrated transport system is an important element of regeneration. Does the minister agree that the proposals for a new train hall at Dundee airport, with bus links to commerce and industry in the city centre, is the way forward for Dundee's transport system and is worthy of support by the Scottish Executive? I hope that the minister will give her support to the scheme when the feasibility study is brought forward.

I was pleased that the minister set the context for the debate when he said that poor quality of care would no longer be tolerated in Scotland. That is an important statement—particularly in the context of looked-after children—and one that we can all sign up to. The minister referred to some of the problems that exist in secure residential units. I am sure that he will be aware of the high-profile case that has hit the headlines in Dundee recently. The case has hit the headlines for a number of reasons, but the consistent problem that has been identified is poor staff morale, which, as we know, affects the children who are being looked after. We must investigate the reasons for such poor staff morale, whether they stem from staffing levels, poor management, problems with sick leave or any of the other issues that Sandra White referred to. I welcome the secure accommodation advisory group that the minister referred to and I look forward to seeing the recommendations that it will produce. The Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, once enacted, will provide important scrutiny of the quality of service that is provided in children's residential care. I have no doubt that the bill will contribute to a rise in the quality of services, but that must be backed up with the necessary resources to improve standards. We must end the situation whereby some children do not have a care plan developed for them by social work departments and some cases are unallocated. In my experience, there was a feeling that the at-risk criteria for children were being changed according to the resources available and that, as a result, many children were excluded from becoming allocated cases. We cannot allow resources to determine the level of risk that we deem it acceptable for children to be left in. I am pleased that the minister said that he would not tolerate that situation and that he has made a commitment to adequate child protection procedures and to ensuring that all cases are allocated. We must also tackle the links between poverty and the number of children who are being looked after. Aberdeen and Dundee in my constituency have some of the highest numbers of looked-after children in Scotland; the figures are 13.6 per cent and 13.2 per cent respectively. That suggests a clear link between poverty levels and the number of children who are being looked after by a local authority. Many measures to reduce the number of looked-after children will therefore be measures to reduce the level of poverty in some of our communities. As we all know, poverty puts a strain on family relationships.  I welcome the minister's consideration of a hybrid system to address informal fostering. We need to ensure that support is provided to those who enter into informal arrangements to look after children of relatives or friends. They make huge personal sacrifices by agreeing to take on the care of children, but they should not have to make financial sacrifices.  One of my constituents went from living in a two-income household with two children to a one-income household with three children after entering into an arrangement to look after the child of a friend who died of cancer. When people are prepared to take on that level of commitment, they should not end up at a financial disadvantage for doing so. I do not think that the system is flexible enough to consider such arrangements and I welcome the fact that that matter will be addressed. I look forward to the proposals.

Will the minister give some thought to people who may fall through the net of the official system? Such people may, by means of a personal arrangement, become guardians of the children of friends or relatives after the parent has died. I have dealt with two such constituency cases and the people who were involved have fallen through the support net that exists in formal fostering and adoption services. Will the minister agree to give that small set of people some consideration in the review?

I welcome again the decision to locate the headquarters of the proposed commission for the regulation of care and the proposed social services council in Dundee. That is one of the First Minister's better decisions and one that will bring 160 badly needed civil service jobs to the city.

Does the minister agree that the decision will bring the total number of civil service jobs in Dundee to about 180, which is still far below the level in comparable areas? Will he assure the chamber that more civil service jobs will come to the city, and that they will come soon?

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I welcome the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. I also welcome the fact that the headquarters of the new Scottish commission for the regulation of care and the Scottish social services council will be based in Dundee, which is an excellent choice. There are high hopes that the bill will lead to major improvements in our care services through effective and consistent regulation as a result of the establishment of the Scottish commission for the regulation of care and the strengthening of user and carer involvement in care delivery, standards setting and regulation. Of equal importance is the establishment of the Scottish social services council to register care staff and promote high standards of conduct and practice among the work force and to ensure that they receive high standards of education and training; the quality of social work services depends greatly on the quality of staff. Why are the changes necessary? The current system of inspecting and registering care services  is inconsistent and depends on the type of care establishment. Responsibility is divided between health boards and local authorities. Many services are not formally regulated at all. The Minister for Health and Community Care alluded to some of them. I am particularly pleased that day care and home care services will be brought into a regulatory framework. It will be interesting to see how we manage to regulate and inspect home care services with sensitivity, given that that will be done in people's homes, but I am sure that it will be achieved. Local authorities inspect many of their own services. That is not satisfactory; a conflict of interest can arise. The lack of integration has made it difficult for residential and nursing care services to be provided in one establishment, which means upheaval for elderly people as their needs change and they have to move to another establishment. A single category of care home will end that disruption. At present, no system is in place for the regulation of those who work in social work. That must be changed. Over the years, the vast majority of staff in social work have done a marvellous job and they should be commended, but we have seen a small number of serious incidents in all care sectors involving vulnerable children and adults. Through the effective regulation of the work force, this bill must put an end to abuse and protect the 500,000 service users in Scotland. That is quite a challenge, but we must ensure that the public has full confidence in care services and that they feel that they can speak out when things are not going well. There is no doubt that people worry when they read how one in five elderly people who are resident in care homes are malnourished. The public must believe that this bill will put an end to such scandals. Whistleblowing is one of the most effective methods of policing poor standards or practice, but staff and service users have to be confident that the system will protect them. It has to be said that there is little confidence in the current complaints system. I hope that the bill will change that. The commission will have a duty to promote the quality and improvement of care services through registration and inspection. An important function of the commission will be to provide the public with information and advice on the availability and quality of the care services it regulates. That fulfils a key recommendation of the Sutherland commission. While on the subject of Sutherland, I want to draw to the minister's attention the very helpful definition of personal care in the bill. The minister will find that definition very useful in finally coming up with a definition of personal care for the full implementation of free personal care for the  elderly. When he sums up, he may wish to take the opportunity to provide a guarantee that the definition that the care development group comes up with will not be narrower than the definition in the bill. Some areas of concern have been highlighted through the Health and Community Care Committee. I have said that the general principles of the bill have been broadly welcomed by a range of organisations, but widespread consultation and the evidence have highlighted a number of key concerns, particularly around inspection levels, maintaining local links, the transfer of staff and the funding for the commission and the council. The registration and inspection process will provide the commission with important powers to issue improvement notices that will list what improvements must be made. If those improvements are not made, a provider's registration can be cancelled. That is a very important sanction that the commission can use to drive up standards. A key worry that was expressed to the committee concerns the Executive's proposal to limit mandatory inspections to one per year. The National Association of Inspection and Registration Officers said: "NAIRO strongly opposes a retreat from the Executive's own current target of two inspections per year. NAIRO believes that unannounced inspections reflect everyday service standards more accurately and rightly enjoy greater public credibility." Real concern was expressed about any reduction in the number of statutory inspections, given that two is the present minimum. It could be argued that organisations will be expected to pay higher fees for less of a service in that respect. Reductions could also be seen as rewarding bad practice and penalising good practice. The recent Accounts Commission report on performance indicators showed that some local authority social work departments are not even meeting the target of two inspections a year, while others are prioritising inspection to go beyond that target. We should not reduce the number of inspections to the lowest common denominator. The evidence that the committee received was overwhelmingly in favour of retaining two inspections a year for residential care homes, of which one should be announced and one unannounced. Although the minister has argued that one inspection a year is only a minimum, the danger is that the minimum becomes the norm. It is important for public confidence that the public are reassured that care homes are being regularly and thoroughly inspected. I was struck by the comment, which appeared in a recent Sunday Mail article, of the daughter of an elderly man who  died in appalling circumstances in a private nursing home. She said: "Health boards still do not go in and investigate vigorously. They give too many warnings that they're coming. So I'm not surprised that old people are still being mistreated and starved." We must make sure that people are reassured. Reducing the level of inspections will not do that. How staff will be transferred is a key area of concern for the 500 staff who will go to the Scottish commission for the regulation of care and the Scottish social services council. Questions have been asked about whether the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations are sufficient to deal with those concerns, which include the location of regional offices, the difficulties of homeworking, conditions of service, pension rights and employment alternatives. I know that some reassurances have been given: my colleagues from the Local Government Committee will deal with that in more detail. Although we now know where the headquarters will be situated, the proposal for five regional offices has generated a lot of concern. We have yet to hear a coherent argument from the Executive on why that model should be followed. The Health and Community Care Committee is of the opinion that the model should be revisited and that there should be some correlation to existing administrative boundaries. Without doubt, fees have been the most contentious issue. The Executive proposes to fund the start-up costs but expects both bodies to be self-financing by 2004-05 through the registration fees of care providers and staff. That has been condemned as unrealistic by organisation after organisation. I quote NAIRO again: "We as both providers and purchasers of services are very concerned about the belief that the commission can achieve self-financing through fees: we do not think that is achievable. It is clear that the imposition of fees on local authorities will draw on community care moneys. We pose the question whether that is the best use of the community care pound". Existing registration and inspection units raise less than one fifth of their cost through income that is generated by the units, but that is expected to become 100 per cent within three years. That can be achieved only through massive increases in the level of fees. As we have heard, there is an intention to increase the fees from the current £10 to £95 by 2003 and possibly to as much as £180 by 2004. That is quite a jump. All the bodies that gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee roundly condemned that hike. The committee asked the deputy minister to think again about the issue. I hope that when he sums up, he will indicate that he has done so, although  the Minister for Health and Community Care's opening speech and the letter that I received this morning do not suggest that that will be the case. I will move on to another related problem that NAIRO highlights. It is inevitable that the bulk of the increase in fees will be passed on, in the charge for the care home place, to the client. As we know, local authorities' community care budgets fund about 80 per cent of the places that private and voluntary care providers supply. Therefore, all that will happen is that community care budgets will bear the brunt of the increase in fees. The Minister for Health and Community Care looks puzzled. If she wants to ask for clarification, I will explain the position differently. Does the minister think that it is sensible for money from one pot of public money—the community care budget—to go through a convoluted route to pay to run the commission and the council, which are public bodies? The value of the community care pound becomes less each time it is moved, because of administration costs. Do ministers think that that is best value? No doubt we will hear at the end of the debate. In the Health and Community Care Committee and today, ministers have argued that the increased charges would be covered by increases in the total revenue grant funding to local authorities. When the deputy minister said that to the committee, everyone laughed, because we know that local authorities remain cash-strapped. More important, the money is not ring-fenced. We heard some honest evidence from social work managers, who admitted that they often use community care money for other priorities, if needs must. Voluntary organisations fear that local authorities will not increase their funding, leaving them to find the money for registration fees by cutting staff or services. They are not reassured. The Health and Community Care Committee did not buy the deputy minister's reasoning on funding. I hope that ministers will listen to the overwhelming opposition to the self-funding model. The structure must be revisited to devise a fairer, more workable and more realistic system. The general principle of people paying a fee to register with the council has been accepted, but the fee should be based on a person's ability to pay. It may not be fair to expect a childminder or social work student to pay the same as someone who is in well-paid employment. Many organisations that gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee backed the introduction of a children's rights commissioner. Some believed that proposals should be in the bill. I have sympathy with the argument that Children 1 st , Barnardos Scotland  and NCH Scotland made in evidence: that they would prefer separate legislation to create the post of children's commissioner rather than risk the role being curtailed by the bill's scope. I am relaxed about how the post is introduced—whether in the bill or through the Education, Culture and Sport Committee—but the Executive must make progress on its establishment, to afford Scotland's children the same level of protection as Welsh children will receive under the Care Standards Act 2000. The bill is an opportunity to improve the delivery and monitoring of care for some of the most vulnerable people in society. We are all behind that aim. The committee has invested much time and energy in hearing a great deal of evidence. There is much agreement and consensus across the parties on what needs to change in the bill. I hope that when the minister meets the key stakeholder groups next week he will listen to what they have to say about the changes that are required—the bill will be all the better for them.

Will the minister tell us what progress is being made to ensure that, as part of the integration into  the education system of young asylum seekers, funding is being made available to local authorities and schools, as it has been made available to the Department for Education and Employment in England?

There has been much to agree about in this debate, particularly on Nicola Sturgeon's reference to "that lot over there". The Tories question why they have to keep defending their previous role concerning the NHS—the answer probably lies in the question itself. The Tories' health service legacy has been to turn doctors into accountants and for Ben Wallace to maintain that there is nothing wrong with the internal market raises the same questions about how safe the NHS would be in Tory hands, however unlikely that is in the near future.

No. I am saying that the Tories cannot be trusted with the NHS. Nor am I sure how much Labour can be trusted with the health service. John McAllion talked about needing a wee bit more time to find out whether Labour's health policy will work and mentioned the necessity of the hair-shirt years. However, John McAllion does not have to wear that hair shirt; instead, the hair shirts are worn by the tens of thousands of people who are waiting for treatment in the NHS. That brings me to the motion. Everyone "applauds the vital contribution of community-based health professionals to the health and care of the people of Scotland". The SNP will not argue with that. However, as well as applauding, why does the Executive not listen to the views of those same community-based health professionals? I have heard nothing from the minister this morning that indicates that she is listening to their concerns. The health professionals would prefer her to listen to those concerns and act accordingly, instead of applauding but ignoring them. The BMA survey on the views of GPs in Scotland on morale, service provision and priorities says it all and must make uncomfortable reading for the minister. I am sure that its timing caused her a great deal of irritation. Instead of lodging self-congratulatory motions, the minister would do better to reflect on the results of the survey. I remind her again of some of its findings. The majority of Scottish GPs claim to suffer from low morale and claim that morale has decreased over the past five years. The majority of GPs say that they are now more likely to consider a career change or retirement than they were five years ago. The majority of GPs would not recommend the career to young people, which is a problem, given that we will have a shortage of doctors in the near future. Finally, a large majority of GPs believe that the level of stress in their jobs has risen in the past five years. The survey does not make good reading, but the minister is too busy with another conversation to listen. The main change that patients and GPs want is for GPs to get more time to spend with their patients. That would improve the quality of care that people receive. GPs gave that idea priority in the survey, and patients also want that change. However, such a move would be dependent on longer consultations, which would require delegation to other staff to free up the GPs' time. That will not happen by accident. One of the initiatives that the minister talked  about was ensuring that patients get access to an appropriate member of the primary care team in no more than 48 hours. I agree that that is a good aim, but no deadline is attached to achieving it and it is difficult to see how we will get from the situation that we are in to the realisation of that aim. I have heard nothing on that from the minister; perhaps the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will tell us what the time scale will be and how that aim will be achieved. The role of the LHCCs has featured much in this debate. The survey shows that 68 per cent of GPs think that LHCCs have made no change to the quality of patient care and that nearly 60 per cent are pessimistic about their future development. Those figures are very disappointing, because LHCCs could and must be levers in the health service to drive improvements and improve local services. I do not always agree with what Richard Simpson says, but he made some important points about the LHCCs. Many members listened when he talked about the loss of innovation, as he touched on an important issue. We must consider how we can restore motivation and innovation to the health service without requiring a return to the internal market. That point was well made. Giving commissioning powers to the LHCCs would be one way of doing that. I disagree with Richard Simpson's comments about waiting lists. He said that waiting lists were not a barometer of the health service, and that we were wrong consistently to raise the issue. The problem could be solved easily if the Minister for Health and Community Care acknowledged that it was a mistake to set the target in the first place. If she withdrew today the pledge that the Labour party made, I do not think that any member would raise the issue again.

Mr Rumbles has his facts wrong. That commitment was made in the 1999 manifesto and it has not been delivered.

Mr Rumbles should have learned that he must choose his friends carefully. The Liberal Democrats have chosen to be friends with the Labour party and must stand by the commitments that it has made. Some important points have been made in today's debate. Although I attacked the Conservatives at the beginning of my speech, I  agree with Mary Scanlon's view that when problems arise in the acute sector, they impact on primary care, and that there is a recycling of people through the system that is a problem for the health service. Christine Grahame spoke about health managers not listening at local level. That was a constant theme throughout the debate, which Adam Ingram related to mental health services in particular. He spoke knowledgeably about the way in which mental health has become the poor relation in the health service, despite the fact that it is one of the Government's three clinical priorities. The Millan report has highlighted an over-stretched and inadequate service. Despite the hard work of many staff, and community pharmacists in particular, we have a service that, in many ways, is crumbling at local level. Like Adam Ingram, I have spoken to a number of carers. I met members of the Tayside Carers Support Project, all of whom said that they were trying to fit the person for whom they cared into services that were wholly inappropriate at local level because the services that were required were not available. As a matter of urgency, we must examine what is happening to mental health services. Community pharmacists have been mentioned. We agree that their role must be extended and that their skills need to be utilised to better effect. The Executive has our support in its attempt to do that. This debate has been useful in identifying the key issues for the primary care sector: staff morale; resourcing; structures, particularly the role of LHCCs; and the better utilisation of staff and their skills. We all want those improvements to happen. The SNP realises that the primary care sector is the key to delivering a better health service and preventing people from being admitted to the acute sector in the first place. Janis Hughes said that prevention is better than cure. I am sure that everyone in the chamber can agree with that.

I congratulate Trish Godman on introducing such a very important motion for debate today. I first went to a hospice—Strathcarron—on a school visit when I was in my teens. Some of us were apprehensive about what we would find there—I think that children have a fear of death. We found a warm place with caring staff. We realised that it was a place of life rather than death, as so much was going on and it had a calm, safe atmosphere. That feeling has stayed with me. Such visits should be encouraged as they allay fears and are very positive experiences for young people. I will address a couple of the issues relating to the hospice movement that Trish Godman outlined. The question of funding has to be resolved, as stable funding is required. We must ensure that health boards fully meet their  commitments to provide 50 per cent of the running costs of hospices. From speaking to people in the hospice movement, I know that hospices want to retain their independence. If health boards meet that commitment, hospices will be able to be independent and have the stable base that they need so that they are not in constant fear of funding crisis. I hope that the minister will tell us that he will act on that point. The problem of annual negotiations with local authorities also has to be addressed. Perhaps we should consider a requirement for local authorities to contribute rather than a voluntary arrangement. At the moment, the situation is one of treatment by postcode and hospices may be unable to continue to operate in a particular area. That cannot be allowed to happen. Finally, I will address the issue of prescription drugs, which Trish Godman outlined clearly. We cannot have hospices being required to pay for prescribed drugs while people are staying with them. That requirement takes away a sizeable chunk of their scarce resources, which they have worked so hard to raise. I hope that the minister will address that point. I end by paying tribute to the Daily Record readers who have contributed so much to the funding of Rachel House, and to the thousands of other people who contribute regularly and ensure that our hospice movement continues.

I will highlight two sets of excluded children. First, children and young people with special needs are often excluded by society. Services are patchy. The level of service that they receive often depends on where they live. We need to ensure that receiving a high quality of service does not depend on where one lives—we must end services by postcode. This week, I met a group of parents of disabled children called Fastrax. Those parents have strong views. They feel abandoned by service providers. They produced a report called "Intensive care: support in the first few weeks of life and then what?", which makes interesting reading. They complain that their needs and the needs of their children are not being recognised. Rather, they are slotted into services that often do not meet their needs. Their campaign focuses on the need for better equipment for their children. They believe that, through mobility, independence can be achieved, which will lead to self-esteem and confidence. The parents' main concern is about poor  wheelchair provision for children in Scotland. That is highlighted in the Scottish paediatric wheelchair service survey, which was carried out in 1998. That survey showed that parents were very dissatisfied with the quality of wheelchairs. Parents find them difficult to transport and manoeuvre, and too heavy; they think that they do not meet the needs of their children. At the moment, many families spend about £2,000 on a wheelchair for their child. That cost recurs as the child grows and develops. Parents make the point that a quality wheelchair, which is matched to the child's needs, can make the difference between active participation in society and exclusion from society. What will the Minister for Health and Community Care do to improve paediatric wheelchair services? Will she meet the parents who produced the report to hear what they say? Secondly, I will address the plight of refugee children—a cause that is close to my heart. The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care heard the views of refugee children last week when they visited the Parliament. They talked about many problems with service provision, particularly relating to inadequate education resources. In England, ring-fenced money is given to education departments to meet the needs of refugee children. That is not the case in Scotland, but I am aware that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs is considering that matter. The Save the Children report, "We Didn't Come Here for Fun", provides an insight into the concerns and fears of refugee children living in Scotland. I hope that the Scottish Executive will respond positively to the many recommendations made in the report and support the UK Government in removing the reservation in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child for refugee children. That would be a major step forward. We have agreed on much this afternoon. I hope that we get a bit more action and fewer words.

Is the First Minister ashamed to be part of a Government that for four years has presided over one in five of our elderly people in hospitals and nursing homes suffering from malnutrition? Does he agree with the comments of Jess Barrow of Age Concern, that the NHS is driven to cut costs? Will he take the opportunity to apologise to the thousands of elderly people and their families who the Government has failed to protect properly?

Will the member give way on that point?

What a fine mess the Executive has got itself into this afternoon. It is the equivalent of causing a fight in an empty room. It is remarkable. As Margaret Smith and others have rightly said, it is unfortunate that the Executive has found it necessary to seek to amend the motion. I am not sure whether the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care found Donald Gorrie's speech helpful. From his facial expression, I think that he probably did not. Most of us found it astonishing when Donald Gorrie said that it was important to win the vote because his side had made a mess of things and that members of the coalition parties needed to rally round to bail out the minister. That was a damning indictment of the relationship between the parties in the  coalition. What did it say about the Scottish Parliament's principles of openness and transparency? Where is the openness and transparency in that, and where are the principles? What Donald Gorrie said was absolutely shocking; it is disappointing that it came from someone who usually makes eloquent speeches in the Parliament. In many ways, the words "act upon" are the most important in the motion. We have done the talking and now it is time for action. We want the minister to tell us how and when he will implement all the committee's recommendations—many fine recommendations from a fine report—such as that we should have adequate resources. Although the Executive has provided additional resources, which I welcome, we have a long way to go. We must make sure that money is spent where it is supposed to be spent. A single funding stream should be established to make the best use of those resources—Kay Ullrich's point about resource transfer was well made. We must ensure that GAE is spent on the elderly and not plundered for other areas. We must ensure that essential services, such as home help services, are adequately funded to meet need. The 30,000 home help hours that have been lost, which I have mentioned on a number of occasions, are a resource that must be restored. I hope that the minister will indicate that that will be done. I am pleased that the recommendation to deal with inconsistent charging policies will be acted upon. Better co-ordination between agencies is equally important. Improved service quality will be advanced in great strides by the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, which will establish the Scottish commission for the regulation of care and end the nightmare of malnourished elderly people in our care homes, as highlighted in the weekend's press. I share Nicola Sturgeon's concern about fees. I hope that the minister will address that issue. The Health and Community Care Committee report clearly recommends free personal care. If the Executive did not want to raise doubts about its commitment to personal care, it should not have lodged such an inept, crass and stupid amendment, as Mike Rumbles described it. The minister tried to argue that it was an attempt to welcome the report, but he could just as easily have done that by ending the amendment before "and further notes", because what is further noted is the announcement on 25 January that proposals on personal care would be produced. The wording in the amendment reopens the debate on what the Executive is committed to. If the minister did not want that to happen, he should not have lodged such a badly worded amendment,  so he must take responsibility for the tone of the debate. The report contains many good recommendations and I was looking forward to a positive debate, because we all assumed that the matter was closed. The minister is the one who has chosen to reopen it today, so he should take responsibility. At this morning's Health and Community Care Committee meeting, the minister refused to provide a definition of personal care or to endorse the definition provided by Sutherland. His refusal to do so adds weight to my previous remarks. The Executive's history on the subject of free personal care, the minister's reluctance to define personal care this morning and in today's debate, and the Executive's amendment to the motion mean that the minister can hardly blame members for being more than a little sceptical and concerned about the Executive's commitment to implement free personal care for all of Scotland's elderly.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the current total level is of debt accumulated by all national health service trusts. (S1O-2945)

It has been widely reported that the total outstanding debts of the health trusts in Scotland could be as high as £150 million. Will the minister give us a categoric assurance that  that is not the case and that any deficit will have no impact on already overstretched services to patients?

Tommy Sheridan opened the debate by saying that he does not know whether there is a causal link between MMR and autism—that goes for most members, if not all. However, we know that there are parental fears. We have all met parents who have real concerns. No matter how many reassurances are given by the Government, the BMA or anyone else, a sizeable minority of parents will decide not to give their children the MMR vaccine. We must accept that over the years there has been growing public scepticism about Government reassurances. Rightly or wrongly, people no longer accept everything that the Government or the medical profession says. What can we do? We must accept that the result is that some parents will choose not to vaccinate their children. That is the worst possible outcome and puts children in real danger. Margaret Smith made an important point. The BMA press release talks about "informed choice", yet people are being offered no choice. What is the choice? It is our responsibility to take a pragmatic approach to the matter. In those cases where parents are refusing MMR, we should consider offering a single vaccine—measles in the first instance, followed by mumps and rubella after the required period.  The problem will not go away. Parents will not change their minds on the vaccine. I look forward to the report of the Health and Community Care Committee, which is likely to be both informative and useful. However, at the end of the day, we will have to come to a decision. We should offer parents the choice that they require and deserve. I hope that we can reach a point where we agree on that.

The minister said earlier that the acute services review is not driven by money. Why then have the health board and the trust said that the affordability of the Tayside acute services review is entirely dependent on eliminating the existing deficit? How can services be developed unless the deficit is dealt with? How can the deficit be dealt with without the assistance of the Executive?

rose—

Will the minister join me in endorsing the SNP policy commitment to provide free fruit for every primary school child in Scotland?

Is Mr Rumbles saying that his Labour colleagues—whose virtues he has been extolling for the past couple of minutes—were wrong to focus on the issue of health service waiting lists?

Does Mr Rumbles disagree with the Executive on anything?

This has been a good debate, and I hope that it ends up being a defining moment for the Parliament. As many members have said, it is about the will of the majority of the Parliament prevailing on an issue that is of huge importance to tens of thousands of people throughout Scotland, and their families. If there is to be a defining moment, I want it to be about such an important issue. The SNP welcomes the steps that have been taken to improve the delivery of community care in Scotland. Time and again, when the minister has made an announcement that will improve the lives of elderly people in Scotland, we have said that we welcome it. This is not a choice between what the minister has announced and what is in the SNP's motion; they are not mutually exclusive. Members—including Margaret Smith—have said time and again that this is about completing the last part of the jigsaw. If this is about dancing on the head of a pin, as Susan Deacon claimed, why all the fuss? It is an awful lot of fuss about a very small pin. The more the minister refuses to accept the will of the Parliament, the more stubborn for its own sake she is seen to be, because her arguments against full implementation have become weaker and weaker in every debate that we have had on the issue. The case that has been made by all members cannot be opposed rationally by Susan Deacon or Malcolm Chisholm; they have lost the argument, so it is time to accept the consequences and do the right thing. To be fair, Susan Deacon has remained consistently opposed to full implementation, unlike her leader, who has given clear signals in support of full implementation over the past few weeks. At least that has given us the opportunity today to finish the debate once and for all, by accepting the majority will of Parliament fully to implement Sutherland and to get on with the job of doing so. Susan Deacon implied that that would be a dangerous road, as services might not be in place to cope with the consequences of free personal care. That could be solved easily, by today setting a defined and clear time scale during which the necessary services could be established and put  in place. There is no problem. We do not need another review; we need an unequivocal statement from the minister that she will commit herself to full implementation within a clear time scale. Nothing less than that will do. We do not want any more of the delay that Christine Grahame mentioned—three and a half years have passed so far. We do not want to wait another six months or another year; we want the statement now. If the SNP motion is passed today, we will expect Susan Deacon to come back with a timetable for the full implementation of Sutherland. That is what we will expect and we will settle for nothing less. Can we do this? Yes, we can. Clear evidence has been given about affordability.

In that case, why has the minister time and again refused to commit herself to the full implementation of Sutherland? That refusal clearly indicates to the Parliament that she does not intend to go through with full implementation unless the Parliament's will prevails and she is forced to do so.

I want to continue. Affordability is not an issue. The last piece of the jigsaw is estimated to cost about £25 million. Henry McLeish has said: "We will be spending approximately £55 billion every three years. Is anyone really suggesting that, with the teachers and with the Sutherland report, that is money that cannot be made available out of our budget?" If Henry McLeish does not seem to think so, I will take his word for it. We should be able to find the £25 million without any great difficulty.

That is a rather misleading statement. I do not believe that Sir Stewart Sutherland was misleading the Parliament when he stated that the final piece of the jigsaw would cost £25 million.  Most members would accept that Sir Stewart knows what he is talking about. I will briefly refer to the amendment in the name of Richard Simpson, who either drew—or was given—the short straw. When I became a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I was aware that a great deal of work had been done on the Sutherland report and the issue of long-term care, and I commend the committee on that work. However, when the committee reached the view that the Sutherland recommendations should be implemented in full, Richard Simpson did not want his dissent minuted, nor did he produce a minority report. Why has he now lodged an amendment that runs counter to the conclusions of the committee's report? I find his behaviour extremely disappointing. I hope that this will be the Parliament's finest hour. As George Lyon said, although no party has a majority in its own right in the Parliament, the majority of the Parliament wants to do the right thing for the tens of thousands of elderly people and their families throughout Scotland. Today, they are waiting to see what the Parliament will do—I do not think that they will be disappointed.

While he is reminding us of what he said in the chamber, perhaps the minister could also comment on what he said when he was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee: "Ultimately, we should not change what we think because of what the Executive thinks".—[ Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee , 6 September 2000; c 1148.] What has changed for him since then?

It gives me no pleasure to speak in this debate because I sense an ever-increasing sense of frustration on all sides of the chamber. Members of all parties do not want what is proposed for the road network, but we have no opportunity to force  the minister to delay the process. I appeal to all members to find a way to force the minister to abide by this morning's clearly expressed will of the Parliament. Twenty months ago, when the elections for this Parliament were held, the people of Scotland voted in the belief that a new political system would allow decision making in Scotland to be conducted in an open, transparent and democratic manner. I believe that that view is endorsed by the vast majority of members but—sadly—the events that surround the awarding of contracts for trunk road maintenance have not been open, transparent or democratic. Instead those events have demonstrated the worst excesses of an episode of "Yes, Minister". Several examples illustrate that. The January issue of Surveyor magazine said that "the financial model had skewed the comparison so that prices were distorted and not based on value for money". As a result of the flaws in the tender process, legal challenges were subsequently mounted against the Government by the council consortium. The latest challenge was rejected on the basis of time, but the petitioners were found to have a prima facie case. Perhaps it would be helpful to emphasise that each of the four consortia comprised local authorities in partnership with the private sector. Members who have tried to speak about public sector protectionism are quite wrong. The system should protect the public and private sectors and should be designed to get best value for the taxpayer. That will not happen if the minister gets her way. On Tuesday, the minister awarded the contract, subject to an urgent independent review of one aspect of the assessment process. That same assessment process has been the subject of court action during the past fortnight and has been vigorously defended by Government lawyers in court. If the minister accepts that there is a problem, why did she go ahead and award the contracts? It is a ludicrous situation.

I agree totally with Fergus Ewing. I am sure that an awful lot of scandals will come to light during the inquiry by the Transport  and the Environment Committee. However, it will be too late—by that point the horse will have bolted.

The minister's defensiveness says a lot. I hope that she continues to dig a hole for herself. The reality is that several hundred local government workers throughout Scotland have had their jobs placed in jeopardy because of the minister's decision. Significant questions about future provision of services remain unanswered. In a briefing paper, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities says that about 500 full-time equivalent jobs are dependent on the contracts. The loss of those contracts will have a significant impact on the operation of many DLOs, which rely on trunk road maintenance for about 30 per cent of their income. Loss of that income will have an impact on the viability of their whole operations and a consequent impact on the maintenance and repair of the local road network.

No, I have taken a lot of interventions. Many DLOs also produce a surplus that they return to the local councils at the end of the year. For example, the three councils in Tayside have budgeted for a surplus of around £1 million from Tayside Contracts. Given the loss of such income, will the Minister for Finance and Local Government give a different settlement to local government? I doubt it. To sum up, I believe that a lot of questions need to be asked. When the Transport and the Environment Committee has its inquiry, a lot of facts will come out about the process that will prove the points that are being made today. The problem is that that will happen after the horse has bolted. I appeal to concerned members; let us do something about this and make the minister delay the process. That is the will of the Parliament.

Will Andy Kerr give way?

The minister just said that the courts vindicated the Executive's position, but did not the judge of the north-east challenge find that the petitioners had made a prima facie case, although the case was rejected for timing reasons? The minister is telling the Parliament an untruth. Will she correct what she said?

Age Concern Scotland called on the Scottish Executive to make a clear, unequivocal commitment to the introduction of free personal care for all older people. It asked the Executive to announce a deadline by which all personal care costs will be met from the public purse. Why have the minister and the Government let Age Concern down? Why have the minister and the Government let down the estimated 100,000 people in Scotland who would benefit from free personal care if Sutherland was fully  implemented? Why will the Government not invest the £25 million needed to bridge the gap to meet the personal care costs of all Scotland's elderly people? The Government will have £53 million in its reserves; using half of that would meet the full personal care costs of Scotland's elderly people. Finally, why does Government prefer to listen to London Labour rather than to the tens of thousands of frail older people living in Scotland who have been let down by the minister's statement?

The SNP is happy to support the principles of the bill, although we have concerns about the process. The proposal to end the preserved rights system is welcome, as it leaves residents at a disadvantage, both financially and in not having their care needs properly met. The widening of the categories of registered professionals who are allowed to prescribe is also welcome. Clearly, widening prescribing rights will reduce the need for routine visits to GPs, which will, we hope, free up time for GPs to spend with patients. However, two questions remain for the minister to answer. First, will he confirm that there will be a rigorous and validated education and training programme and closer links between professionals to protect the patient and professional accountability? Secondly—as Mary Scanlon asked—will safeguards be developed to ensure communication between multi-prescribers and so avoid potentially harmful interaction of drugs that have been prescribed by different health professionals? I look forward to hearing the minister's response to those questions. As I said, the content of the bill is to be commended, but the process by which this and other Sewel motions are presented to the Parliament leaves a lot to be desired. The memorandum that is attached to the bill says: "Parliament's approval is sought to include devolved issues in the UK Bill." The motion seeks the agreement of the Parliament that "the relevant provisions to achieve these ends in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament." However, it is presumptuous to introduce a Sewel motion for approval so late in the bill's process at Westminster. What if this Parliament were not minded to support the bill? As Nicola Sturgeon said, the explanatory notes that accompanied the bill at Westminster say: "At the request of the Scottish Executive and by the approval of the Scottish Parliament clause 49 amends devolved legislation concerning Scotland so that preserved rights can cease across the whole of Great Britain on the same day." To me, that suggests that approval had already  been given when the bill had its second reading last week. That is misleading to MSPs and to MPs. It might be appropriate for the Procedures Committee to consider suitable timetabling of Sewel motions. I look forward to the response of the committee's convener to that.

The minister will probably be aware that Her Majesty's Government's Home Office is currently undertaking a review of the stigmatising voucher scheme, the deadline for which is next Friday. Can the minister confirm whether he will submit evidence to that review about the operation of the voucher scheme in Scotland?

During the health debate this morning, Frank McAveety said that the waiting lists pledge in Labour's 1999 manifesto was a mistake. That was later contradicted by the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, who said that the Executive would deliver on the waiting lists pledge by 2002. Who is right? If it is Malcolm Chisholm,  why did the Minister for Health and Community Care make no reference in her statement to delivering on the waiting lists pledge?

Today's debate has offered an important opportunity for the Parliament to set the context for the launch of the national health plan. I am glad that Malcolm Chisholm recognised that the SNP has provided such an opportunity, unlike the Minister for Health and Community Care, who has allocated only 45 minutes to a statement that we will hear soon. I am glad that she has blessed us with her presence, even though she seems otherwise engaged at the moment. At a time when, as we go into winter, the public regard the health service as the critical issue, it is not good enough that we will not have had the opportunity to debate the plan after we have had the opportunity to read it. This debate is on the current state of the NHS, and anything that is announced by the Minister for Health and Community Care following the debate must be considered in that context. There has been a reduction in the number of acute beds, and 3,000 beds are occupied by people who do not need them. There are 900 fewer nurses than there were in 1996 and hospital waiting lists have increased by 15 per cent since September 1999. It is interesting that the Government's pledge on waiting lists—the pledge that must never speak its name—has conveniently disappeared from the minister's statement yet again. However, that pledge was clear—it was in black and white—in the Government's 1999 manifesto. I thought that black and white pledges had to be delivered on, but clearly that is not the case when the Labour party is in power.  Only 13 per cent of Scots who were surveyed in an Executive poll believed that there had been an improvement in the performance of the NHS in the past two years. Many believed that the care element of the service has been lost. We need an open and honest debate about the state of the NHS—something that the Minister for Health and Community Care finds difficult to handle. She has consistently denied the scale of the problems in the NHS and that is part of the problem. Her record is one of denial, excuses and damage limitation. When problems were experienced in Tayside, "Crisis? What crisis?" was the call from the minister. That is perhaps not surprising, as she was not even aware of the 47 per cent increase in the number of people on waiting lists in Tayside, or had conveniently forgotten about it. I am sorry that Richard Simpson feels unable to vote for the SNP motion, but then he has never voted for any SNP motion. If we lodged a motion to say that Christmas day would fall on 25 December, he would probably vote against it because it was an SNP motion. Richard Simpson should know that we will not fall for that one. The minister and the Executive have failed to deliver on their key manifesto pledges. Members will remember their key manifesto pledge to cut waiting lists. We can talk about waiting times, if that would be preferable, and about the 43 per cent of people who are having to wait for longer than a year. It does not matter whether we talk about waiting lists or waiting times; the pledges have not been honoured. When will a new Labour politician answer for the Executive's failure to deliver on its commitments? The arrogance of this Administration—I note its self-congratulatory amendment—knows no bounds. Although the minister is no longer the missing minister—she arrived only five minutes before the end of a debate that provides the context for the health plan announcement—she is disrespectful of the Parliament and of the NHS in not taking the opportunity to listen to members from all parties. Some members have lauded the shift in resources. Let us be clear: the SNP wants resources to be shifted into the community.

Not just now. I would like to make some progress. We believe that people should be able to remain in their homes. However, the Labour Administration has failed to enable them to do so, because it has implemented cuts in home help services that amount to a loss of nearly 30,000 home help hours. Health visitor numbers and district nurse numbers have fallen, and NHS Direct, which was supposed to have been  launched early this year, has not yet been introduced. Pledge after pledge has not been honoured.

The SNP believes that it is a problem when people are discharged into the community without adequate facilities to help them to remain in their homes. Many of those people end up back in hospital, in acute beds that are then blocked. We have a cycle of people going through the system because Labour has failed to invest in adequate resources to enable them to remain at home. This month, Susan Deacon announced that each health board would get additional nursing staff. That sounds good until one considers that Scotland has lost hundreds of nurses since new Labour came to power—nearly 900 nurses since 1996. The Minister for Health and Community Care's encouragement to trusts to use agency staff flies in the face of the Accounts Commission report that said that such staff should be used only in unforeseen circumstances, which winter pressures cannot be described as. With dropout rates at their highest for four years, the Executive needs to address the key concern in the health plan. Susan Deacon announced that she would be providing more than 700 extra beds across the NHS this winter. However, we have lost 3,000 beds. She is replacing less than one quarter of the beds that have been taken away and she expects us to be grateful. The additional beds that are being provided in Lothian are already full. I see that the minister is shaking her head, but I assure her that that is a fact. Recently released figures show that more than 3,000 people are awaiting discharge from hospital. The main problem is the lack of public funding that is available to purchase residential or nursing home places, which is an issue that was highlighted in the previous debate that the SNP initiated on the matter. The coalition parties have tried to justify the extensive loss of resources to the NHS by arguing that the resources are showing up elsewhere. By showing that community care services are not as they should be, we have scotched that myth. Added to all of that is the debacle over the Sutherland report. Now that the minister has graced us with her presence, perhaps she will tell us whether she has a different position on the matter from Henry McLeish. Will one of them clarify what the position is?

Susan Deacon and Henry McLeish have declined to clarify to Parliament what the position on Sutherland is. We may hear more pledges from the minister, but they are fast becoming empty promises. We need properly funded targets if there are to be improvements. The issue is not the amount of money; it is where the money is spent, why the benefits of additional resources are not being felt and why the Executive is failing to deliver on the targets that it set. I note that Frank McAveety said that the pledge to reduce waiting lists was a mistake. That acknowledgement is some progress, at least.

No. I am winding up. We have waited two years for the national health plan. The Executive's press spin has led us to believe that we should expect something substantial. Expectations have been raised. If the minister cannot meet those expectations, the health plan will be added to the growing list of new Labour failures on health. I suggest that a failure to deliver on Scotland's health plan would be a failure too far. We will have to wait and see. I say to Mr McAveety that, if treating more patients more quickly and with more nurses is considered to derive from a 1970s perspective, I will be happy to get the flares out of the wardrobe and wear them with pride.

Will the member give way?

I am happy to take on Mr Raffan on waiting times. Perhaps he can comment on the fact that the number of patients who have been waiting for more than a year has increased by more than 43 per cent since 1997. Does he think that that is a good record?

rose—

The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care says that there has been a transfer of resources from the NHS to social work, but is not it the case that many people in Scotland are complaining that services in the community are not in place? For example, there has been a reduction of around 29,000 home care hours over the past two years. Where is the transfer of resources? It is not being felt where people need the services.

Will the minister give way?

Will Ian Jenkins give way?

My speech will be brief. I congratulate Scott Barrie on lodging the motion that we are debating today. I agree with him that the closure of the large institutions could not have come fast enough. People with learning difficulties who are settled in the community have positive experiences and success stories. No one wants to return to the bad old days of the big institutions. However, as Scott Barrie said, many people with learning difficulties have experienced bullying and harassment in their community, which is shocking. I had not heard the figure of nine out of 10 people before—that figure should be a wake-up call for us all, given that little action is taken and few incidents are reported to the police. When I worked in community care in the Springburn area of Glasgow, a huge number of issues in relation to harassment of people with learning difficulties were brought to us. I had the opportunity of helping a group of self-advocates—people with learning difficulties who supported other people with learning difficulties to make progress on some of that huge number of issues. They met the police, looked at reporting procedures and set up a system in which advocates were on hand to assist someone to go to the police and file a complaint. That was successful in Springburn, but much more has to be done throughout Scotland. I certainly support Scott Barrie's call for more police training and I welcome the "Let's Keep Safe" booklet as a start.

On behalf of the SNP, I welcome the debate on the national alcohol misuse strategy. The debate is well overdue, as it is more than a year since the Executive first promised to hold it. Furthermore, we will not see the strategy until October next year, which means that it will take the Executive two and a half years to come up with an alcohol strategy for Scotland. That is not good enough. We are all comfortable discussing and condemning drug use, but we are less comfortable with alcohol for the simple reason that it is something that we all—or most of us—drink, and most of us enjoy, particularly at this time of year. However, it is not all joy and merriment when one in five people in Scotland worries about their own or someone else's drinking. Statistically speaking, at least 25 members of the Parliament have a drink problem or know someone who does. Let us be clear. Alcohol is a major public health issue in Scotland. Scotland has a drinking culture and the definition of a good time is often based on how paralytic someone got the night before. Alcohol costs us dearly, socially and economically. Alcohol misuse is an important cause of social exclusion, and the despair caused by poverty and unemployment often leads people to alcohol for comfort. At least 85,000 children in Scotland live with a problem drinker. The problem remains largely hidden, yet we know that drink is a common factor in family break-ups and has clear links to domestic violence. Many children suffer psychological and physical abuse or neglect because of alcohol misuse. Crime and violence are linked to alcohol misuse. Drink is involved in 65 per cent of murders, 75 per cent of stabbings and 41 per cent of assaults and muggings. It is interesting to note that one in five of all violent crimes takes place in and around licensed premises. Therefore, the review of liquor licensing law is to be welcomed. The economic impact of alcohol is huge. Each year 14 million working days are lost because of alcohol-related problems and 25 per cent of accidents at work involve workers who misuse alcohol. Alcohol misuse puts a strain on our health service. The estimated annual cost of hospital treatment for alcohol-related illnesses in Scotland amounts to £180 million. One in seven acute hospital admissions relates to the misuse of alcohol. The number of alcohol-related deaths in Scotland is increasing. A conservative estimate puts the number at about 3,000 a year, which is 10 times the number who die from taking illicit drugs. Despite that, the resources that are dedicated to alcohol misuse are small compared with those dedicated to tackling drugs. As I said to the  minister, the £100 million of new Executive money that will be invested in drug-related services in the next three years is welcome, but there is no matching commitment for alcohol services and initiatives. In the light of the evidence of the harm that is caused to society by alcohol misuse compared with drug misuse, that decision seems hard to justify. How do we begin to tackle our drinking culture?

I agree. However, the amount for drug-related services is significantly more than that for alcohol-related services. I will return to how we tackle our drinking culture. Gone are the days of prohibitionist candidates such as Neddy Scrymgeour, who ousted Churchill from Dundee in 1922 with a landslide victory on the back of doing away with the demon drink. A platform of such candidates in next year's general election would not work in quite the same way. Instead, we need a strategy that is suited to Scotland in the 21 st century. The proposed strategy provides us with an opportunity to consider new ways of tackling alcohol misuse. If we are to have a fresh look at the problem, the collection of information about what works and what does not is important. We need to know what the problems are before we can tackle them and we must define what we are talking about when we discuss alcohol misuse. We must have different strategies to deal with the binge drinker, who tends to be younger and who may become involved in associated violence and criminal activity because of their drinking. We must also address under-age drinking. The SNP supports the use of proof-of-age card schemes as one way of reducing access to alcohol. We should be concerned about under-age drinking when we consider that 40 per cent of 13 to 14-year-olds were drunk when they first had sexual intercourse, leading to unsafe sex and unplanned pregnancies. We must examine the role played by alcohol as the gateway drug to illicit drug use by young people, as there appears to be evidence that alcohol plays an important role. The strategy for under-age drinkers will be different from the strategy that targets consistently heavy drinkers, who could be described as alcoholics and tend to be older. Some people in that group will not stop drinking and will require support to enable them to stay at home, which would prevent their admission to acute hospital beds. That strategy will include having an adequate number of beds available in  rehabilitation units, such as Castle Craig in West Linton, although that will have implications for community care budgets, which have always struggled to cope with that difficult client group. I hope that the minister will confirm that he will consider that issue. The development of a more coherent prevention strategy is crucial. We must put an end to the confusing mixed messages about alcohol consumption. We must evaluate how helpful it is to talk about the number of units that are good, or bad, for people, rather than trying to help people to identify whether alcohol is becoming a problem for them and whether it affects their health, relationships or ability to hold down a job. Any strategy needs to be backed up with adequate resources. Although the £2.5 million that has been earmarked for the development of the strategy is welcome, there is no indication of whether there will be a significant injection of resources for preventive work and service provision. I hope that the minister will give us an indication as to whether significant additional resources for the strategy will be forthcoming. Is there an argument for the hypothecation of some of the massive £660 million that is generated through the Scottish alcohol revenues that are due to be collected this year alone? Perhaps the minister will tell us what he thinks of that. The Scottish Council on Alcohol, which has 30 years of experience in the field, struggles financially. Local councils on alcohol are integral to the strategic delivery of special alcohol services, yet they are funded on a shoestring, often through charitable donations, and they do not know from year to year where their funding will come from. The Scottish Council on Alcohol must be funded adequately. I hope that the minister will address that point.

I am sorry, but I am running out of time. The strategy must be ambitious, but such ambition is not reflected in the targets that are set in "Towards a Healthier Scotland" for reducing the incidence of adults who exceed weekly alcohol limits. The target for men is a mammoth 2 per cent decrease between 1995 and 2005 and, for women, a 1 per cent decrease for the same period. The Executive must raise its ambitions somewhat. We must have a national alcohol strategy that is modelled specifically on Scottish needs but is of an international standard.

We must remember that the  vast majority of Scottish people who consume alcohol use it sensibly and responsibly. However, alcohol is a problem for a sizeable proportion of the population who are affected either directly or indirectly by alcohol misuse. I will conclude with the Scottish Council on Alcohol's comments.

The Scottish Council on Alcohol says: "Scotland requires an alcohol strategy which will have a positive impact on our drinking behaviour and which will adequately fund services to those who need them." We hope that the strategy that is to be produced next October will achieve that aim.

Spending £2.5 million on the strategy for dealing with alcohol misuse is welcome, but measures for tackling drug misuse received £100 million from the Executive. That was obviously welcome, but does the minister agree that the proportion of money being spent on alcohol services is very small when we consider that the alcohol problem is much bigger?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to implement recommendations of the report by Save the Children and the Scottish Refugee Council, "I Didn't Come Here for Fun". (S1O-2645)

As the minister will be aware, the report highlights the experiences of refugee children coming to Scotland and shows that each of them has been subject to some form of racial harassment, abuse or attack. Does the minister see the Scottish Executive having a leadership role in ensuring the rights and needs of children seeking asylum in Scotland? How does he intend to respond to the proposal for a cross-departmental working group on refugee and asylum issues, which is one of the report's key recommendations? As the minister responsible in this area, will he agree to meet the refugee children when they visit the Parliament in the new year and to listen to their concerns directly?

I want to press the Lord Advocate on his arguments against a public inquiry. The Lord Advocate cites time as an argument against a public inquiry, yet the family have waited for more than two years to receive no justice for their son's murder. At lunch time, Mr Chhokar told me: "I just want justice. It is irrelevant how long it takes." The Chhokar family have made it clear that they want a full independent public inquiry, not an inquiry that is conducted in private. After all that has happened and everything that they have been through, should not the family's wishes be met? The Lord Advocate has also failed to explain why he said that "A public inquiry into the issues that are raised by this case would have an extremely damaging effect on the considerable work on anti-racist . . . policy and practice". Will he explain what he means by that? Does the Lord Advocate agree that not holding the inquiry in public will have an extremely damaging effect on the way in which the justice system is viewed by every ethnic minority community in Scotland?

I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this debate on a very important subject. I must say that, until two weeks ago, I had never heard of mesothelioma. Then a constituent visited my surgery and told me her story. It seems that not only shipyard workers contract this disease. This woman worked in a Dundee engineering plant 50 years ago. She was a fit woman and used to visit the gym regularly until June, when she started to experience breathing problems. After she went to the doctor and was referred for tests, she was diagnosed with mesothelioma, which came as a bolt out of the blue. However, when she began to investigate the disease, she found that there was very little research on the condition and, unfortunately, no effective treatment as yet. I have written to the chief medical officer and the Minister for Health and Community Care to find out what research is being carried out or is planned. There are some glimmers of hope. The Cancer Research Campaign has been investigating a new drug cocktail, the compound multi-targeted antifolate or MTA. Such glimmers are important for people who are suffering from the disease. Perhaps the minister will indicate what the future holds for research. The minister might be aware of the comments of Julian Peto, the professor of epidemiology at London University, who has stated that asbestos-related deaths will reach epidemic levels by 2018, outstripping accidents as the prime cause of early death. That is backed up by the Cancer Research  Campaign, which claims that 250,000 western Europeans will die of mesothelioma by 2035. Such statistics are very worrying. Finally, my constituent has now suffered the additional stress of having to argue her case for industrial injuries benefit and to prove how she contracted the condition, despite the fact that it happened 50 years ago. Surely that cannot be right. Would not a system of no-blame compensation be more appropriate in these cases? In conclusion, I ask the minister to inform us of the state of research, to make representations to the social security minister about industrial injuries benefit and to investigate the whole issue of compensation.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the drug beta interferon is subject to postcode prescribing. (S1O-2538)

Will the Minister for Health and Community Care comment on the treatment of my constituent, Vivian Howie, who suffers from MS and whose neurologist at Ninewells said that she would be an ideal candidate for beta interferon? Tayside Health Board told her that she could not be given the drug because its budget of £70,000 had run out, but Fife Health Board told her that beta interferon could be prescribed for her if she were to move to Fife, because it prescribes to all who meet the medical criteria. Does the minister agree that that is a classic case of postcode prescribing, and that Vivian Howie should not have to move to Fife to receive beta interferon? If the minister agrees, what will she do about my constituent's case?

My constituent, Vivian Howie, needs to know now whether she must pack her bags and move to Fife. What will the Minister for Health and Community Care do about her case?

Ben Wallace bizarrely suggested that I should be picking on 14-year-olds. I wonder whether he was volunteering to go first. I look forward to the unveiling of the community care inquiry report. I know that the Health and Community Care Committee has been working hard on it for 10 months. Margaret Smith said that she had given 10 months of her life to that inquiry. I have given 10 years of my life to working in the community care sector, which I care about passionately. The community care inquiry will be far-reaching and will make many important recommendations on the way in which community care should be delivered. It is widely known that the SNP has pursued the issue of current waiting lists for nursing homes and residential homes for some weeks, as Christine Grahame outlined. I questioned the health minister on two occasions about the matter and failed to get an adequate response. The SNP brought the motion to Parliament this morning to try to get answers to our questions, but unfortunately we have yet again not been given any. It is plain to any rational person that the debate is about the here and now. Malcolm Chisholm let the cat out of the bag when, in response to my intervention, he failed to confirm that there would be a substantive response to the committee's report from the Executive before the Christmas  recess. He is clearly saying, "Watch this space." It will be January at the earliest. That is not good enough for the 2,000 people who are now on waiting lists. They require care to prevent them from being in a vulnerable situation.

That flies in the face of Margaret Smith's contention that the SNP was wrong to bring the debate to the chamber because there will be a similar one in two weeks' time. Who is right and who is wrong? I am confused on that point, if Malcolm Chisholm does not mind my saying so. The debate is about what happens over the next few weeks as we head into winter. It is disappointing that certain members of Parliament have chosen to squander the opportunity by indulging in tittle-tattle instead of addressing the needs of their constituents. People outside Parliament will not understand why members who are supposed to be interested in community care have taken their ball away and have not contributed to the debate as they should have done. That is disappointing.

I look forward to those passionate points when they are made—probably in January. We are talking about the here and now—the 2,000 people who cannot wait for us to deliberate in January because they need support now. The SNP began the inquiry because the Executive did not have the information that it should have had. Mr Chisholm should consider why the Executive did not have the information about waiting lists. We have done the work for Malcolm Chisholm. We have built up a picture of the here and now; of the immediate issues that must be addressed before it is the middle of winter. As my colleagues have outlined, the  picture is worrying. Waiting lists are long for both hospitals and those at home. The returns that we received show that almost 900 people are vulnerable and inappropriately placed. At least 2,000 people in Scotland are awaiting a place in a nursing or residential home. Let us be clear: the £10 million that was announced by the Executive for that purpose—albeit welcome—is inadequate to meet those needs. If members do not believe me, they should read the letters from the many local authorities which say that £10 million will not be enough to meet those needs. At least 75 per cent of the people who are on those waiting lists will remain on them—the evidence is there for all to see.

I have never before heard of a council being criticised for listening to people and doing the right thing—keeping home care in the local authority. It is strange that a council is being criticised for doing the right thing—only the Tories could make such a criticism. Let us return to the crux of the matter. Scottish Care, the organisation that represents 60 per cent of private and residential care homes in Scotland, claims that it will be impossible to move the elderly out of beds that they do not need because councils cannot afford the places. Nicola Sturgeon's quote from Anthony Toft showed that people in the health profession are less than convinced that the procedures that are being put in place will protect elderly people this winter. Members have cited examples from local authorities throughout Scotland. Perhaps Margaret Jamieson should turn her attention to the 62 people in East Ayrshire who have been assessed as needing nursing home or residential care, but for whom no funding is available. If she wants to see the letter that I received from East Ayrshire Council, I shall give it to her after the debate. That is where the problems lie, and it is unfortunate that members have not turned their attention to those important issues this morning. In the constituency of the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, 34 people are in the same position through a lack of funding. I would be happy to give him the letter from the City of Edinburgh Council which identifies that fact. People are being forced to resort to the courts to receive the care that they have been assessed as requiring. Mr Arthur MacGregor, who is 90 years old, was assessed as requiring full-time care, yet South Lanarkshire Council told him that he was  16 th on a waiting list of 199 people and so it could not provide him with funding for seven months. We want to know about the plight of Mr MacGregor. We want to know what the minister is going to do for Mr MacGregor. The debate is about the here and now. The situation appears to be even more serious when one considers that the needs of those who require a nursing home or residential care place will be intensive while they remain at home. The present home care service is insufficient to meet those people's needs. Local authority after local authority has confirmed that services are not in place to meet the needs of people who require intensive home care. We have lost 30,000 home care hours since Labour came to power—a point that Malcolm Chisholm did not try to deny. That means that authorities are even less likely to be able to provide intensive home care support. People will be left in vulnerable situations over the winter months, and that is not good enough. Although we welcome the additional resources that were announced by the Minister for Health and Community Care last month, they will not come on stream, in the main, until April 2001. We want to know about the here and now: we want to know what the minister will do between now and April. We have had no answer to that question this morning. There is nothing to dispute in the Conservative amendment: we agree with the full implementation of the Sutherland recommendations and have been calling for it for much longer than the Tories have. Yet again, the minister has chosen not to give the Parliament an answer on when the recommendations of the Sutherland report will be implemented in full. Nevertheless, I am at a loss to explain why the Tories feel it necessary to remove the crux of the matter—the fact that, although we need action now, resources will not be available until 2001. Only the Tories can explain that. Let me be clear: it is the SNP's duty to be an effective Opposition and to bring these very real concerns to the chamber. We will not shirk from that responsibility, even though others might. We want to discuss the real issues that affect the people of Scotland here and now, not the mince that we have heard in other debates. After today, it will be clear to all that some members in the chamber are not so keen to debate those issues and indeed prefer to hide behind smokescreens to avoid doing so.

No, I am just winding up. The Health and Community Care Committee's report on its inquiry will be published at the end of the month, after which the Executive has eight weeks to respond. That takes us beyond the  Christmas recess and the key pressure points of the winter weeks. Today's debate presented an opportunity to question the Executive about people trapped in inappropriate care over those weeks. By taking the stance that they have, members of the Health and Community Care Committee have achieved nothing more than letting the Scottish Executive off the hook. I urge members to support Nicola Sturgeon's motion.

Perhaps Malcolm Chisholm will take this opportunity to say whether the Executive will be in a position to give a full response to the inquiry report in two weeks' time or even before the Christmas recess.

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

Given the real concerns that the member has outlined, does he agree that the SNP was right to give him the opportunity to raise such concerns?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Malcolm Chisholm refers to the resources that were announced on 5 October. Nicola Sturgeon recognised that resources had been made available, but the evidence from local authorities is that that money will deal with only 25 per cent of waiting lists. What does the minister intend to do about the remaining 75 per cent of people on waiting lists?

Will Malcolm Chisholm give way?

I join the long queue to welcome Malcolm Chisholm to his first debate as Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care. I will enjoy sparring with him. I also welcome the tone of the debate. However, we should beware that consensus does not become an excuse for inaction. In December 1999, we agreed that accountability was a problem. In March, we talked about accountability again. Now, in November, we agree again that accountability is a problem and needs to be improved. It is time to stop talking, to publish the health plan and to get on with making the required changes. Financial transparency is crucial. We need to know where the pounds are going and whether they are being spent where they are meant to be. Margaret Smith talked about the £26 million from the tobacco tax. What difference is that making? Margaret Jamieson talked about Ayrshire and Arran Health Board and made the point well that answers cannot be provided locally to questions about where money is being spent. In that case, the health board was spending money where it was not supposed to be spent. Those issues must be addressed. Many members talked about public accountability, which must involve visibility. Procedures must be transparent and we must stop information being shrouded in secrecy. We must also assess some of the announcements that have been made about accountability. We should find out whether there has been any improvement in the representation on boards. What progress has been made? Do the health boards represent a wider pool of people? The local partnership forums were supposed to address many of the problems of accountability—what has happened to them? The patients project is supposed to improve the way in which the NHS communicates with patients and their carers and families. We talked about that in December—what has been achieved to date? We need answers to those questions today. Consultation will be a key issue; it should be more than a formality that involves decisions being made after a sham of consultation has been carried out. Andrew Welsh made a good point about the problems at Tayside Health Board. We need to improve the levels of openness and accountability—patients deserve that and have a right to expect it. I note Susan Deacon's caution on the structural issues. She said that we do not want the health service to face yet another major restructure. However, I echo George Lyon's point that we must do something about the layer upon layer of  bureaucracy and quangos. I reiterate Nicola Sturgeon's points on the need to have a bit of ambition and vision—we hope to see that in the health plan. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will accept that the SNP amendment is a genuine attempt to strengthen the motion by adding to it public and staff involvement and a recognition that change must be resourced adequately. The issue of resources is important—change must be resourced adequately if it is to be successful. We must also remember the points made by Hugh Henry about the language that is used sometimes—we, too, may be guilty of talking in tongues in the chamber. Hugh's comments about renationalising the health service will stay with me after the debate. He was absolutely right, because the public want a health service that has them at its heart. They want a health service that gives patients the No 1 priority and that ends postcode prescribing, so that it does not matter where in Scotland one lives. They want a truly national health service. We have heard about the problems that are caused by out-of-date and inadequate equipment and by waiting times—depending where one lives, one's cancer may not be treated in time. We have heard from many people throughout Scotland about the need for clean wards, which is a basic point. When we talk about the NHS, we should remember the people's priorities. We want the health plan to be issued before the Christmas recess and I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will give us a commitment to hold a full debate on the plan when it is published.

Small businesses are the linchpin of the Scottish economy—98.8 per cent of all businesses in Scotland employ fewer than 50 people and small businesses employ 47.6 per cent of the total Scottish work force. It is very important that we give all the support we can to our small-business community. A couple of weeks ago, I attended a useful meeting with the Dundee branch of the Federation of Small Businesses, at which I spoke to everybody in the room about the issues that affect them. The same problems and barriers were mentioned time and time again, such as the problems of accessing finance for start-up and growth, local bureaucracy, and the maze of advice agencies. Of course, the main issue that was raised was the burden of business rates. Anyone who had any doubts about the arguments in favour of retaining the uniform business rate should have attended that meeting: everybody in the room said that it would be a disaster to move away from the uniform business rate. It would be particularly disastrous in a city such as Dundee, where because of the lack of Executive funding for local government, the cash-strapped council would be extremely tempted to raise the level of the business rate in the city to make good the shortfall in funding. Of course, that would drive small businesses beyond the city boundaries. There was unanimous support for the retention of a uniform business rate scheme, albeit with the introduction of a system of relief for small businesses.  Small businesses pay a disproportionate level of rates in relation to their profit and turnover—they pay 10 times as much as larger firms. Business rates are a tax burden on the occupancy of property and have nothing to do with the income that is generated by the business. The burden is made worse by the fact that revaluation sometimes results in rates increasing above the rate of inflation. We need to lessen that burden to enable our small business community to thrive. Too few Scottish businesses start up and too few survive. The current annual rate of business start-up is below that of 1995, so there is no room for complacency and it is crucial that we remove some of the barriers. For a long time, the SNP has proposed a banded system for business rates. I am happy that the Local Government Committee has undertaken a review of business rates and come out in favour of a tapered small business rate relief scheme. I look forward to seeing the detail when the scheme is presented to Parliament.

The details of any scheme will have to be debated. It is of note that two of the key proposals were self-funding schemes, so schemes would not necessarily have to be a burden on the Parliament. This debate is about the principle. It is also about hearing what the Scottish Executive thinks about proposals and what its priorities are. It is about which scheme the Executive favours, rather than my personal preference. As well as addressing business rates, we need a package of measures for small businesses. Access to finance remains a problem. It is frustrating that the Parliament cannot tackle all the underlying problems that affect small businesses—they, unfortunately, remain the responsibility of the Westminster Parliament—such as high interest rates, the strength of sterling and the hikes in fuel tax. All those issues were raised at the meeting that I attended in Dundee. That is why we argue that this Parliament requires more powers, genuinely to tackle the problems faced by the small business community. We can tackle the unfair burden of business rates on small businesses. I hope that, after 11 months of dilly-dallying, we will hear some answers this morning.

Overall, this has been a good debate, apart, perhaps, from the rewriting of life under the Tories by Ben Wallace. The Tory Government introduced dental charges in the first place, so he has a brass neck. I want to focus on some of the key issues that have been raised today. The motion talks of "commitment to an . . . accessible NHS dental service". That is laudable, but we have heard evidence in the debate today that NHS dental services are far from accessible. It has been pointed out that, since Labour came to power, the number of adults registered with dentists has dropped to less than half the adult population. The number of children who are registered with a general dental practitioner has fallen since 1997. The UK has the second highest population:dentist ratio in Europe, almost three times that of Greece. We have a long way to go. Hospital waiting times are also a problem. Let us take the figures for Dundee dental hospital and school. They show that, whereas less than 20 per cent of outpatients had to wait more than nine weeks to be seen in September 1997, nearly half the outpatients had to wait more than nine weeks by March 2000. We have heard from Margaret Ewing and others about the problems in Grampian. I hope that the minister will address those specific problems when summing up. Another problem that has been highlighted is that many people have difficulty accessing an NHS dentist at all. I was contacted today by an Edinburgh resident who has been trying for some time to get on to a dentist's list. He needs a lot of  work done, which will apparently not be compensated sufficiently by the NHS. Dentists are therefore loth to take him on. He has approached nearly 40 dentists, all of whom have refused him. He currently survives by taking regular painkillers, and sees a general practitioner for antibiotics when he gets a tooth abscess. That sort of thing cannot continue, and I ask the minister to address the problem of accessibility. There has been agreement that Scotland's oral health remains poor, particularly compared to that of people in England, and that the oral health of children remains particularly bad. While I agree with the emphasis given in the action plan to increased oral health promotion, that sits uneasily with the points that were made during the debate about the plethora of sugary products that are being promoted in our schools. That is not joined-up thinking, and I hope that the minister will give an adequate explanation, as her deputy minister failed to do so. All in all, the minister's record on dental health is not good, and she cannot be complacent. That is why the SNP wants real action to be taken. The abolition of charges for dental check-ups would be a start. As has been pointed out, that was a policy previously held by the Lib Dems. Indeed, it was in their manifesto—the pick-'n'-mix manifesto. It seems incredible, but Nora Radcliffe was hinting that they may even stick it back in their next manifesto, so that they can ignore it again the next time round. They clearly have the intention of never implementing that policy, and voters should take note. The SNP amendment is necessary. There is no doubt that charges for check-ups stop people visiting their dentist. As Nicola Sturgeon said, the British Dental Association poll showed that one in two people were more likely to visit a dentist regularly if the charge for the NHS dental check-up was abolished. That figure speaks for itself. As for cost, Mike Rumbles had better find a better researcher. If he had looked at the SNP's "A Penny for Scotland" document, he would have seen that that was included.

No, thank you. For a mere cost of £14 million over three years, less than 10 per cent of the underspend of this year's health budget, we could restore free dental checks, removing one of the biggest obstacles to people visiting dentists on a regular basis. Unlike the Liberal Democrats' manifesto commitment, we would implement ours. The Lib Dem manifesto clearly gets ignored from one election to the next. I will move on to the serious issue of oral cancer.  I was disappointed that the deputy minister failed to mention it adequately. More than 100 people die in Scotland needlessly from oral cancer each year. The incidence of oral cancer has increased by one third between 1985 and 1995. I have no doubt that if free NHS dental check-ups were introduced for everybody, but particularly for the elderly, deaths from oral cancer would be reduced by early detection and treatment. Many elderly people are excluded from income support because they have a small occupational pension. That is a real issue, and I hope the minister will address it. There is no disagreement about the dreadful state of Scotland's collective teeth, but there is a difference of emphasis on the solutions. We are not quibbling about the action plan, only saying that it does not go far enough. I hope that the minister will address the ban on tobacco advertising—that is a serious issue and there is a clear link to oral cancer. It is clear that people from all parties want to see fluoridation dealt with in a separate debate. I hope that the minister will agree to that. I urge the chamber to support the SNP amendment.

Will Ben Wallace give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

We welcome any restoration of the 30,000 home-care hours that have been cut by the Labour  Government since 1998 and the fact that the cuts that led to a disgraceful 10,000-person waiting list for aids and adaptations are to be addressed. However, does the minister agree that the announcement will neither end the disgrace of elderly people having to sell their homes or use their savings for their care, nor help the 25,000 or more people who have to pay for personal care in their homes? Further to Nora Radcliffe's question, will the minister clarify whether nursing-type duties that are carried out in the person's home—not in residential care, which the minister talked about in her statement—such as the changing of a catheter or the giving of medication by a home help will be carried out free of charge or will they continue to be charged for? If the Health and Community Care Committee comes out in favour of full implementation of the Sutherland report, will the minister ignore the months of work that that committee has done or will she respond with a time scale for full implementation?

Tayside Contracts supplies approximately 60,000 tonnes of quarried material for road maintenance purposes. The tax will result in an additional cost of £96,000 to Perth and Kinross Council, Angus Council and Dundee City Council. Will the minister approach the chancellor—

The issue is about aggregates tax.

Oh, come on. That is outrageous.

Will the minister give way?

I commend Patricia Ferguson for securing this important debate to mark the 25 th anniversary of the establishment of Scotland's local health councils. I pay tribute to the work of Tayside health council, which has been very vocal on a number of local health issues. It is a good example of why  health councils are so important. It has been involved in discussions surrounding the concerns about the increase in parking charges at Ninewells hospital and has been on record raising the concerns of patients. As I was going through the televisual system to find out what Tayside health council had said, I was overwhelmed by the amount of publicity it has had and the comments it has made. It has been involved in addressing concerns about the financial difficulties in Tayside and has had several meetings with the health board and the health trust to put forward vociferously the views of patients. I had a slight concern about the delay in Tayside health council's funding. It does a lot of important work and often represents patients in the press. If it does not receive regular funding, or if its funding is delayed, the work that it can carry out is hampered. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Community Care can reassure us that there will be no delay next year in awarding funding to health councils. It is obvious that delay jeopardises health councils' work and that they cannot plan when they do not know how much money they will have from one month to the next. Given the good work of health councils, any moves to diminish their role would be of great concern. As Patricia Ferguson said, we are looking for some reassurances on that front. The convener of the Scottish Association of Health Councils said that "Health Councils recognise the need for modernisation but we don't want the baby thrown out with the bath water! Health Councils, like all organisations have strengths and weaknesses." I seek reassurances on that this evening. Like Patricia Ferguson, I am aware of worries about proposals for health councils in England—they concern funding, their statutory footing and their independence. I hope that we will have Scottish solutions to Scottish problems in relation to our health councils.

Will the minister give way on that point?

Iain Gray's amendment talks about fairness and equity in the care of the elderly. I have not heard anything from Labour members about fairness or equity. Where is the fairness in someone having to use their life savings or to sell their home to pay for their personal care? Where is the fairness in someone who is confused and diagnosed with dementia having to pay for their care when others do not? Iain Gray has made his position clear: there will be no funding of personal care. He has tried to justify that by minimising the number of people who are involved. Are our policies being dictated by numbers rather than by what is right?

Thousands of pensioners will hear Iain Gray's words and act accordingly in the months to come. How can it be right that someone is compelled to sell their home or use their life savings to pay for personal care? Margaret Smith made it very clear that that fear permeates Scotland's elderly. Old people have told me of their fears that, in later years, their bank books will be checked or that they will be scrutinised to see whether they have any money under the bed. I have sometimes had to explain to elderly people that the money they have saved throughout their adult working lives is going to be taken away from them. Perhaps the minister would not have made his comments if he had had to sit in front of someone who had tears rolling down their face when they realised what was going to happen.

No—I do not have much time. Labour members have tried to portray this section of the elderly population as rich pensioners.

No, I have given way to the minister once. Those so-called rich pensioners have scrimped and saved all their lives, paid their taxes and probably bought their council homes. Are they the rich pensioners Hugh Henry was talking about? I think not. They have built a nest-egg, often for their funeral, and it is disgraceful that the Executive should want to take it away from them. Its arrogance knows no bounds. Furthermore, I have been astounded by the Executive's arrogance in dismissing the clear view of all the organisations that have had an input into the Sutherland report and the Health and Community Care Committee. I take it that those organisations are all wrong and that the Executive is right. So much for the listening Government—which did not listen to its own party about pensions and is not listening to Scotland's elderly or the organisations that represent their interests. Nora Radcliffe made the astounding suggestion that the SNP should renege on its responsibilities and wait to see what Westminster does. She should raise her sights; it is every MSP's responsibility to make this decision today. We cannot pass the buck. This is our opportunity to make a real difference. If we do not take it, we will never be forgiven.  This could be either the Parliament's finest hour or its most disgraceful. That choice rests with every MSP in the chamber. The Scottish Executive has made its position very clear and I have no doubt that it will not budge. It is time again for this Parliament to assert its authority and I implore members to look to their consciences and support the motion.

Will Hugh Henry give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

As someone who is not a member of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, I wanted today's debate to deal with the issues, which Labour members seem all too eager to avoid. That is no wonder, given the years of underfunding of Scotland's public sector housing, over which the Labour party and the Tories before it have presided. In 1979, housing support grant was £564 million at today's prices. This year, the grant has been slashed to only £11 million. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities estimates that housing departments have lost £2.4 billion in revenue because of reductions in housing support grants since 1979. The clawback of right-to-buy receipts, which was endorsed by the Executive, ensures that much-needed resources are not invested in the vital modernisation and upgrading of tenants' homes. That is the context in which the debate must be set.

I agree absolutely. It comes down to political will and, unfortunately, there is no will in the Scottish Executive at the moment. It is clear to me, as it must be to anyone else who has read both the majority and minority reports, that the tone and content of the evidence that was gathered is not reflected in the majority report. For example, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations gave extensive evidence on the need to change borrowing rules, yet the majority report gave those opinions only a one-line mention. To compound matters, that mention is followed by a full explanation of the view of the Minister of Communities on the matter. There is no comparison or analysis of that view, simply a bland assertion. Wendy Alexander's views are quoted throughout the report—31 times, compared with only two mentions of the Scottish Tenants Organisation. So much for the importance of tenants, to which Cathie Craigie referred earlier. It is nonsense to minimise the importance of Treasury rules, given that they prevent housing investment. Let us be clear that that straitjacket is self-imposed; there is no evidence that the Treasury compels the Executive to count rental income as borrowing. The minister has never said that the rules could not be changed, only that it  was not the "ideal option". Clearly, it is not the ideal option if she is hellbent on the policy of mass stock transfer. What is the real problem? I think that the answer can be found in the evidence of Charlie Gordon, the leader of Glasgow City Council, who implied that the reason for the stock transfer policy has more to do with the perception that Glasgow City Council has made a mess of the city's housing.

Charlie Gordon's view may well be true, given that Glasgow City Council has been a Labour-controlled authority, over which the Deputy Minister for Local Government has presided in the past. However, that should not direct Scotland's public sector housing policy. There should not be a Glasgow-led housing policy of one size fits all. Again, the perception in Glasgow and elsewhere that debt is being used as a carrot and stick to muscle local authorities out of public housing is not reflected in the majority report.

Mr McAveety's self-justification and defensiveness says it all. The problem with the one-size-fits-all solution is that other areas will suffer. The minister's response to partial stock transfer is quite incredible. She states: "The danger of taking on partial stock transfer is that councils try to load more of the debt on to us without dealing with the worst parts of their stock."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 29 March 2000; c 915.] So much for partnership, trust and co-operation. The whole policy is being driven by distrust and suspicion of local government, much of which, ironically, is of the same political colour as the minister. The minister's refusal to consider the servicing of debt without stock transfer means that if there is only a partial transfer, the council's debt will only be serviced for five years. What happens after that? The council tax payers will have to foot the bill when the debt is returned to the council after five years.

For the minister and her Labour back-bench fan club, of which Cathie Craigie is of course a member, there is a one-size-fits-all policy—take it or leave it. There has been a consistent refusal to tell the tenants what the alternative is if they vote no to stock transfer. The tenants are hardly being offered an informed choice by the so-called listening Government.

Will the member give way?

Will Margaret Curran clarify whether she believes that, if tenants vote no, essentially there will be no investment in the stock?

Will Mr Monteith give way on that point?

Several members have come to me and asked, "Fibro-what?", so that I have had to explain what fibromyalgia is all about. That is not surprising, as for a long time fibromyalgia syndrome has been the hidden disability. I am raising the issue during Fibromyalgia Syndrome Awareness Week to try to bring that hidden disability out into the open. I was surprised when I attended a meeting of the Tayside support group, which was attended by more than 150 people, all of whom exhibited various symptoms related to the condition. That is where my awareness of the issue came from. What is fibromyalgia syndrome? It is a very debilitating condition that involves severe pain in the fibrous tissues of the body, such as the tendons, ligaments and muscles. Sufferers can be in agony because their muscles become spasmodic, tight and painful to move. The syndrome is also characterised by extreme fatigue, sleep disorder and many other unrelenting symptoms ranging from migraines to allergies. To date, the hidden disability has no cure. Another symptom is forgetfulness, which many sufferers find to be the most frustrating symptom because often they cannot remember the names of everyday items. I know of one lady, a member of the support group, who used to have an important job in Tayside Chamber of Commerce. When she developed the syndrome she had to leave her job because of the effects of the illness. It is a very debilitating condition. The condition is poorly understood and sufferers often find themselves labelled neurotic. However, it is a real condition that is estimated to affect 4 per cent of the Scottish population. Fibromyalgia syndrome probably has the same level of  awareness as ME had 10 years ago. The syndrome affects seven times more women than men. We do not know why. Indeed, we do not know the answers to many questions. We do not know what the underlying causes of the syndrome are. Some evidence suggests that the illness may be post-viral; other evidence suggests that it is environmental. Organophosphates have also been linked to the condition. We need more research to find out the answers to those questions. The key problems faced by people with fibromyalgia syndrome are lack of awareness in the medical profession and lack of access to the benefits system. The medical profession is generally unaware of the syndrome and many patients are told that they are suffering from muscle pain. In extreme cases, patients presenting a series of symptoms have been told that they are hypochondriacs. The input of the medical profession is hugely important, particularly when it comes to claims for benefits. A claim for incapacity benefit, for example, depends not on the nature of a person's medical condition, but on how the condition affects the person's ability to work. The efficacy of the medical testing arrangements—the all-work test—depends on the doctors who are employed to carry out the medical assessments keeping abreast of and updated about conditions such as fibromyalgia. That is not happening. Doctors know very little about fibromyalgia and in some cases are misinformed about the condition. In both situations, the result is that many people with fibromyalgia who are very debilitated by the condition are denied access to benefits. The Deputy Minister for Community Care could address the lack of awareness in the medical profession by agreeing to the issuing of guidance on the condition by the health department. I hope that that is the least that the minister will agree to today. There needs to be far more research into fibromyalgia. Some good work has been done, but it is very limited and depends on the interest of a few people in the medical profession. I draw members' attention to the work of Dr Abdul Al Allaf from the rheumatology unit at Ninewells hospital, who has carried out limited research into the condition. He has been very supportive of the Tayside support group. That is not enough. We need more funding in order to investigate the condition. In the United States, far more research is under way. There is also much lobbying in order to secure funding from the National Institute of Health. We need something similar in Scotland. Currently, there is no effective treatment for fibromyalgia, let alone a cure. That is likely to remain the case unless resources are put into  researching the condition. Fibromyalgia sufferers are calling for acknowledgement, recognition and awareness. I hope that the minister will give them a good response.

To ask the Scottish Executive why the national health service waiting lists in Tayside have risen by over 35 per cent during the past 12 months. (S1O-2176)

Today, I received a letter from Derek Maclean, the medical director of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust, which states: "I share your concerns over funding pressures and possible impacts on future waiting lists."  Given the concerns that are being expressed by the medical profession, will the minister guarantee that the cutbacks resulting from the £14 million deficit will not lead to further increases in waiting lists in Tayside and will she further agree to allow the trust—as a bare minimum—an additional year in which to try to pay off the deficit in Tayside?

I am sure that I am not the only member in the chamber who is a little confused about the minister's assurances. If he cannot, as he stated earlier, instruct the SQA, how on earth can he stand here today and offer any assurances about anything the SQA may or may not do?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

The debate could be better entitled "Saving the NHS" if The  Courier and Advertiser  headlines are anything to go by: "Tayside patients face six years of 'austerity'"; "Another Tayside health chief goes"; "Health crisis: enough is enough, Deacon told"; "Don't blame me, says Minister". "Don't blame me" sums up the minister's attitude to the situation in Tayside. For months, she told concerned local MSPs from all parties that we were scaremongering. Pleas for her intervention were ignored as we were told time and again that it was a problem for local health managers to sort out. It was a case of, "Crisis? What crisis?" Finally after nine months—nine months, I tell Richard Simpson—of speculation and anxiety from patients and staff, the minister announced that a task force would be sent in to sort out the problems. At last the minister acknowledged that the £11 million deficit in Tayside's acute hospitals was "clear cause for concern". Why did it take nine months to realise that? Why did she not act sooner? Why did she accuse local members of scaremongering when they were telling the truth and raising local concerns? We now have the interim report of the Tayside task force, which confirms what we knew already: that there was a lack of effective financial control, an absence of leadership, a lack of team work and poor communication. The report states: "many members of staff are disillusioned and dispirited, expressing a sense of frustration and anger at the lack of proper information and consultation." Really. What a revelation. It has been clear to everyone in Tayside that staff morale has been at an all-time low for some time. What I cannot understand—and perhaps the minister will explain it—is what, given that the situation was so bad in Tayside, with a failure of the acute trust and the health board on most counts, the NHS management executive and the minister were doing during that time. Did they know about the  deep-rooted problems in Tayside? If not, why not? If they did, why did they not act sooner? Heads have rolled locally. Perhaps it is time for other heads to roll. The so-called recovery plan has done little to alleviate concerns. Tayside people now face six years of austerity to pay back the projected £19 million deficit. I have talked to clinicians many times over the past few months. If the minister did so, they would tell her that it was totally unrealistic to say that that £19 million would be paid off within two years—unless there were swingeing cuts. Swingeing cuts, I tell the minister. She has claimed time and again that patient care in Tayside will not be affected. However, the recovery plan is based on a 15 per cent cut in hospital admissions in key areas. That means a cut of at least 1,000 referrals for accident and emergency, and a cut of 133 referrals for plastic surgery and treatment of burns injuries. Cuts are also planned in neurosurgery and general and respiratory medicine. Is the minister really trying to tell us that a 15 per cent cut will not lead to a reduction in patient care? Staff, patients and local politicians know that it will; is she the only one who says that it will not? Robin Hunter of Unison has said that it is not possible to achieve a 15 per cent reduction in activity without affecting service users and losing jobs. Is the minister the only one who thinks otherwise? The people of Tayside should not be punished for the mistakes of others.

I am sorry. As I said earlier, local heads have rolled. However, we cannot just change the people at the top, give them the same leaky bucket to carry, and expect all to be well. The continuation of the huge deficit in Tayside means that people in a new team would be starting with their hands tied behind their backs. The health minister could have given Tayside a fresh start by writing off the deficit. Tayside's per capita share of the £135 million underspend in the minister's budget would amount to £11 million, which is almost exactly the amount that is required to pay off the current deficit. Instead, the people of Tayside are expected to accept six years of austerity. What a missed opportunity.

Does the member acknowledge that, although some responsibility for the case that he mentions must lie with the local managers, the interim report also criticised the management executive, for which the Minister for Health and Community Care is responsible, for its handling of the situation in Tayside?

Will the minister give way?

I support amendment 26, which is one of the most important amendments that we will be discussing today. It goes to the heart of what the Scottish Parliament is about: the integration of equal  opportunities into all policy development, legislation and implementation. Section 12A, however, undermines equal opportunities as it will be used to exclude disabled children from mainstream education. Amendment 26 seeks to rectify that situation by putting the child's best interests at the centre. It explicitly rules out disability and additional expenditure as primary reasons for refusing a child a mainstream placement. The existing section 12A is a licence to segregate disabled children and will mean that they will continue to be excluded from mainstream education, not through choice but through prejudice. As the Riddell report highlighted, there has been no improvement in the past 13 years in the number of disabled children in mainstream education, and section 12A will do nothing to rectify the situation. The last-minute—which says it all—Executive amendment to include a presumption that the opt-outs can be used only in exceptional circumstances is not enough to address the concerns of parents of disabled children. Their concerns were very much in evidence when they held a demonstration at this Parliament just last night. It is extremely patronising to say that the parents of disabled children do not know exactly what they want from this legislation. They know what they want and they know that what is being proposed is woefully inadequate. It certainly falls short of the Executive's stated commitment to inclusive education, and comes as a bitter disappointment to the families of disabled children. This bill is an opportunity for Scotland to be in the vanguard of inclusive education. Without amendment 26, it will continue to lag behind. Inclusive education has been a reality for more than 20 years in Norway and Italy, and even the proposed legislation for England and Wales contains a stronger commitment to inclusive education than the Scottish bill does and makes no reference to ability or aptitude. Do we really want to have weaker legislation in Scotland than in the rest of the UK? The Equity group, which gave us this amendment, also gave excellent and persuasive evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee.

I am running out of time. The amendment recognises the need for continued special education where that is the wish of the parents or child, or where the local authority can show that a mainstream placement would not be in the interests of the child. There is therefore a safeguard, and an independent conciliation service would resolve any disputes.  Amendment 26 puts the interests of the child first and foremost and has the support of Children in Scotland, Disability Scotland, the Association of Scottish Principal Educational Psychologists, as well as this Parliament's cross-party group on children. Amendment 26 rules out disability and additional expenditure as primary reasons for refusing a mainstream placement. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 will be extended to include education later this year, making unjustified discrimination and admission arrangements to schools unlawful. Let us get ahead of the game and make it clear that discrimination has no place in educational legislation for Scotland. I urge members to support amendment 26.

To ask the Scottish Executive how interpretation and translation services required by refugees using NHS services are funded. (S1O-  1808)

The minister may or may not be aware that there are severe problems with the funding of interpreting and translation services in the health service. In one health centre in Glasgow, 27 languages are now registered, which costs the service over £30,000 in one month, in payments for private interpreting and translation services. In the light of those figures, will the minister agree to take up with the Home Office the issue of the lack of resources that Greater Glasgow Health Board has for interpreting and translation services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the explanation is for the time taken by the health service funding authority and its health gains division to give notification of 2000-01 budgets for health councils. (S1O-01762)

The minister will be aware that  there was a delay in the announcement of funding to Tayside health council that resulted in its not knowing whether it could produce and distribute its regular newsletter. Does the minister agree that health councils are the patients' voice in the health service and that funding should have been sorted out in early April? Can she assure me that there will not be the same delay next year?

The debate is welcome. There have been few occasions to discuss this crucial area of race relations. Like Kate MacLean, I hope that we will have the opportunity to debate the issues in more detail and, in particular, to examine the steering group's findings and the Macpherson report. The wishes of the CRE have been granted in part. It said:  "we hope that the Scottish Parliament will have a full debate on the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill otherwise what is the point of the Scottish Parliament". That is absolutely correct. We welcome the bill's intention to make it unlawful for a public authority to discriminate directly in carrying out any of its functions, which was a key recommendation of the Macpherson report. Phil Gallie alluded to police officers walking on glass. William Macpherson himself said that the Metropolitan police—I suppose that it could go for any police and right-wing critics—should stop whining and complaining about the report and get on with it. Phil Gallie should perhaps take that advice.

I will move on, as I do not have much time. The message is clear: public authorities must not discriminate directly or indirectly in carrying out any of their functions. The bill gives important new powers to the CRE, which have been covered. The Executive memorandum states that the UK Government will consult the Executive during the coming months and that the Executive will contribute to the UK discussions. I hope that the Scottish Executive will be prepared to say that there are areas where the UK Government could have done better. Kate MacLean and Phil Gallie referred to the fact that the schedule 1A list does not include some public bodies. The main omission, however, is the exclusion of the immigration service from the provisions of the bill. The meeting that Phil Gallie and I were at, which was well attended and at which Phil had a hard time, was about the fact that immigration policy should not be based on racism and prejudice. I stand by those comments.

The CRE has described the Government's omission as giving a higher priority to immigration control than good race relations. The Scottish Refugee Council is equally concerned about the omission. I welcome Jackie Baillie's clarification that the Parliament has the ability to place duties on public bodies, because there was confusion about that following Peter Peacock's evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. We are all here today because racial incidents are far from uncommon in Scotland and their number is, as Michael Matheson said, increasing. We need action to deal with the situation across all areas of Scottish life. The bill is a start, which is to be welcomed, but unfortunately it does not go far enough. By passing the amendment, we can try to  persuade the UK Government to go a stage further by outlawing all discrimination in all public bodies, without exception. I urge members to support Michael Matheson's amendment.

Will the minister clarify how far this Parliament is able to put duties on authorities to promote equal opportunities in race relations or any other areas, as there has been some confusion in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee about that?

Will Jackie Baillie give way?

I congratulate Margaret Curran on addressing the key issue of this debate—violence against women. All of us in the SNP support that position. I hope that others will address the key issue, because unfortunately, so far, debate has not.

I would like to get started. The issue is whether Jack Straw made the right decision or the wrong decision when he granted Tyson, a convicted rapist, a visa—nothing more, nothing less. If members agree that he made the wrong decision, the question is what they are prepared to do about it. The debate is about the way in which Jack Straw made his decision and the conclusion that he came to. It is about the lack of consultation with the Scottish Executive, which the Tories seem to think was okay, and the fact that Jack Straw was prepared to see the promoters of the Tyson fight, but was not prepared to speak to Jim Wallace directly. He then came to the decision to let Tyson in, despite that being against the wishes of the majority of members of this Parliament and of the Scottish public.

The problem is that Jack Straw's decision has real implications for the issue of violence against women. Unlike Ian Jenkins, I believe that the fight is not yet over. I believe that we can get a reversal of the decision, which is what I am going to talk about. Jack Straw's decision was reached in accordance with rule 320 of the UK immigration rules, which states that admission will not normally be granted to people with criminal convictions for relatively serious offences unless it can be justified on strong compassionate grounds. I see no compassionate reasons for the decision, let along strong ones. The decision is therefore wrong, which is why the idea of a judicial review must be considered. Glasgow rape crisis centre has stated that women's organisations met and came out fully in favour of a judicial review. That is one of the ways that the Parliament can address the issue; there are others. All the motion asks is that the Scottish Executive consider all the possibilities for getting the decision reversed. I am saddened by the Tory and Labour amendments. The Tories' amendment makes no mention of whether they think the decision was right or wrong. All the Labour amendment talks of is widespread concerns—the understatement of the decade when women's groups the length and breadth of Scotland are up in arms about the decision. I am also puzzled as to why the amendment appears to say that the Scottish Parliament has no locus, when it has been accepted that Jim Wallace and David Steel attempted to make representations to Jack Straw and the Home Office. The fact that they were ignored is another matter. Members from other parties who are unhappy about the Tyson decision must ask themselves what they are going to do about it. Do they not accept the need for a judicial review of the decision? Are they saying that the numerous women's groups considering such action are wrong? If members agree with the principle of judicial review, why do they think that cash-strapped women's groups should finance it—creating a David and Goliath situation—rather than a well-resourced Scottish Executive? The SNP motion calls on the Scottish Executive to consider all the options to stop Tyson, whether through pressure on the SFA, a judicial review or whatever. The important thing to establish today is that this Parliament's will is to do whatever it can to prevent Tyson coming to Scotland. We should be united behind that call.

This Parliament has a locus because justice and crime are devolved issues. I would support a call that Tyson should not be allowed into Scotland, England, Wales or Ireland—it does not matter where. I support Maria Fyfe and others at Westminster who have been vociferous on the issue. That does not mean that this Parliament should not debate the matter. If anything, we should be encouraged to do so and encourage our colleagues at Westminster to do so. The issue of whether Tyson comes to Scotland is a matter for this Parliament because of the signal it sends out to our young people that a convicted rapist and a notoriously violent man is someone they should respect and look to as a role model. If the state is prepared to condone his behaviour, which is the implication of the decision, then how can we expect young people to reject the idea that violence against women is acceptable? We should all think beyond party politics today. After years of working with women who have been abused and raped, my motivation in this debate is not party politics but to raise the issue of violence against women and to argue that this Parliament should send out a clear message on the unacceptability of violence against women. I urge all members to do that today.

Will the minister give way?

The minister has seriously lowered the tone of the debate with his comments. He should, perhaps, have taken some time to rewrite his speech during Roseanna Cunningham's comments. Given his comments on judicial review, does he also condemn the moves that are afoot by women's groups throughout  Scotland to consider judicial review as a course of action?

Does the member believe that this Parliament has any locus on the matter of violence against women, which is what this debate is about?

Yesterday, I spoke to an elderly woman who was part of the lobby by Strathclyde elderly forum outside this building. She wanted me to tell the chamber this morning about her experience of community care. For many people, the reality is different from the self-congratulatory smugness and complacency of the Deputy Minister for Community Care and the Minister for Health and Community Care, who was sitting next to him during his speech. The husband of the woman to whom I spoke was terminally ill with cancer. They required aids and adaptations to be installed, including a shower, as she was no longer able to help him in and out of the bath. They requested an assessment by an occupational therapist. However, due to a lack of resources and, consequently, of occupational therapists, it was more than a year before a letter arrived to say that  the assessment would be carried out. Unfortunately, the letter arrived on the same day as her husband's funeral. Can members imagine how that woman felt? That is not an isolated example. Similar stories are being told the length and breadth of Scotland, as Michael Matheson showed. Frankly, the system is not working and the complacency of the minister in denying that is staggering. Local authority budgets cannot be reduced without affecting community care services. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has identified a shortfall of no less than £299 million. The minister spoke about a 13 per cent increase in home care hours, but the facts do not back up that claim. Figures that were obtained from the health department show that there was a drop of more than 25,000 hours between 1998 and 1999—a 7 per cent reduction. I will let the Deputy Minister for Community Care explain that discrepancy now.

I listened very carefully to the figures. The minister cannot escape the fact that there has been a drop of 25,000 hours. Those hours had been given to elderly people in the communities who required them. The figures confirm what we all know is the case, that many elderly people are having their home care services reduced and that many receive no services at all. The funding problem is not just in home care. In my constituency, a very good project that is run by SAMH for people with mental health problems is under threat. That project provides a range of services, including training opportunities to allow people to get back into work. It is under threat because the cash-strapped Tayside Primary Care NHS Trust is struggling to find match funding to allow it to continue. It provides the very community-based services to which the minister referred earlier for people who used to live in institutions. The threat to the project is distressing for the users of the services that it provides because they require a stable routine, which is important for people with mental health problems. I would welcome intervention by the Minister for Health and Community Care to save the project, the threat to which I have brought to her attention. There has been much talk today about a change of culture. That is welcome, but a culture change  will only deliver real change if it is backed up by adequate resources. Although I accept that finding additional resources is not necessarily an easy task, the fact that the minister continues to deny that there is a lack of resources does nothing to make the case to the UK Treasury that more resources are required. I urge the minister to change that policy.

I take it from the member's comments that he believes the coalition will stand or fall on the issue of PR in local government.

The Scottish National party supports inclusive education, and welcomes the report of the Riddell committee. A number of recommendations were made by Riddell, and I will highlight one or two of them. Recommendation 3 states that the Executive should examine what further support could be made available to ensure that pupils with special educational needs are included in mainstream education. While the additional moneys that have been announced by the minister are welcome, it would be useful to know what monitoring procedures are in place to ensure that that expenditure achieves results in increasing the number of children in mainstream education. Recommendation 13, which concerns integrated play and learning opportunities, is important as segregated education provides little interaction between disabled and able-bodied children. The problem is that the services that provide such opportunities are run on a shoestring and desperately need adequate resources. What resources will be made available for integrated play and learning opportunities? Recommendations 18 and 19 deal with extending the school week for special educational needs pupils. The Executive has endorsed that, but will any additional resources be made available for that purpose? The key point must be that, wherever possible, children with special educational needs should be educated in mainstream schools, with all the necessary resources being provided to make that happen. That might involve additional short-term costs, but the considerable long-term gains and the increase in academic and social opportunities for children with disabilities are surely worth that investment. The Executive has said that the costs of  inclusion in mainstream schools are not to be disproportionate to the outcome, but I should like the minister to clarify that. What is the measure of disproportionate cost? How will it be decided whether the resources that are required to enable a child with disabilities to attend a mainstream school are disproportionate? Disproportionate to what?

I certainly agree with that, and hope that the minister will address that point. My fear is that the disproportionate cost argument could be used as an opt-out to continue the poor record in Scotland of including children with special educational needs in mainstream education, whereby there has been no increase in numbers in 13 years. Cathy Peattie alluded to some of the reasons for that. The lack of mainstream efforts leads to the denial of parents' right to school choice, a right that is enjoyed by the families of able-bodied children. I want to highlight a point that Nicola Sturgeon made. In the Executive's report, no mention is made of the review of special educational needs provision by the Parliament's Education, Culture and Sport Committee. I, too, seek reassurance that the minister will take on board that committee's report and recommendations. When I read an Official Report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, I noted the minister's response to concerns about equal opportunities being omitted from the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill. He said that equal opportunities come under "existing UK legislation that covers matters of discrimination."—[ Official Report, Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 5 April 2000; c 766.] Will the minister clarify that? Surely that does not rule out, in any way, the Scottish Parliament putting a duty on local authorities to promote equal opportunities. I certainly hope not. That would not be common sense and would be a great disservice to Scotland's people. I hope that we can make it a right of special educational needs pupils to be educated in mainstream schools. If we do not do that, nothing will change. We must have an approach that is driven by the needs of the child and not constrained by a cost-driven agenda.

I begin by paying tribute to the army of home helps who, in the face of adversity, keep a totally under-funded and stretched service going by their dedication to their clients, going beyond the call of duty. Karen Whitefield should speak to the home helps in her area. They will tell her that the service has been reduced year on year, cut after cut, as it has been elsewhere in Scotland. I will draw on my experience as a home care organiser in one of the most poverty-stricken areas of Glasgow where we experienced a consistent reduction in the home help service and the closure of the home from hospital scheme. The service was inadequate to meet people's needs and restricted to those in immediate or imminent danger of being received into care. It therefore excluded many people whose lives would have been improved by receiving the home help service. Those lucky enough to receive the home help service received an inadequate service, despite the best efforts of the dedicated home helps and the hard-working managers who had the weekly task of putting together the jigsaw puzzle to ensure that hundreds of clients received some level of service in the face of unfilled home help posts, frozen posts, sickness and holidays. That often involved last-minute phone calls to clients to ask whether they could manage as someone else was in more dire need. I am talking about people who needed assistance to get in and out of bed, assistance to wash and who needed to have their  meals prepared—all basic human needs. It is a cinderella service for some of the most vulnerable elderly and disabled members of the community. On top of all of that, year upon year, I had to send out letters to tell people about the escalating charges; they were going to have to pay more for receiving less. I would often have to visit a client who had been identified as no longer being able to remain at home. We were then faced with another dilemma: it was almost impossible to have someone admitted to care in the area because of the strict limit on the number allowed to be admitted to residential or nursing homes due, yet again, to budget constraints. Once the quota was reached, no more people could be admitted, so it came down to the luck of the draw. It is no wonder that we often had to resort to persuading reluctant GPs to agree to admit an elderly person into hospital, which would at least get them out of their home and into a safe environment. That was not easy when GPs also had instructions not to admit people to hospital due to bedblocking. I and my colleagues fought tooth and nail to get confused and frail elderly people into hospital because they were at risk. I make no apologies for that. That was and is the reality of community care the length and breadth of Scotland. Something radical must be done. Iain Gray talked about the £60 million put in to assist discharge from hospital, but home from hospital schemes have already closed, so in essence that money will only set up what has already been removed; it is completely inadequate to solve the problem. We must have a radical overhaul of the system and a major injection of resources to ensure that they are adequate to provide intensive home care when that is required to allow someone to remain at home and residential and nursing home places when remaining at home is no longer an option. Anything less than that is not good enough, because our elderly people deserve much better. They deserve, and have a right to, a quality of life.

Can Karen Whitefield tell me whether, unlike in every other area in Scotland, the home help service in her area is increasing?

Nobody, with the possible exception of Brian Monteith, really believes that excluding children is in itself a good thing. However, I do not believe that the option of exclusion should be de facto removed by target setting. Discipline problems in schools are destructive for teachers and pupils. They have a profound impact on teacher morale and turn the teacher's day into an exercise in crowd control rather than imparting knowledge. I will focus on the issue of violence against teachers. It is a terrible admission to make that our society has such a problem. In 1998-99, there were 245 acts of violence per 100,000 pupils, which directly resulted in the loss of a total of 187 working days. Of course, those were only the reported incidents—I am sure that there were many unreported incidents. In total, there were nearly 2,000 violent incidents in that year, almost 40 per cent of which took place in the primary sector. More than half the incidents that were reported involved violence, and the majority  of other incidents involved verbal abuse. What should be done about the problem? The Executive has implemented various schemes targeting disruptive behaviour, such as the alternatives to exclusion programme, which aims to support authorities in finding other ways of dealing with disruptive behaviour. Although such programmes are welcome, it must be recognised that any pupils facing exclusion are likely to have been involved in serious incidents in the school. It is on that point that I have concerns about the Executive's approach, which appears to be driven by easily defined numerical targets, such as reducing expulsions by a third. Although it is good to reduce the number of expulsions, setting targets for that may lead to schools trying to cope with very disruptive or even violent pupils, which may have devastating consequences for teachers or other pupils. The approach fails to recognise the individual requirements of pupils and may not be in their best interests in the long run. Schools need to keep the option of expulsion—I was pleased that, to some degree, the minister confirmed that they would be able to. Schools' decisions on discipline should not be influenced in any way by Government targets. Does the minister really believe that target setting will not influence a head teacher's decision on expulsion? We recognise that disruptive pupils have special needs. As has been stated, to meet those needs schools require adequate facilities, learning support, adequately trained teachers and appropriate class sizes, all of which cost money. However, education authorities across the country are having to make cuts in many areas. The clear message to the Executive from today's debate is that Scottish schools need to be adequately resourced if real improvement is to be made in standards of discipline.

What plans does the Executive have to investigate an alternative local taxation that would be based on an individual's ability to pay?

Commenting on the Scottish Executive's attempts to mainstream equal opportunities in the Standards for Scotland's Schools etc Bill, Morag Alexander of the Equal Opportunities Commission said that she would "give the Executive one out of 10 for that".—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 16 November 1999; c 153.] As a result, the Equal Opportunities Committee has a number of serious concerns about what is missing from the bill and the apparent lack of conviction on issues of equality of opportunity behind some of its major proposals. Equal opportunities have not been explicitly addressed without reservations anywhere in the bill. A number of organisations such as the EOC, the Commission for Racial Equality, the Equality Network and the Equity Group have raised concerns that the bill does not go far enough to ensure equality of opportunity in education. The Equal Opportunities Committee heard evidence from a wide range of organisations with an interest in equality. The CRE and the Centre for Education and Racial Equality in Scotland have proposed the inclusion of a positive duty to promote equal opportunities, which is entirely consistent with the responsibilities of Parliament and the Executive under schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. The CRE, the EOC and the Equality Network have all said that ministers  should have an explicit duty to secure improvement—which should refer to schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998—that enables Parliament to ensure that equal opportunity requirements are met by public authorities. Will the minister indicate whether he will accept such a duty in principle at this stage in the bill's progress; and if not, why? The bill provides Parliament with a valuable opportunity to place a duty on education providers in Scotland to promote equal opportunities. Amending the bill in such a way would also provide a true example of mainstreaming in action. It would be straightforward to amend section 1 of the bill to incorporate the principle of non-discrimination, so that every child has a right to education irrespective of their sex, race, colour, national origin or disability. I hope that the minister will accept that principle today. Common themes for all the organisations that were consulted were the need for performance indicators to be set in relation to equality and for disaggregated data to be submitted by local authorities to measure the impact of equal opportunities initiatives. The most powerful evidence that was submitted to the Equal Opportunities Committee was on the right of disabled children to mainstream education. The Equal Opportunities Commission recommended that the bill should establish the right of every child to be educated in a local mainstream school and to receive individual support when and where necessary. The evidence from the Equity Group and from a group of parents of children with disabilities on the Isle of Bute lent weight to that recommendation. Hearing directly from parents of disabled children was very persuasive—they were clear that inclusive education is an equal opportunities issue and that a clear national policy on the education of children with disabilities in Scotland is needed. They said that there is a need to shift the balance away from diminished expectations in relation to people with disabilities and that parents should have a choice about whether their children are educated in mainstream or special education. The right of every child to the best education that is available must be enshrined within the bill. There has been stagnation in the progress of the education of disabled children. In 13 years, there has been no increase in the number of children with special needs attending mainstream schools in Scotland. A parallel statistic is that 95 per cent of adults with disabilities are unemployed. The lack of mainstream educational opportunities leads to the denial of the right to school choice that is enjoyed by the families of able-bodied children. Considering that 15 per cent of children in Scotland have some form of disability, we are talking about a sizeable number of people being  denied equality of opportunity. Mainstreaming of children with disabilities is proven to be the most beneficial option, socially and academically. That is true on a long-term basis both for disabled and able-bodied children. The results of more than 114 different research studies conducted between 1986 and 1998 have provided empirical proof that children with disabilities demonstrate higher levels of social interaction when they are in integrated settings. That is not an attempt to run down the efforts of the special needs sector, which will always have a role, especially in relation to children who have communication needs that are the result of sensory impairment. It must be acknowledged that the vast majority of disabled children could be accommodated within mainstream education if the will to do that existed, along with the resources to back it up. In conclusion, the bill has much to commend it, but it is sadly lacking in explicit commitments to equal opportunities. I urge the minister to listen to the views of the many equality organisations that are saying the same thing and to indicate today that he will support amendments to the bill that would enshrine equal opportunities at its core.

I welcome the Executive's turnaround on the question on religion and on the enhanced ethnic minority categories. I also welcome the Executive's acknowledgement of the need for equality proofing, which shows that the Executive realises that such proofing must be actioned rather than just spoken about. I hope that the example of the Census (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill will have an impact on future initiatives. It remains a matter of regret that the Executive was not able to go the whole hog and accept the inclusion of a question on the Scots language and other languages spoken in the home. I agree with Irene McGugan's comments on Hugh Henry's unpleasant little piece in the Paisley Daily Express , when he talked about confusing people "with strange words", but perhaps that says more about Hugh Henry's ability to be easily confused. I am sure that the rest of the chamber does not share his thoughts.

I have a copy of it here, which I will give Mr Monteith at the end of the debate. The Executive agreed to consult users and interested parties on the form of the questions on religion and ethnicity. It was not wholly necessary of the Executive to be so restrictive with the options in the consultation paper. I seek clarification that, if the Executive receives good, positive suggestions outwith those options, those suggestions will be considered seriously. I agree with Irene McGugan about the consultation paper's unnecessary emphasis on cost implications. It is more important to get the question right than it is to emphasise the cost. I have some sympathy with option 1 for the question on religion. That would provide adequate information without confusing those who will complete the form. I agree with the minister that answering that question should not be made compulsory and that it should be made clear that no sanctions will be employed against those who do not wish to answer the question. I also have some sympathy with option 2 on ethnic grouping. That would provide us with a more detailed breakdown, which would be useful for service development, among other things. I  am, however, aware that the CRE is also keen to have Irish included as a category. We should listen to its arguments rather than attempting to rule out its suggestions through the consultation paper. We might otherwise miss out on some good ideas. I look forward to the results of the consultation after 17 March. I am sure that the Deputy First Minister enjoys his visits to the Equal Opportunities Committee and I hope that we will see him there again soon. As deputy convener of the committee, I note with satisfaction that 90 per cent of what the committee wanted to be included in the bill will be included. The next time the committee takes the Executive to task, we will be 100 per cent successful. I conclude by assuring the Executive that the Scottish National party will co-operate fully in ensuring the swift passage of the bill.

I want to concentrate on the two special grant reports, as they provide an opportunity to highlight the many deficiencies of the new financial arrangements under the Asylum and Immigration Act 1999. The funding levels in both special grant reports are regarded as sufficient to meet the needs of asylum seekers and Kosovan evacuees. That cannot be said, however, of the proposed levels of support under the Asylum and Immigration Act 1999. Funding levels, especially for families, will be considerably less. Perhaps the Minister for Finance would like to listen to what I am saying, as it is quite important—or perhaps he would not. The Home Office has agreed that between April and November 2000 the funding will be £140 per week for an individual asylum seeker and £240 per week for a family. That is not sufficient to provide all the services asylum seekers need, such as infrastructure and administrative costs, assessment and provision of social services,  housing, education for school-age children and the cost of interpreting and English language support. Interestingly, and quite rightly, the Government believes such services to be essential in the financial allocation for Kosovan evacuees as laid out in special grant report number 2. It should not go unnoticed that there has been a downgrading of the needs of asylum seekers under the new act. Nor has any assessment been made under the present or the new arrangements of the cost of providing health services to asylum seekers. That is not joined-up thinking. The projected costs of the Local Government Association in England and Wales suggest that after the costs of housing, utilities, vouchers and administration are subtracted, only £31 per week for a family will be left over to provide for essential services such as health, education and interpreting. If those figures are the same in Scotland—we are still in the dark about that—it will not be adequate. COSLA has already expressed concern that the overall support level is likely to be insufficient. The problem is more acute in Scotland since we are likely to be taking a higher proportion of families than single people, with less surplus money per person to provide essential services. Despite such concerns, the Westminster Government is not prepared to provide extra funding to local authorities for additional teachers, nurses, doctors or interpreters. It holds firmly to the line that unless population change merits additional resources in the block grant, there is no additional money. Yet there is no doubt that there will be difficulties in areas where there is a significant increase in school rolls without additional resources, particularly where there are language difficulties. In Glasgow, for example, the 600 families expected will result in an estimated 1,000 to 1200 children going to school. There are no additional resources for local health services, although it is widely recognised that asylum seekers often have special health needs. Translation and interpreting services create huge problems impacting on almost every area of asylum seekers' lives. The lack of services was highlighted in the Macpherson report and we are still waiting for the Minister for Justice to take action on that. We can expect anything up to 6,000 refugees to arrive over the next year despite the lack of resources for interpreters. For example, in Edinburgh—

Edinburgh is host to a growing number of families from Somalia, many of whom speak a minority language. The nearest interpreter is in Manchester. Little thought has been put into how those Somali families will be supported, given the language barriers. No resources have been allocated by the Home Office to address the  problem. The SNP welcomes asylum seekers to Scotland, but recognises the necessity of having properly funded services to enable the smooth integration of asylum seekers into local communities. Specific services are required for asylum seekers and refugees, and the Home Office should provide the resources necessary to enable those services to be developed and delivered.

In his opening remarks, Jack McConnell said that the special orders were a good example of local and central Government working together. However, the minister must address the resource implications of the orders, particularly for health, education and interpreting, and be prepared to return to the Home Office and argue for additional resources.

I agree with the minister that the projected overspend is cause for concern. Given that, for  months, the minister has refused to acknowledge that she has any locus on the problems with health services in Tayside, will she tell us at which point and for what specific reason she changed her mind and agreed to establish the task force?

As has been said, the strength of the Equal Opportunities Committee's motion was that it was agreed on an all-encompassing, all-party basis. It was based on principle and covered the three interrelated elements of ethnicity, religion and language, including the Scots language. As the committee's convener said recently, this is the first census that the Scottish Parliament has had to deal with, and we should do so in a cross-party way, taking on board what others feel is important. It is a pity that the Executive has not seen fit to follow suit by accepting all aspects of the motion, including the question on language spoken in the home and on Scots language. The Executive's position is all the more remarkable when we consider that the Deputy First Minister has a track record of supporting a Scots language question in the census. He says  that he has since seen the light and is now better informed; although the minister can be accused of many things, consistency is not one of them. It is a pity that he has left the chamber— [Interruption.] I see that, in fact, he has returned just in time. I want to speak about the chain of events that led to this debate.

Yes.

I hope that he will listen more often, and that he will sometimes do so at an earlier stage. There are lessons to be learned from how this episode was handled. Since 10 January, the Executive has refused consistently to include any of the additional questions. When the Equal Opportunities Committee made its position clear, there were jitters all round about a possible defeat, so the Executive embarked on a process of delaying the debate until 16 February to try, I think, to persuade the Equal Opportunities Committee to change its mind. The Deputy First Minister attempted to do that last week with a performance that made people more determined to stick to their guns. However, after press coverage at the weekend there was a series of U-turns. We do not want hastily drawn-up letters to appear on desks the night before debates, such as the one that left the Equal Opportunities Committee in the difficult position today of having to decide whether to withdraw its motion. That is not how this Parliament should do business, and I hope that we will learn lessons for the future. The power and influence of the Equal Opportunities Committee in this matter should be welcomed. It has been said that if the SNP's motion were accepted, the process of passing the order would be delayed. That is a spurious argument, as we have all agreed to facilitate the passage of legislation. I am sure that an amended order could be passed quickly. It is important to get Scotland's first census right; it is important that we get all the questions right and do not miss this opportunity. We are disappointed that the Executive has not seen fit to accept the question on languages spoken in the home, and on the Scots language. The Commission for Racial Equality argued vociferously for a question on languages spoken in the home, because the answers would indicate change over time and assist in the planning of bilingual education. As Linda Fabiani said, the question would also inform a national strategy on interpreting and  translating. That is an under-resourced area, which Jim Wallace has still to address in the light of the Macpherson report. I hope that he will come forward with new resources for that service as quickly as possible. No equivalent data are available from survey information and much service delivery is hampered by the lack of that information. The other omission—surprise, surprise—is the Scots language. As I have said before, Scots used to be supported by the Deputy First Minister. Perhaps one reason why the Executive does not want to find out how many people speak, read or write Scots is that it is estimated that 1.5 million do, yet Scots receives only £112,000 a year in funding. That amounts to less than 10p per person. Scots is clearly the worst-funded indigenous minority language in Europe. People have suggested that the question on Scots may not be understood. It might be difficult to phrase such a question clearly, but it would not be impossible. It is important that we get the census right, rather than embark on a census that is lacking. Members from all parties have given their support to the inclusion of a census question on Scots. They have supported such a question in the past and I hope that they will support such a question today, unlike the Deputy First Minister. Other members whom I did not know supported the Scots language have spoken in favour of the question and that is encouraging. The argument for the inclusion of a question on income has been made vociferously by Tommy Sheridan, Des McNulty and others. I hope that the Parliament will agree to that—the SNP would support that. I urge members to support the motion in the name of Irene McGugan. The Scots language deserves to be treated with more respect and including it in the census would be a good start.

Given those statements, will the minister explain why he lent his support to the campaign to include a question on the Scots language in the census?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Home Office and what matters were discussed. (S1O-1095)

As part of the discussions with the Home Office on the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, what views did the Scottish Executive give on the introduction of a more expensive and demeaning voucher system to replace the cash payments system, which worked well in Scotland?

I welcome the tone of Annabel Goldie's opening speech. I think she was let down badly by the tone of some of her Conservative colleagues. Today's debate has, unfortunately, been brought about for reasons of political opportunism. Whether we support or oppose the repeal of section 2A, it was clear that members would get their opportunity to give their view and cast their vote during the passage of the ethical standards in public life bill. There was no reason—other than political opportunism—for the Tories to introduce this motion today. Although all parties occasionally indulge in political opportunism, there are times when they should not.

In some ways this is a false debate, because we will have the real debate in a few weeks' time. All of us are engaged in dialogue with the public about what has become an important issue. On some occasions one just does not exploit political opportunism—this is one of those occasions. This issue has been terribly distorted, but it must be said that it was naive in the extreme for the Executive to think it could announce the intention to repeal section 28 without adverse reaction. The Minister for Communities should realise that although the people around her and her advisers may think like her, many members of the Scottish public do not and were likely to be concerned by the way in which the repeal was announced. The lesson is that clear and early information—and proper consultation—must become the norm in this Parliament when changes such as this are announced. Would not it have been much better to take the entire Scottish public with us on this issue?

Something has gone wrong somewhere, given that we are in this position. I am trying to say that when the Executive makes announcements such as the one on section 2A, information must be put in the public domain that counteracts some of the negative and discriminatory arguments before they can be made. Unfortunately, that did not happen on this issue. We must all learn from that experience, so that we handle matters differently in the future. We have reached consensus that full and proper consultation on the guidelines for teachers must now take place—

I must move on. Let us not fall into the trap of trying to prescribe the nature of those guidelines, or we might find ourselves open to further criticism. Rather, let us hear from people out there the kind of guidelines that will allay their fears. Repealing section 28 is the right thing to do—not the politically correct thing to do. For me, the main reason for its repeal is that it is a symbol of discrimination. How do I know that? Because that was the intention when it was introduced by the Tories in 1988. I would like to think that Scotland is ready to move on and to reject one of the last bastions of the Thatcherite legacy—I hope that we can do that in a rational manner. The Scottish National party amendment will go some way towards achieving that; I urge members to support it.

The logic of reviewing something is that one is willing to change aspects of it if one feels that they are not working. Therefore, is the minister not acknowledging this Parliament's ability to amend the pieces of the act that do not work?

I welcome today's debate very much as the first, but by no means the last, opportunity to extract  long-overdue answers to serious questions about the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The motion has received support from 50 of the 107 non-Executive members across all parties. That should tell the minister something about the level of concern in the Parliament. Our concern is in addition to that expressed by the Churches, the Scottish Refugee Council and Amnesty International, among many others who are represented in the public gallery today. Let us be clear: the matter is a question for this Parliament. The Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 amended no fewer than five pieces of devolved legislation without making any reference to this Parliament. What consultation took place between the Scottish Executive and the Home Office? What were the views of Scottish ministers, in particular on the proposed voucher scheme? Dispersal of up to 6,000 asylum seekers and refugees to Scotland will impact on education, health, housing and other services. If such services do not receive the necessary resources and are not coping, the service providers will turn to ministers of this Parliament, who were not even involved in the design of the new system. Does the minister acknowledge the concerns that have been expressed by service providers about the lack of resources and their fears that they will not be ready in time for dispersal? When refugees, or local people who are concerned about the refugees coming into their community, visit members of the Scottish Parliament at their surgeries, we will not be able to hide behind the smokescreen of the ultra vires argument. We do not expect the minister to do that today either. Can we change the situation in Scotland? Can we do away with vouchers and restore cash payments to asylum seekers? I have been asked that question many times. The honest answer is that I do not know. If the minister is honest, he will admit that he does not know either. There is no precedent; the issue will have to be tested in the Parliament. Where there is a political will, however, there is a way. I believe that there is a great deal of political will to do something about the issue. That will increase when members see refugees struggling with vouchers in the supermarket queue or have distraught people arriving at their surgeries. The First Minister went some way towards acknowledging that the Parliament can change things when he said, in a reply to a parliamentary question, that the Executive would review the operation of the act after 18 months. We contend that, rather than implement a flawed system that is doomed to failure, we should get it right now. I urge the minister to consider delaying dispersal to  allow us to get things right in Scotland, so that we can live up to our reputation as a fair and tolerant society. In a press statement today to mark the Executive's embarking on a research study to promote race equality, Jackie Baillie said that the study is part of the Executive's commitment to root out racism and promote social justice and equality for all who live in Scotland. Let us see from the Executive some social justice and equality for refugees and asylum seekers.

Over the past few years, I have been fortunate enough to attend informal discussions at the Glencree Centre for Peace and Reconciliation, just outside Dublin. I would like to pay tribute to the work of the centre, particularly the work it does with young people in breaking down barriers. Perhaps we could take some lessons from the centre's groundbreaking work.  Such off-the-record discussions provide a great insight into the workings of the peace process. I witnessed at first hand how those with apparently diametrically opposed views could sit down together to work out what they needed to move things on. I am sure that those discussions and many others like them have contributed enormously to the peace process, resulting in the formation of the Northern Ireland Assembly. Because of the commitment and determination of such people, I am sure that, despite the current difficulties and the possible suspension of the Executive, a way forward will be found, as it has happened time and time again. The idea of a council of the isles was often spoken of at Glencree. It was seen as an opportunity to further understanding and co-operation not only between Governments or Parliaments, but between the peoples of the isles. My belief in the importance of such a council was further strengthened when I took part in a council of the isles study tour in the United States, before Christmas. The tour was organised by the Irish institute of Boston College. There was great excitement as the Northern Ireland Executive was being formed while we were out there. There was some awareness of the Scottish Parliament among the people I met, but their interest outweighed their awareness. As the only MSP on the tour, I spent a huge amount of time answering questions about our new Parliament. There is a great deal of good will toward Scotland out there, on which we can build. One of the most important aspects of the tour was the opportunity it gave to build relationships between elected representatives from the various parts of the isles. Our discussions ranged from the opportunity for bilateral discussions between the Scottish Parliament and the Northern Ireland Assembly to transport issues and environmental concerns, and the idea of an alliance to expand the tourism market by attracting visitors wishing to sample the Celtic experience. The possibilities are varied and plentiful, but to allow them to happen we must ensure that the council of the isles develops its own dynamic, as indeed this Parliament has started to do. It is essential that interparliamentary—and not just ministerial—links are developed. As has been said, that concept is encouraged in strand 3 of the Good Friday agreement. I hope that the Deputy First Minister will recognise the importance of parliamentary links and accept the SNP amendment, so that this Parliament speaks with one voice in support of the council of the isles.

Does the member agree that the maintenance grant, which was abolished by the Labour Government when it came to power in 1997, would have assisted the very people he is talking about to go into higher education?

I say to Karen Whitefield that our concern is to protect the rights of tenants in Scotland. I sometimes have to pinch myself when I hear speeches in this chamber. Are these the same people who threw up their hands in horror when the Tories slashed housing support grant? Are they the same people who threw up their hands in horror when the Tories introduced clawback at 25 per cent and became full of rage when that was increased to 75 per cent? Are they the same people who threw up their hands in horror and fired salvo after salvo at the Tories for slashing borrowing consents? As we see today, the same people will throw up their hands in adulation, or be required to grit their teeth and follow the new Labour line. It is almost impossible to believe that in Scotland today housing conditions in many areas are not merely poor, but a national disgrace. There are areas where tenants' homes are in such poor  condition that up to 30 per cent of their income goes on trying to keep their houses warm; where damp mould grows on walls, even in the summer months; where wind and rain drive through rotten windows that badly need replaced. Time after time, those windows are patched up with a blob of silicone, as a temporary repair. The conditions that I have described endure because of a lack of investment—a lack of investment that was well recognised by Executive members and members of the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties when they were in opposition. However, since they have become a partnership Administration, they have chosen to wear the Tory clothes. Do not take my word for that. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton recently congratulated the Minister for Communities, saying: "Wendy Alexander is to be congratulated for adopting Scottish Conservative and Unionist policies on housing". Strange bedfellows indeed. In 1979, housing support grant was £564 million at today's prices. This year the grant level has been slashed to only £11 million. Again, members should not take my word for it. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities estimates that, because of reductions in housing support grant since 1979, housing departments have lost £2.4 billion in revenue. During the 1980s and 1990s, the Tories masked the growing crisis by allowing local authorities to recycle 100 per cent of the capital receipts from right-to-buy sales. The severity of the crisis became visible only when the Tories decided to use the receipts to meet the cost of the capital debt. Under that policy, which has been endorsed by new Labour and now the Executive, right-to-buy receipts are clawed back and do no go into the vital modernisation and upgrading of tenants' homes. Again, members should not take my word for it. COSLA estimates that the clawback has meant that 30,000 tenants' homes have not been modernised; that 5,500 window replacements have been cancelled; and that almost 10,000 heating systems have not been installed. The irony is that the people who are paying for this folly are those who can least afford it. Furthermore, borrowing consents to local authorities have been decimated. The value of consents fell from £620 million in 1979 to £225 million in 1990, and has nose-dived to only £155 million in this financial year. The reduction in housing support grant and borrowing consents, as well as the 75 per cent clawback rule, has hit council tenants, who are some of Scotland's poorest people, with a triple whammy. The Tories started the war to kill off local  authority housing in Scotland but, worse, new Labour and its Lib Dem partners in the Executive are attempting to outdo the Tories by finishing off the job through death by a thousand cuts. We have heard members from all parts of the chamber express concern about that. I hope that people will have the guts to stand up to the Executive and support some of Scotland's poorest people.

I also thank Sylvia for lodging this motion. As many members have said already, Cornton Vale has a lot of women who should not be there. Many of them are there for non-payment of fines. An analysis of the criminal justice system showed that women were more likely to be given custodial sentences for crimes such as non-payment of fines—if they can be defined as crimes. When we consider many of the women who are in Cornton Vale, we could describe them more as victims than criminals. The system has failed them. As has been said, a huge number have been physically or sexually abused. Many have chronic alcohol or drugs problems. They need help, not punishment. In my previous life in social work, I was involved in placing people into drug rehabilitation centres  and so on. I had to try to find appropriate placements for them. It was frustrating because, when a woman was ready to go into a rehabilitation or detoxification unit, it was necessary to strike while the iron was hot. If there was no place available, going back to them four weeks later was no good, because the opportunity had passed. We must have the resources, so that when a woman says, "Yes, I am ready to seek treatment", the treatment must be available. Much has been said about the other problems faced by women in Cornton Vale, so I will skip over most of those issues. We must break the cycle of women going in and out of prison with little being done to tackle the underlying problems. There are many good alternative to custody programmes. Halfway houses are a good idea, and I will find out more about them. The criminal justice system is, as all members have said, currently failing these vulnerable women. I hope that this Parliament will change that situation sooner rather than later.

rose—

Overall, the tone of today's debate has been good, although it was unfortunate that some Labour  members decided to take the line of political cynicism or to argue that there were other priorities. I hope that they will reflect on that. In particular, the comments of Mary Mulligan and Hugh Henry were a disgrace to the Labour benches. People in glass houses should never throw stones. We all have our past embarrassments to deal with. I remind Mary and Hugh about the atrocious anti-Catholic comments made by Sam Campbell, the former Labour provost of Midlothian, who remains a serving Labour councillor.

If Mrs Mulligan's feelings were so strong, I am sure that she would be working to remove Mr Campbell from the Labour party. This motion is important because we do not want Sam Campbell's comments—or those of anyone else—to be acceptable in modern-day Scotland. We want Scotland to be united in condemning discrimination against any section of the population. That is why this debate is not a waste of time. It is very important that this Parliament sends that message out to the people of Scotland and sets a lead in tackling discrimination wherever it arises. It is also important to examine the role of the Parliament. Several people have said that we should not discuss reserved matters and have suggested that the SNP is somehow trying to destroy the Parliament by doing so. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, on which I am proud to serve, I remind members that equal opportunities are a reserved matter. Nevertheless, this Parliament took the right decision in setting up an Equal Opportunities Committee.

I say to Mr McMahon that some self-reflection is needed. The members of the Equal Opportunities Committee are hard working and I resent his comments. The Government cannot have it both ways. This Parliament has the right to discuss all matters, including the very important matter of equal opportunities, which I wish was not reserved. The fact that we have an Equal Opportunities Committee sends out a message to the people of Scotland that equal opportunities are at the core of this Parliament's philosophy. I hope that, by the end of the day, we can reach a unanimous  decision to support this motion.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will be concluding a concordat regarding the terms of the forthcoming immigration and asylum legislation with Her Majesty's Government. (S1O-  667)

I am sure that the minister will be aware of the controversial nature of that legislation, particularly the voucher scheme, and of the cross-party concern about it. Will he assure us that this Parliament will be able to debate the terms of the concordat?

A precedent has been set in this Parliament that we can discuss and debate reserved matters, regardless of whether we have legislative competence over them. Will the minister give the Parliament an opportunity to debate this matter, which is of cross-party concern?

Although we now have the beginnings of a child care strategy, the aspirations are set far too low. Where is the vision of universal, full-time child care? Helen Eadie has unfortunately left the chamber, but I wonder whether she really was saying that aspirations are no longer relevant in the new Labour world. We must aspire to full-time child care provision—not to do so undermines the whole strategy. Affordability is a key aspect of child care provision. As of 1998, every four-year-old has access to a free, part-time, pre-school education place, which amounts to about two and a half hours of care per day. That provision will be extended to three-year-olds by 2002. However, any pre-school education or child care over and above that must be funded by parents. I acknowledge that there has been an increase in child benefit, which is worth £64 a month at the higher rate. The typical cost of child care can be £50 per week for the very, very lucky—it is more likely to be around £120 per week. Other assistance comes in the form of the working families tax credit. It provides for child care costs up to a maximum of £70 per week for one child, depending on income and as long as the parent works more than 16 hours a week and is not a  student. There are many exceptions to the rule and the forms are as complicated as we might expect. Also, the working families tax credit is available only if registered child care is used, so it cannot be used to pay the army of grannies who are often the main child care providers in a family. That is short-sighted and overly restrictive. I am concerned about the working families tax credit from an equal opportunities perspective, too. It is paid through the wage packet by the employer or directly by the Inland Revenue. Couples can decide to whom it is to be paid. In 326,000 of the 406,000 couples who receive the credit, the main earner is the man, so it is likely that the credit will be paid into his wage packet. I am sure that many members will be aware of the problems that that will cause in households in which child care costs may not be seen as the priority. Unfortunately, that is the reality. Although the working families tax credit is a reserved matter, it has a major impact on the Scottish child care strategy. I therefore ask the minister to address a number of key questions that require answers. The working families tax credit is not available to parents who work fewer than 16 hours per week, despite the fact that such parents still have child care needs. Does the Government plan to change that? Will the minister make representations about that? Will there be national monitoring of those who have been refused the working families tax credit and of the reasons for refusal? As I have said, to be eligible for the tax credit, children must be in registered child care, which may not include child care that is provided within the child's home. Some local authorities register such care, but registration should be standard across Scotland to ensure equal access to good-quality care at home. What is being done to ensure that that happens? Parents in higher and further education struggle to pay for child care, and access funds are limited and insufficient. How is that problem being addressed? Employers have a huge role to play in providing child care. Only 10 per cent of employers provide practical help with child care costs. That is abysmal and the Scottish Parliament should examine the matter. However, the Parliament should lead by example. I am concerned that child care in the Parliament has slipped off the agenda—we have to ask why. I am talking about child care for the children of parliamentary staff rather than of MSPs. If we do not lead by example, how can we expect employers to provide child care?  The demand for child care is enormous and can be met only if the issue of affordability is dealt with. Therefore, I encourage members to support the amendment.

Today is an opportunity to applaud the work of the voluntary sector in Scotland—it has a crucial role to play in enriching the life of Scotland. Since being elected, I have met a large number of voluntary organisations of various kinds, from One Parent Families Dundee to the Tayside Recyclers. Their energy and enthusiasm—often in the face of  a lack of resources—have impressed me. From my previous life as a community worker, I know how hard such organisations work, often for little praise in return. The voluntary sector involves a huge number—estimated at around 1 million—of Scotland's citizens. They volunteer in a variety of ways and a variety of settings. The diversity of the voluntary sector is its strength, while its independence is a prerequisite to its success. The sector is involved in service provision, campaigning and advocacy. It is important that its campaigning and advocacy role is recognised; that is where some of our concerns lie. During discussions with many voluntary organisations, I have found that, in general, the compact is supported, albeit that there is a certain amount of scepticism about whether it will be implemented. That aside, the view—crucially—is that an independent body should be set up to monitor the compact and its implementation. I have to tell Cathie Craigie that that is what voluntary organisations are calling for, and as someone who worked for the voluntary sector, I am sure that she will appreciate that its views should be taken on board. The main thrust of the compact is aimed at service providers in the voluntary sector. Others in the sector receive an add-on mention. While we recognise the enormous benefits that service providers in the voluntary sector bring, we cannot forget organisations whose role is one of campaigning and advocacy. They can make life uncomfortable for Government bodies; their role is to criticise when necessary. No one likes to be criticised, but concerns have been expressed by many such organisations that the compact will take away their independence, because it will bind them into the Government's agenda. I disagree with Phil Gallie—who, unfortunately, has left the chamber—that organisations should follow Government policy in order to receive funding. That is a dangerous argument. Governments and their policies come and go, but the voluntary sector continues to provide a service. Scotland's environmental campaigning organisations have expressed concerns. The majority of them are unlikely to endorse the compact because they fear that it could become a binding document that isolates the organisations that do not sign up to it and takes away the independence of those that do. Those fears must be addressed. Scottish Environment LINK is the liaison body for Scotland's main voluntary organisations that are interested in securing a sound future for Scotland's environment. Through the joint working  group, it participated in the discussions on the compact, but began to feel that the scope of the compact was intended more for service providers and was less relevant to bodies such as itself, which are involved in advocacy and campaigning. It said: "Link bodies maintain the view that the Compact as it currently stands is not relevant to much of their work and therefore Link should not sign up". The Scottish Wildlife Trust has also expressed concerns and has not signed up to the compact. It said that "the Compact gives little or no reference to the principle of sustainability, which they are working towards . . . We feel it should be more responsive to environmental issues". The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, which has more than 70,000 members in Scotland, sees itself as fundamentally independent of the Government, and it has expressed major concerns. We must avoid the development of a two-tier system in the Scottish voluntary sector: organisations that sign up to the compact and those that do not; those on the inside and those that are excluded. The SNP amendment provides a solution to that problem and would stop a two-tier system developing. It would allow organisations that do not sign up to the compact to retain a stake in the process and a communication channel with the Executive. An independent body will support the development and promotion of the entire voluntary sector and encourage co-operation between compact signatories, non-compact signatories and the Executive. We believe that there should be an independent body to ensure that the compact works to the benefit of its members and those outside the compact. We want to ensure that the compact is inclusive and does not constrain the independence of voluntary organisations. We want the concerns of the environmental organisations and other campaigning organisations to be addressed. We welcome the compact and, with our amendment, want to see it in place as soon as possible.

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact the change to objective 2 status will have in Dundee, specifically in relation to the exclusion of the science and technology park and the universities from the new objective 2 boundary. (S1O-473)

What criteria will the minister use when considering the amendments? What will be the time scale, given that the whole package requires to be approved by Christmas?

Given Mr Stone's description of the importance of the teachers' voices, does he agree that it would have been better to have a classroom teacher on the committee of inquiry?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the high value of sterling was a major factor in the recent job losses at Agritay Ltd in Dundee. (S1O-361)

I thank the minister for his acknowledgement that interest rates and the value of the pound were factors identified by Agritay's management, as well as by the convener of Aberdeen economic development committee and by one of the Administration's back-bench members. What is he going to do about making representations to the UK Government about the value of the pound and the high level of interest rates?

As was said earlier, many of those who feel most unsafe live in our most deprived communities. The problems that they face are well known: people are unable to leave their homes without having someone to house-sit to prevent a break-in and the theft of their possessions; there is widespread vandalism; there is a fear of young people hanging about; and there is the scourge of drugs and drugs-related crime. I am not sure that the audits, focus groups, surveys, citizens panels and people's juries that are referred to in the rather glossy report will tell us anything that communities do not already know. A couple of weeks ago, I had a meeting with the Finmill community safety panel in Dundee, which was very clear about its safety concerns and priorities. I would be more than happy to pass them on to the minister, so that we can bypass the  inquiry phase and get on with action to solve the problems. The report is inoffensive and contains nothing with which I would disagree. However, as Christine said, it is not the easiest document to read. I found more than 150 references to partnership and more than 50 references to strategy, but zero references to new money. Will the minister tell us how much new money will be available to tackle the problems? He announced £3 million to support communities in dealing with safety problems. That money is welcome, but it could be spent in one partnership area. If we ask, ask, ask and do not deliver, we will do more damage. The document states that local authorities will be key players in the partnerships. However, they have seen their budgets cut by £1.3 billion in real terms over the first three years of this Government, which has meant that youth facilities have had to close or reduce their service. That is not really joined-up thinking, is it? Why do we not provide the youth facilities that would stop young people hanging around the streets and reduce youth-related crime? That is joined-up thinking. Will the minister tell us what new resources will go into developing youth provision? Young people are themselves trying to do things to improve the communities in which they live. I would like to pay tribute to the Braeview Academy community safety panel, which had its first official meeting yesterday. It involves young people identifying their priorities and doing something to achieve them. Their question was: "Where are the resources to develop youth facilities in our area?" I ask the minister the same question, because this is all about resources. The report says that the action plans that are to be drawn up put the onus on individual agencies to "take ownership of those parts of the action plan which most relate to their core activities". Will the minister clarify whether that is to be achieved within existing resources? If that is the case, how will it be done? The police play a key role in community safety, yet police force numbers—and I am not talking about civilian staff—have decreased during the past two years. The police have a role to play in making communities feel safer, but that requires additional police presence. Will the minister say whether police resources will be made available in addition to the 200 police officers who will be ring-fenced for work on the drugs problem? The report is inoffensive, if a little vague. However, we should not raise expectations in our communities if we cannot deliver. Adequate  resources must be made available and I have yet to hear that that will be the case.

Will Mr Gallie give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive why £1 million has been earmarked to support people's juries rather than the existing network of local community and voluntary groups and whether it has any plans to increase funding for such groups. (S1O-333)

Is the minister really saying that the vast network of community and voluntary groups with years of experience is unable to tell her what the local priorities of an area are?

I am pleased—and I hope that John is too—that the SNP amendment has persuaded the Scottish Executive that the food standards agency should be based in the north-east. I hope that he will vote for the amendment. It is difficult for the Scottish public to understand why some Labour members will not be voting in favour of the amendment when it calls for exactly what the Minister for Health and Community Care has announced today—maybe that is politics. I am sure that the bids from Dundee and Aberdeen will be of the highest quality and that there will be sound arguments for both locations. Like Kate MacLean, I am a little concerned that Dundee seems to have been a bit slow off the mark and is not, perhaps, lobbying as hard as Aberdeen. The issue is about civil service job dispersal in general. Dundee has the lowest incidence of civil service employment of any Scottish area with a population of more than 40,000. It is fair to say that Aberdeen does not fare much better. There is no doubt that the lack of Government agencies in the area compromises both Dundee's claim to be a regional centre and its ability to fulfil its job creation potential. I do not think that the dispersal of 35 jobs will reverse that, but it would represent a start. Much more needs to be done in terms of the dispersal of civil service jobs. It is to the Parliament's credit that we have managed to hold a mature debate without much of a turf war, although I am sure that Lewis Macdonald and John McAllion will each be striking the other off their Christmas card lists. The final decision will be made on the basis of the quality of the bids.

As Kate knows, I am already on record as supporting Dundee in its bid to become the Scottish base of the food standards agency. However, if that bid is not successful, I would be happy for the jobs to go to Aberdeen—Kate has said the same thing. We want the jobs to go the north-east, although we all have preferences as to where exactly in the north-east they should go. The victory for the Scottish Parliament is that civil service jobs are being dispersed. I want more jobs to be dispersed. It is a pity that Richard Lochhead's motion on civil service job dispersal fell off the agenda, because that is a crucial debate. The issue relates to far more jobs than the 35 that we are discussing today—jobs that could be dispersed to all areas of Scotland, so that they could benefit from our new constitutional framework.

As Maureen has already said, domestic violence affects all sections of society. It does not depend on class or whether people live in rural or urban areas; it affects all sections of society.  As has been said, women's aid groups provide excellent services throughout Scotland, despite their piecemeal funding. Helen Liddell's Scottish Office campaign against domestic violence raised expectations, as Dorothy said. The worst aspect of that was that the expectations were not met and many of the women who subsequently phoned the helpline were not found refuge places. It must have taken a lot to reach the stage of being able to leave a violent relationship and make that difficult decision, but not receiving the service they expected must have been a difficult blow.  We are aware of the acute difficulties in rural areas and the lack of refuge spaces. I would support the move to consider that as a matter of urgency.  Much has been said about physical abuse, but I want to make a couple of comments about the psychological abuse that many women experience. People ask why women do not leave. They do not leave because they do not have the self-confidence left to make that decision. We must raise those women's self-confidence and enable them to make the decision, but we must ensure that services exist for them once they have.  I call for a national funding strategy so that no  matter where they live in Scotland, women can leave a violent relationship.

There is nothing in what Susan Deacon said that any reasonable person could disagree with. Everyone wants to improve public health in Scotland. In "Towards a Healthier Scotland" we read about improving life circumstances and  tackling inequalities in health. Stress is laid on working in partnership and the development of plans and projects is a key part of the health strategy.  That is all good stuff, but at that point I begin to have a bit of a problem. Susan Deacon was keen to tell us the good news, but did not mention the other side, which is not such good news. She talked about partnership and about working closely with the Health Education Board for Scotland, but HEBS funding has been cut by £400,000. I fail to see how that would improve partnership working.  In addition, Government support for local council spending is £1.3 billion less in the first three years of the Labour Government than it was in the last three years under the Tories. That has meant a slashing of local authority budgets. It means that many of the socially excluded communities that ministers are so fond of referring to and of visiting have experienced savage cuts in many of the services and projects that are important in tackling public health problems.  Public health problems can be tackled best at community level using the services and projects there, but the cuts have resulted in a loss of services to the neediest people in society. I will give some examples.  The Whitfield Health and Information Project in Dundee closed last year when its funding ended. That project provided advice on sex education, teenage pregnancies and diet and nutrition, among other things-the very areas where we want improvement. The Glasgow North Community Health Project has suffered a cut of £15,000 to its budget. That has reduced its ability to carry out much needed work in one of Scotland's most deprived areas.  It does not stop there. The threat to projects continues to this day. The funding of the Incite drugs project in Aberdeen ended in July. Only through public appeal has that project managed to continue. With only one of the three funding partners having agreed to future funding, the project is under serious threat, yet it is involved in important drug abuse prevention work and peer education with young people. It is the very type of project that we want to tackle public health problems.  This is not intended to be partisan. In a previous life, many members from other parties have been involved in working on such projects in very deprived communities. They know as well as I do that there has been cut after cut to the examples of good practice that Des McNulty mentioned. The minister has to take on board the fact that we must secure those projects.  I want to mention several other points that the  minister might want to pick up on. Will she make a statement about the important issue of the shortage of vaccines, which is a matter of concern for many doctors? I implore her to examine discrimination in health service delivery. Several organisations have raised, through the Equal Opportunities Committee, the issue of the lack of interpreting and translating services. For someone whose first language is not English, it is difficult to communicate important health information that will help towards a diagnosis, or to understand a diagnosis when it is given; and it is stressful for both people and doctors when patients do not fully understand the information that they are given. The problem needs to be addressed and I hope that the minister will investigate the matter.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to implement the recommendations of the Stephen Lawrence inquiry as contained in the Macpherson report. (S1O-126)

The recent case of Ghulam Rabbani raises many issues relevant to Macpherson, such as the chronic underfunding of interpreting services in Scotland. What does the minister intend to do about that in relation to the criminal justice system?

Will the member give way?

I am not aware that I have received an answer. Do you know how it was communicated, Sir David?

I have checked my mail, but I will double-check; as far as I am aware, it has not arrived yet.  The Presiding Officer: Thank you very much.

May I make a point of order?

Thank you. Last week I attempted to submit an emergency question on the case of the Chhokar family. You said that it was not an emergency question, Mr Presiding Officer.

If I can finish my question my point will become clear. You then suggested that I submit the question as a written question requiring an urgent response. That was fine, but my point of order is to seek clarification on when that urgent response should be given. As yet there has been no response and the chamber office has been attempting to get one. I raise this matter because I could not find anything in the standing orders and I would like some clarification about the time scale for an urgent response.

Thank you.

The issue concerns the principle of free education. Today, we are seeking to make a start on re-establishing free education, first, by abolishing tuition fees. Every member-Mike Rumbles-has the opportunity to do that today. We all know that tuition fees are a deeply unpopular measure introduced by the Labour Government. It was Pauline's Government that abolished the remnants of the maintenance grant, in case she has forgotten. Tuition fees are unpopular not just with those who have to pay them, but with 65 per cent of people who have expressed, in recent polls, their opposition to them.  Support for their abolition has come from various quarters. Only this morning, we received a deputation from Dundee City Council, which, last Monday, passed a motion in support of the widespread campaign of opposition to tuition fees. It is clearly the will of the people to abolish tuition fees. They elected 73 of us to do just that. We are supposed to be here to represent their wishes: we can do that today by supporting the amendment. Many members benefited from free education. Perhaps they would not be here today if they had not done so, yet they wish to deny that opportunity to others.  The impact of the attacks on free education can already be seen with the 6 per cent drop in university applications. To argue, as Labour members often do, that abolition of tuition fees benefits the well-off is utter nonsense. Over the past few weeks we have heard a number of speeches claiming "I'm more working class than thou". I do not intend to make one myself, but I was the first person in my family to have a university degree and I know that if the education  system of today had been in operation then, I would not have gone to university and I would not be here today.  It sounds crass to talk about abolishing tuition fees as benefiting the better-off when we are earning a minimum of £40,000 a year and many ministers are earning £70,000 to £80,000. Jack McConnell's household income is probably more than all of ours collectively. We talk nevertheless about better-off people. Are they the clerical worker and the joiner with a joint income of £17,000, who have to pay tuition fees? Is it the spouse who earns £14,000 and who has to contribute to their partner's tuition fees? Or is it the postman and the nurse, who pay full tuition fees? Are these the better-off people that we are talking about? I do not think so.  The amendment allows us to go further than abolishing tuition fees because it gives us the opportunity to re-establish a free education system-and we have to look at student maintenance to do that. The First Minister talked yesterday of the need to achieve a Scottish education system of excellent quality. The state of an education system says a lot about a society. I would have thought that the message that we want to send out is that Scotland has an education system that is free at the point of delivery, not one based on ability to pay. The quickest way to abolish tuition fees is not to have an inquiry but to vote for the amendment today, which I urge members to do so that we can begin to return Scotland to a system of free education.

I will address the equal opportunities recommendations of the CSG report. The area of equal opportunities will be of key importance to the work of this Parliament. It is unfortunate that equal opportunities legislation remains a reserved matter, because that will be a frustrating barrier to the work of this Parliament. However, that should not reduce the importance of making sure that legislation emanating from this Parliament does not discriminate against any section of Scotland's society.  The Equal Opportunities Committee will have a key role in ensuring that that does not happen, but we must do much more. Alex Salmond said yesterday that we have a Scottish Parliament without any elected representatives from Scotland's ethnic minority communities or people with disabilities. We must take early action to remedy that imbalance. We can go some way towards achieving that, by making sure that the Parliament's committees invite representatives from under-represented sections of society. People can advise committees, but we do not want such consultation to be token. Rather, we want it to provide real input in the early stages of policy making in this Parliament.  This is about not just MSPs, but the Scottish Parliament as an employer. I should be interested to know, for example, how many of the staff who are employed in the Scottish Parliament are from an ethnic minority background or have a disability. It would be appropriate for the Equal Opportunities Committee to conduct an early audit, so that that  could be looked at.  Another early task of the Equal Opportunities Committee will be to produce a policy statement and plan. I implore that committee to avoid the jargon that many see as the domain of the chattering classes and instead to come up with an equal opportunities policy statement and plan that has relevance to the lives of all Scotland's people.  I will finish with a comment from the CSG report on the style of decision making:  "The traditional Westminster style of point-scoring, quick repartee , aggression and counter-aggression is alienating for most women, people with a different cultural background, many disabled people and indeed, many men. To promote inclusiveness it will be important to set a style that listens to views, seeks to find solutions to problems and allows for the development of constructive argument and debate."  Like many other people, I am sure, I feel that that has been sadly lacking in the debates so far. I hope that we will all take on board the spirit and recommendations of the CSG report.

We have to hand it to Labour members for their ability to make speeches with a straight face. New Labour talks about the new politics with a straight face, but then we hear Irene Oldfather's speech. Jack McConnell talks about financial prudence with a straight face then spends more than £500,000 on special advisers to prop up the Labour Administration. We see financial prudence go out of the window when the prospect of 20 new Labour offices in Glasgow springs up-perhaps Jack will take note and start to make some cuts.  Karen Whitefield made an interesting speech-she seemed to want the amount of money that members received to be connected to the number of votes cast. Perhaps I could make a special plea on the basis of the votes that were cast in Dundee, where the margin between Labour and the SNP was less than 3,000-in one of the seats, Labour has a majority of around 120. If there is to be a special dispensation on the basis of votes cast, perhaps I can be first in line.  The people of Dundee-and of constituencies elsewhere-should be able to go to whom they want. That is democracy. Community groups in Dundee have said to me that it is wonderful that they have a choice of members to go to. They should have that choice. What is wrong with that? I am sure that community groups will exercise their choice to maximum effect.  The Labour party is trying to prevent the Opposition from having the resources that it needs to do its job well. That will not go down well with the community groups of Dundee, the voters of Dundee or voters throughout Scotland. Labour is being driven by panic, not principle, and the party will be seen for what it is.

Will the minister give way?